Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N EUROSYMBOLIC G ROUNDING FOR C OMPOSITIONAL
W ORLD M ODELS
 Atharva Sehgal            Arya Grayeli            Jennifer J. Sun          Swarat Chaudhuri
 UT Austin                 UT Austin               Caltech                  UT Austin



                                             A BSTRACT

         We introduce C OSMOS, a framework for object-centric world modeling that is
         designed for compositional generalization (CompGen), i.e., high performance on
         unseen input scenes obtained through the composition of known visual “atoms.”
         The central insight behind C OSMOS is the use of a novel form of neurosym-
         bolic grounding. Specifically, the framework introduces two new tools: (i) neu-
         rosymbolic scene encodings, which represent each entity in a scene using a
         real vector computed using a neural encoder, as well as a vector of compos-
         able symbols describing attributes of the entity, and (ii) a neurosymbolic atten-
         tion mechanism that binds these entities to learned rules of interaction. C OS -
         MOS is end-to-end differentiable; also, unlike traditional neurosymbolic meth-
         ods that require representations to be manually mapped to symbols, it com-
         putes an entity’s symbolic attributes using vision-language foundation models.
         Through an evaluation that considers two different forms of CompGen on an
         established blocks-pushing domain, we show that the framework establishes a
         new state-of-the-art for CompGen in world modeling. Artifacts are available at
         https://trishullab.github.io/cosmos-web/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The discovery of world models — deep generative models that predict the outcome of an action in
a scene made of interacting entities — is a central challenge in contemporary machine learning (Ha
& Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2023). As such models are naturally factorized by objects,
methods for learning them (Zhao et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2021; Watters et al., 2019a; Kipf et al.,
2019) commonly follow a modular, object-centric perspective. Given a scene represented as pixels,
these methods first extract representations of the entities in the scene, then apply a transition network
to model interactions between the entities. The entity extractor and the transition model form an
end-to-end differentiable pipeline.
Of particular interest in world modeling is the property of compositional generalization (Comp-
Gen), i.e., test-time generalization to scenes that are novel compositions of known visual “atoms”.
Recently, Zhao et al. (2022) gave a first approach to learning world models that compositionally
generalize. Their method uses an action attention mechanism to bind actions to entities. The mech-
anism is equivariant to the replacement of objects in a scene by other objects, enabling CompGen.
This paper continues the study of world models and compositional generalization. We note that such
generalization is hard for purely neural methods, as they cannot easily learn encodings that can be
decomposed into well-defined parts. Our approach, C OSMOS, uses a novel form of neurosymbolic
grounding to address this issue.
The centerpiece idea in C OSMOS is the notion of object-centric, neurosymbolic scene encodings.
Like in prior modular approaches to world modeling, we extract a discrete set of entity represen-
tations from an input scene. However, each of these representations consists of: (i) a standard real
vector representation constructed using a neural encoder, and (ii) a vector of symbolic attributes,
capturing important properties — for example, shape, color, and orientation — of the entity.
Like Goyal et al. (2021), we model transitions in the world as a collection of neural modules, each
capturing a “rule” for pairwise interaction between entities. However, in contrast to prior work, we
bind these rules to the entities using a novel neurosymbolic attention mechanism. In our version of

                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                         Evaluation on Unseen Composition
                     Entity Composition
                   Generalization to compositions of
                    objects not seen during training
 Distribution of
 Atoms ( )            Sampled
                                                       Image (       )         Ground Truth
                      Composition                                                             Prediction   Prediction
                      (     )                                                   Next Image    (Baseline)     (Ours)
                                                           Actions

                   Relational Composition
                   Scene Composition + Objects with
                     shared attributes have shared
                               dynamics

                      Sampled                          Image (       )         Ground Truth   Prediction   Prediction
                      Composition                                               Next Image    (Baseline)     (Ours)
                      (     )
                                                          Actions

Figure 1: Overview of compositional world modeling. We depict examples from a 2D block pushing
domain consisting of shapes that interact, where we can generate samples of different shapes and
interactions. We aim to learn a model that generalizes to compositions not seen during training,
such as entity composition (top) and relational composition (bottom). Previous works (Goyal et al.,
2021) focus on entity composition, and struggle to generalize to harder compositional environments.
Our approach C OSMOS leverages object-centric, neurosymbolic scene encodings to compositionally
generalize across settings containing different types of compositions.


such attention, the keys are symbolic and the queries are neural. The symbolic keys are matched
with the symbolic components of the entity encodings, enabling decisions such as “the i-th rule
represents interactions between a black object and a circular object” (here, “black” and “circular”
are symbolic attributes). The rules, the attention mechanism, and the entity extractor constitute an
end-to-end differentiable pipeline.
The CompGen abilities of this model stems from the compositional nature of the symbolic attributes.
The symbols naturally capture “parts” of scenes. The neurosymbolic attention mechanism fires
rules based on (soft, neurally represented) logical conditions over the symbols and can cover new
compositions of the parts.
A traditional issue with neurosymbolic methods for perception is that they need a human-provided
mapping between perceptual inputs and their symbolic attributes (Harnad, 1990; Tang & Ellis,
2023). However, C OSMOS automatically obtains this mapping from vision-language foundation
models. Concretely, to compute the symbolic attributes of an object, we utilize C LIP (Radford et al.,
2021) to assign each object values from a set of known attributes.
We compare C OSMOS against a state-of-the-art baseline and an ablation on an established domain
of moving 2D shapes (Kipf et al., 2019). Our evaluation considers two definitions of CompGen,
illustrated in Figure 1. In one of these, we want the model to generalize to new entity compositions,
i.e., input scenes comprising sets of entities that have been seen during training, but never together.
The other definition, relational composition, is new to this paper: here, we additionally need to
accommodate shared dynamics between objects with shared attributes (e.g., the color red). Our
results show that C OSMOS outperforms the competing approaches at next-state prediction (Figure 1
visualizes a representative sample) and separability of the computed latent representations, as well
as accuracy in a downstream planning task. Collectively, the results establish C OSMOS as a state-
of-the-art for CompGen world modeling.
To summarize our contributions, we offer:

• C OSMOS, the first differentiable neurosymbolic approach — based on a combination of neurosym-
  bolic scene encodings and neurosymbolic attention — to object-centric world modeling.
• a new way to use foundation models to automate symbol construction in neurosymbolic learning;
• an evaluation that shows C OSMOS to produce significant empirical gains over the state-of-the-art
  for compositionally generalizable world modeling.


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
We are interested in learning world models that compositionally generalize. World models arise
naturally out of the formalism for Markov decision processes (MDPs). An MDP M is a tuple
(S, A, T, R, γ) with states S, actions A, transition function T : S × A → S × R≥0 , reward function
R : S × A → R , and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. We make three additional constraints:
Object-Oriented state and action space: In our environments, the state space is realized as images.
At each time step t, an agent observes an image I ∈ Spixel and takes an action A ∈ A. However,
learning Spixel directly is an intractable problem. Instead, we assume that the high dimensional state
space can be decomposed into a lower dimensional object-oriented state space S = S1 × · · · × Sk
where k is the number of objects in the image. Now, each factor Si ∈ Si describes a single object in
the image. Hence, the transition function has signature T : (S1 ; A1 ×· · ·×Sk ; Ak ) → (S1 ×· · ·×Sk )
where each factor Ai is a factorized set of actions associated with object representation Si and (◦; ◦)
is the concatenation operator. A pixel grounding function P↓ : S → Spixel enables grounding a
factored state into an image.
Symbolic object relations: We assume that objects in the state space share attributes. An at-
tribute is a set of unique symbols Cp = {Cp1 , . . . Cpq }. For instance, in the 2D block push-
ing domain (illustrated in Figure 1), each object has a “color” attribute that can take on values
Ccolor := {red, green, . . . }. An object can be composed of many such attributes that can be re-
                                                                                   Cp
trieved using an attribute projection function α↑ : Si → Λi := (ΛC    i ; . . . ; Λi ) where (C1 , . . . , Cp )
                                                                        1

                                                 C
is a predefined, ordered list of attributes and Λi p selects the value in the Cp -th attribute that is most
relevant to Si . Note that α↑ only depends on a single object and trivially generalizes to different
compositions of objects (Keysers et al., 2020).
Compositional Generalization: We assume that each state in our MDP can be decomposed using
two sets of elements: compounds and atoms. Compounds are sets of elements that can be decom-
posed into smaller sets of elements, and atoms are sets of elements that cannot be decomposed
further. For instance, in the block pushing domain (Figure 1), we can designate each unique object
as an atom and designate the co-occurrence of a set of atoms in a scene as a compound. We use
A to denote the atoms and C to denote the compounds. The frequency distribution of a distribu-
tion ◦ is denoted F◦ (D). Given this, CompGen is expressed as a property of the train distribution
Dtrain and of the test distribution Dtest undergoing a distributional shift of the compounds, while
the distribution of atoms remains the same.
Given the following assumptions, for any experience buffer D := {{⟨I (t) , A(t) ⟩}Tt=1 ⊆ Spixel ×
A}Ni=1 , learning a world model boils down to learning the transition function T for the MDP using
                                                                   (i,t)
the sequences of observations collected by D. Specifically, for S1...k ∈ I (i,t) , A(i,t) , I (i,t+1) ∈ D,
our objective function is
                           N T −1
                    1     X   X
                                          (i,t) (i,t)     (i,t) (i,t)

          L=                      ||P↓ T S1 ; A1 . . . , Sk ; Ak         − I (i,t+1) ||22
                N (T − 1) i=1 t=1
We study two kinds of compositions:
Entity Composition: Figure 1 shows an instance of entity centric CompGen in the block pushing
domain. Here, there exist n = 9 unique objects, but only k = 3 are allowed to co-occur in any given
realized scene. Each unique object represents an atom, and the co-occurrence of a set of k atoms in a
scene represents the compound. Hence, there are a total nk possible compositions. The distribution
of atoms in the train distribution and the test distribution does not change, while the distribution of
compounds at train time and at test time are disjoint. So, FA (Deval ) is equivalent to FA (Dtrain )
while FC (Deval ) ∩ FC (Dtrain ) = ∅.
Relational Composition: Figure 1 shows an instance of relational composition in the block pushing
domain. Here, there are n = 9, k = 3 unique objects. A composition of objects occurs when two
objects share attributes (for instance, here, the shared attributes are color and adjacency). Objects
with shared attributes share dynamics. As a result, if one object experiences a force, others with the
same attributes
            also undergo that force. Hence, assuming a single composition per scene, there are a
total nk k2 possible compositions. As in the previous case, FA (Deval ) is equivalent to FA (Dtrain )
while FC (Deval ) ∩ FC (Dtrain ) = ∅.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



          Prior Work Entity Extractor                                     Spatial Decoder


                                                                Module
                                                               Selector
                                                 Concat
                                                                  +
                                                               Executor


                Image


              Actions
         Ours
                        Entity Extractor                                                               Spatial Decoder


                                                                                             Module


                                                  ❄
                                                                             Attention      Selector
                                                                             + Concat          +
                                                                                            Executor

                Image                      Symbolic Labeling
                                               Module

              Actions                         Neurosymbolic Representations


Figure 2: Comparing world modeling frameworks between prior work (Goyal et al., 2021) and C OS -
MOS . Both modules start with entity extraction, to obtain neural object representations {S1 , . . . Sk }
from the image (Section 3.1). While prior work uses this representation directly for the module se-
lector, our work leverages a symbolic labeling module, which outputs a set of attributes Λ, to learn
neurosymbolic representations (Section 3.2). We then perform action conditioning (Section 3.2) to
keep track of corresponding actions, and update through a transition model (Section 3.3).


3     M ETHOD

We approach neurosymbolic world modeling through object-centric neurosymbolic representations
(Figure 2). Our method consists of: extracting object-centric encodings (Section 3.1), representing
each object using neural and symbolic attributes (Section 3.2), and learning a transition model to
update to next state (Section 3.3). Similar to previous works, we use slot based autoencoders to ex-
tract objects, but use symbolic grounding from foundation models alongside neural representations,
which enables our model to achieve both entity and relational compositionality. The full algorithm is
presented in Algorithm 1, and the model is visualized in Figure 3. We will make use of the example
in Figure 3 to motivate our algorithm.

Algorithm 1 Neurosymbolic world model for k-factorized state space. The input is an image I of
dimensions (C, H, W) = (3×224×224) and a set of k-factorized actions of dimension (k×daction ).
The model is trained end-to-end except for the S LM modules, whose weights are held constant.
                                                            ⃗ 1, . . . R
There are three global variables: T , {C1 , . . . Cp } and {R          ⃗ l }. T is the threshold of the number
of repeated slot update steps, {C1 , . . . Cp } denotes text encodings for the closed vocabulary and
{R⃗ 1, . . . R
             ⃗ l } are learnable rule encodings.
 1: function T RANSITION I MAGE(I, [A1 , . . . . . . Ak ])
 2: {S1 , . . . Sk } ← E NTITY E XTRACTOR(I)                                                                        ▷ Si dim: (k, dslot )
 3: for in range(T ) do
 4:     {I1′ , . . . Ik′ }, {M1′ , . . . Mk′ } ← S PATIAL D ECODER({S1 , . . . Sk })                                ▷ Ii′ dim: (C, H, W)
 5:     {I1 , . . . Ik } ← {Mi′ · Ii′ , ∀i ∈ [1, k]}
 6:     {Λ1 , . . . Λk } ← {S LM(Ii , {C1 , . . . Cp })|∀i ∈ [1, k]}                                                       ▷ dim: (k, p)
 7:     {Λ1 , . . . Λk } ← ACTIONATTN({Λ1 , . . . Λk }, [A1 , . . . Ak ])
 8:     p, c, r ← M ODULAR RULENET(K={Λ1 , . . . Λk }, Q={R            ⃗ 1, . . . R
                                                                                  ⃗ l })
 9:     Sp ← Sp + M LP BANK[r](concat(Sp , Sc , R             ⃗ r ))
10:   {I1′ , . . . Ik′ }, {M1′ , . . . Mk′ } ← S PATIAL D ECODER({S1 , . . . Sk })                                  ▷ Ii′ dim: (C, H, W)
      return ki=1 Mi′ · Ii′
                  P
11:



3.1    S LOT- BASED AUTOENCODER

A slot-based autoencoder transforms an image into a factorized hidden representation, with each
factor representing a single entity, and then reconstructs the image from this representation. Such


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


autoencoder make two assumptions: (1) each factor captures a specific property of the image (2)
collectively, all factors describe the entire input image. This set-structured representation enables
unsupervised disentanglement of objects into individual entities. Our slot based autoencoder has
two components:
E NTITY E XTRACTOR : I → {S1 , . . . , Sk }: The entity extractor takes an image and produces a set-
structured hidden representation describing each object. In our domains, slot attention and derivate
works (Chang et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2022) struggle to disentangle images into separate slots. To
avoid the perception model becoming a bottleneck for studying dynamics learning, we propose a
new entity extractor that uses Segment Anything Kirillov et al. (2023) with pretrained weights to
produce set-structured segmentation masks to decompose the image into objects and a Resnet-18
image encoder He et al. (2016) to produce a set-structured hidden representation for each object.
This model allows us to perfectly match ground truth segmentations in our domains while preserving
the assumptions of set structured hidden representations. More details are presented in Section A.1.
S PATIAL D ECODER : {S1 , . . . , Sk } → {I1′ , . . . Ik′ }, {M1′ , . . . Mk′ }: The slot decoder is a permuta-
tion equivariant network that decodes the set of slots back to the input image. We follow previous
works (Locatello et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2021) in using a spatial decoder (Wat-
ters et al., 2019b) that decodes a given set of vectors {S1 , . . . , Sk } individually into a set of image
reconstructions {I1′ , . . . Ik′ } and a set of mask reconstructions {M1′ , . . . , Mk′ }. The final image I is
produced by taking the Hadamard product of each reconstruction and its corresponding mask and
                                                              Pk
adding all the resulting images together. That is, I = i=1 Mi′ · Ii′ .


3.2   N EUROSYMBOLIC ENCODING

To achieve robust CompGen in our setting, our representation must be resilient to both object and
attribute compositions. The k slot-based encoding, by construction, generalizes to object replace-
ment. For attribute compositions, however, it is essential to know the exact attributes to be targeted
for CompGen. Given these attributes, we propose describing each entity with a composition of
symbol vectors. Each symbol vector is associated with a single entity and attribute, allowing it to
trivially generalize to different attributes compositions. Moreover, we can ensure a canonical order-
ing of the symbols, making downstream attention-based computations invariant to permutations of
attributes. We’ll next detail our method for generating these symbol vectors.
                                                       C
S LM : Ii × {C1 , . . . Cp } → Λi := (ΛC                p
                                          i ; . . . ; Λi ): The symbolic labelling module (S LM ) pro-
                                            1

cesses an image and a predefined list of attributes. Assuming this list is comprehensive (though
not exhaustive), the module employs a pretrained C LIP model to compute attention scores between
the image features and each entity encoding. The resulting logits indicate the alignment between
the image and each attribute. The attribute most aligned with the image is then identified using a
straight-through Gumbel softmax (Jang et al., 2016). The gumbel-softmax yields the index of the
most likely value for each attribute as one-hot vectors, which are concatenated together to form a bit-
vector. However, the discrete representation of such bit-vectors do not align well with downstream
attention based modules so, instead of directly using one-hot vectors, the gumbel-softmax selects
a value-specific encoding for each attribute. Thus, the resultant symbol vector is a composition of
learnable latent encodings distinct to each attribute value. In implementation, S LM utilizes another
zero-shot symbolic module (a spatial-softmax operation (Watters et al., 2019b)) to extract positional
attributes, such as the x and y position of the object, from the disentangled input vector.
For instance, in Figure 3, S LM takes in the slot corresponding to the circle and a list of attributes
(shape, color, etc.) and selects the most relevant attribute value (‘circle’, ‘red’, etc.). We subse-
quently select trainable embeddings corresponding to each attribute value and concatenate them to
construct the symbolic embedding.
ACTIONATTN : {Λ1 , . . . Λk } × {A1 , . . . Ak } → {Λ1 , . . . , Λk }: For accurate next state prediction,
world models must condition the state on the corresponding action. Typically, this is done by con-
catenating each action to its associated encoding if the slots have a canonical ordering. However,
the entities in a set structured representation do not have a fixed order. To find such a canonical
ordering, we follow Zhao et al. (2022) in learning a permutation matrix between the actions and the
slots and using the permutation matrix to reorder the slots and concatenate them with their respective
actions. Attention, by construction, is equivariant with respect to slot order, which avoids the need


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                  (Frozen)
                            For each slot    Vision-Language
                                            Foundation Model

                                                                                0.75
                                                                                0.25


                                                 ❄
                                                                                Blue
                                                                                        Symbolic
                                                                                       Embeddings


                                                           Queries
                                               Attention
                                               + Concat

                                                                         Keys
                                Latent
                       Entity Embeddings                                                     Spatial
          Image
                      Encoder                              Neurosymbolic                    Decoder
                                                           Attention-based
                                                           Module Selector

          Actions


Figure 3: A single update step of C OSMOS. The image I is fed through a slot-based autoencoder and
a CLIP model to generate the slot encodings {S1 , . . . Sk } and the symbol vectors {Λ1 , . . . Λk }. The
actions and the symbolic encoding are aligned and concatenated using a permutation equivariant
action attention module, which are used to select the update rule to be applied to the slots. This
figure depicts a single update step; in implementation, the update-select-transform step is repeated
multiple times to model multi-object interactions.


to enforce a canonical ordering. For instance, in Figure 3, if Λ1 corresponds to the circle, a trained
ACTIONATTN module reorders the actions so that A1 corresponds to going downwards.

3.3   T RANSITION M ODEL

Monolithic transition models like GNNs and MLPs model every pairwise object interaction, leading
to spurious correlations in domains with sparse interactions. Our modular transition model addresses
this problem by selecting a relevant pairwise interaction and updating the encodings for those objects
locally (following Goyal et al. (2021)). We model this selection process by computing key-query
neurosymbolic attention between ordered symbolic and neural rule encodings to determine the most
applicable rule-slot pair. As each entity is composed of shared symbol vectors, the dot-product
activations between the symbolic encodings and the rule encodings remain consistent for objects
with identical attributes. Next, we will discuss the mechanisms of module selection and transitions.
M ODULE S ELECTOR : {Λ1 , . . . Λk } × {R  ⃗ 1, . . . R
                                                      ⃗ l } → (p, c, r): The goal of the selection process is
to select the primary slot, the contextual slot (which the primary slot will be conditioned on), and the
update function to model the interaction. Query-key attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015) serves as the
base mechanism we will be using to perform selections. We compute query-key attention between
the rule encoding and the action-conditioned symbolic encoding. The naive algorithm to compute
this selection will take O(k 2 l) time, where k is the number of slots and l is the number of rules.
In implementation, the selection of (p, c, r) can be reduced to a runtime of O(kl + k) by partial
application of the query-key attention. This algorithm is presented in Section 2 of the appendix.
M LP BANK : i → M LPi : Our modular transition function comprises a set of rules R1 , . . . , Rn , with
each rule defined as Ri = (R⃗ i , M LPi ). Here, R
                                                 ⃗ i is a learnable encoding, while M LPi : Sp × Sc →
Sp′ represents a submodule that facilitates pairwise interactions between objects. Intuitively, each
submodule is learning how a primary state changes conditioned on a secondary state. In theory,
each update function can be customized for different problems. However, in this study, we employ
multi-layered perceptrons for all rules.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We demonstrate the effectiveness of C OSMOS on the 2D Block pushing domain (Kipf et al., 2019;
Zhao et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2021; Ke et al., 2021) with entity composition, and two instances
of relational composition. We selected the 2D block pushing domain as it is a widely-adopted and


                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         3 objects                               5 objects
 Dataset    Model           MSE ↓      AE-MSE ↓          Eq.MRR ↑   MSE ↓      AE-MSE ↓      Eq.MRR ↑
 RC         C OSMOS         4.23E-03   4.90E-04          1.20E-01   4.15E-03   1.68E-03      3.67E-01
 (Sticky)   A LIGNED N PS   1.14E-02   7.72E-03          8.01E-02   6.07E-03   2.47E-03      3.62E-01
            G NN            7.94E-03   5.11E-03          6.03E-04   6.21E-03   2.73E-03      5.30E-04
 RC         C OSMOS         4.60E-03   4.33E-04          1.04E-01   5.53E-03   1.86E-03      2.86E-01
 (Team)     A LIGNED N PS   1.24E-02   8.36E-03          1.75E-01   9.64E-03   3.12E-03      2.93E-01
            G NN            8.92E-03   3.82E-03          7.16E-04   7.01E-03   1.62E-03      5.46E-04
 EC         C OSMOS         7.66E-04   6.34E-05          2.99E-01   4.08E-04   2.92E-06      3.03E-01
            A LIGNED N PS   3.51E-03   2.69E-03          2.97E-01   2.45E-03   1.22E-03      3.19E-01
            G NN            9.89E-03   1.03E-02          5.50E-01   1.20E-02   1.28E-02      5.25E-01


Table 1: Evaluation results on the 2D block pushing domain for entity composition (EC) and re-
lational composition (RC) averaged across three seeds. We report next-state reconstruction er-
ror (MSE), autoencoder reconstruction error (AE-MSE), and the equivariant mean reciprocal rank
(Eq.MRR) for three transition models: our model (C OSMOS), an improved version of Goyal et al.
(2021) (A LIGNED N PS), and a reimplementation of Zhao et al. (2022) (G NN). Our model (C OSMOS)
achieves best next-state reconstructions for all datasets.

well-studied benchmark in the community. Notably, even in this synthetic domain, our instances of
compositional generalization proved challenging to surpass for baseline models, underscoring the
difficulty of the problem.
2D Block Pushing Domain: The 2D block pushing domain (Kipf et al., 2019; Ke et al., 2021) is a
two-dimensional environment that necessitates dynamic and perceptual reasoning. Figure 5 presents
an overview of this domain. All objects have four attributes: color (ΛCcolor ), shape (ΛCshape ), x
position (ΛCx-pos ), and y position (ΛCy-pos ). Objects can be pushed in one of the four cardinal
directions (North-East-South-West). Heavier objects can push lighter objects, but not the other way
around. The weight of the object depends on the shape attribute. At each step, the agent observes
an image of size 3 × 224 × 224 with k objects and an action pushing one of the objects. This action
is chosen from a uniform random distribution. The goal is for the agent to capture the dynamics of
object movement. Furthermore, while there are n = |Acolor | × |Ashape | unique objects in total,
only k < n objects are allowed to co-occur in a realized scene.
Dataset Setup: We adapt the methodology from (Kipf et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2022) with minor
changes. For entity compositions (EC), we construct training and testing datasets to have unique ob-
ject combinations between them. In relational composition (RC), objects with matching attributes
exhibit identical dynamics. Two specific cases are explored: Team Composition (RC-Team) where
dynamics are shared based on color, and Sticky Composition (RC-Sticky) where dynamics are
shared based on color and adjacency. Further details are in the appendix (Section A.2). Our data gen-
eration methodology ensures that the compound distribution is disjoint, while the atom distribution
remains consistent across datasets, i.e. FC (Dtrain ) ∩ FC (Deval ) = ∅ and FA (Dtrain ) = FA (Deval ).
The difficulty of the domain can be raised by increasing the number of objects. We sample datasets
for 3 and 5 objects.
Evaluation: We compare against past works in compositional world modeling with publically avail-
able codebases at the time of writing. For the block pushing domain, we compare with homomor-
phic world models (G NN) (Zhao et al., 2022) and NPS (Goyal et al., 2021) with modifications to
ensure that the actions are aligned with the slots (A LIGNED N PS). The latter is equivalent to an
ablation of C OSMOS without the symbolic labelling module. We analyzed next-state predictions
using mean squared error (MSE), current-state reconstructions using auto-encoder mean squared er-
ror (AE-MSE), and latent state separation using (MRR) following previous work (Kipf et al., 2019;
Zhao et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2021). Recognizing limitations in existing MRR calculation, we
introduce the Equivariant MRR (Eq.MRR) metric, which accounts for different slot orders when
calculating the MRR score. More details can be found in the appendix Section A.4.
Results: Results are presented in Table 2. First, we find that C OSMOS achieves the best next state
prediction performance (MSE) on all benchmarks. Moving from entity composition to relational
composition datasets shows a drop in performance, underscoring the complexity of the task. Sur-
prisingly, there is less than expected performance degradation moving from the three object to five


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


object domain. We attribute this to the nature of the block pushing domain and the choice of loss
function. MSE loss measures the pixel error between the predicted and next image. As the density
of objects in the image increases, the reconstruction target becomes more informative, encouraging
better self-correction, and hence more efficient training.
Second, we observe that, without neurosymbolic grounding, the slot autoencoder’s ability to encode
and decode images degrades as the world model training progresses. This suggests that neurosym-
bolic grounding guards against auto-encoder representation collapse.
Finally, we do not notice a consistent pattern in the Equivariant MRR scores between models.
First, all models tend to exhibit a higher Eq.MRR score in the five object environments. How-
ever, in many cases, models with high Eq.MRR score also have underperforming autoencoders.
For instance, in the five object entity composition case, the GNN exhibits a high Eq.MRR score
yet simultaneously has the worst autoencoder reconstruction error. We notice this happens when
the model suffers a partial representation collapse (overfitting to certain color, shapes combina-
tion seen during training). This maps many slot encodings to the same neighborhood in latent
space; making it easier to retrieve similar encodings, boosting the MRR score. Given these
observations, we conclude that MRR might not be an optimal indicator of a model’s down-
stream utility. For a comprehensive assessment of downstream utility, we turn to the methodol-
ogy outlined by Veerapaneni et al. (2020), applying the models to a downstream planning task.

                                                                                                               Object Composition Object Composition Scene Composition
Downstream Utility: We evaluate the                                                                                 (Sticky)            (Team)
                                                                                                                                                            Model
downstream utility of all world mod-                                                                                                                        AlignedNPS
                                                         Average L1 Norm Between Current and Goal State


                                                                                                          30                                                COSMOS
els using a simple planning task in 2D                                                                                                                      GNN
                                             3 Objects


shapeworld environments. Our method,                                                                      20
inspired by Veerapaneni et al. (2020), in-
volves using a greedy planner that acts                                                                   10
based on the Hungarian distance be-                                                                        0
tween the predicted and goal states. Due
to the compounding nature of actions                                                                      30
                                             5 Objects


over a trajectory, there is an observed                                                                   20
divergence from the ground truth the
deeper we get into the trajectory. We                                                                     10
run these experiments on our test dataset
                                                                                                           0
and average the scores at each trajectory                                                                      0    10   20   30 0       10     20   30 0    10      20   30
depth. We showcase results in Figure 4.                                                                                         Trajectory Length
Our model (C OSMOS) shows the most
                                               Figure 4: Downstream utility of different world models
consistency and least deviation from the
                                               using a greedy planner. The graph follows the average
goal state in all datasets, which suggests
                                               L1 error between the chosen next state and the ground
that neurosymbolic grounding helps im-
                                               truth next state as a function of the number of steps the
prove the downstream efficacy of world
                                               model takes. A lower L1 error indicates better perfor-
models. More details can be found in
                                               mance. C OSMOS (in red) achieves the best performance.
appendix section A.5.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Object-Oriented World Models: Object-oriented world models (Kipf et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2022; Van der Pol et al., 2020a; Goyal et al., 2021; Veerapaneni et al., 2020) are constructed to
learn structured latent spaces that facilitate efficient dynamics prediction in environments that can
be decomposed into unique objects. We highlight two primary themes in this domain.
Interaction Modeling and Modularity in Representations: Kipf et al. (2019) builds a contrastive
world modeling technique using graph neural networks with an object-factored representation. How-
ever, GNNs may introduce compounding errors in sparse interaction domains. Addressing this,
Goyal et al. (2021) introduces neural production systems (NPS) for modeling sparse interactions,
akin to repeated dynamic instantiation GNN edge instantiation. C OSMOS is influenced by the NPS
architecture, with distinctions highlighted in Figure 2. In parallel, Chang et al. (2023) studies a hi-
erarchical abstraction for world models, decomposing slots into a (dynamics relevant) state vector
and a (dynamics invariant) type vector, with dynamics prediction focusing on the state vector. In


                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OSMOS, instead of maintaining a single “type vector”, we maintain a set of learnable symbol vec-
tors and select a relevant subset for each entity. This allows C OSMOS to naturally discover global
and local invariances, utilizing them to route latent encodings (akin to “state vectors”) to appropriate
transition modules.
Compositional Generation and Equivariance in World Models: Equivariant neural networks har-
ness group symmetries for efficient learning (Ravindran, 2004; Cohen & Welling, 2016a;b; Walters
et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022). In the context of CompGen, Van der Pol et al. (2020b) investigates
constructing equivariant neural networks within the MDP state-action space. Zhao et al. (2022)
establishes a connection between homomorphic MDPs and compositional generalization, express-
ing CompGen as a symmetry group of equivariance to object permutations and developing a world
model equivariant to object permutation (using action attention). We adopt this idea, but integrate a
modular transition model that also respects permutation equivariance in slot order.
Vision-grounded Neurosymbolic Learning: Prior work in neurosymbolic learning has demon-
strated that symbolic grounding helps facilitate domain generalization and data efficiency (Andreas
et al., 2016a;b; Sun et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2021; Shah et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2019; Hsu et al.,
2023; Yi et al., 2018). The interplay between neural and symbolic encodings in these works can
be abstracted into three categories: (1) scaffolding perceptual inputs with precomputed symbolic
information for downstream prediction (Mao et al., 2019; Ellis et al., 2018; Andreas et al., 2016b;
Hsu et al., 2023; Valkov et al., 2018), (2) learning a symbolic abstraction from a perceptual input
useful for downstream prediction Tang & Ellis (2023), and (3) jointly learning a neural and symbolic
encodings leveraged for prediction Zhan et al. (2021). Our approach aligns most closely with the
third category. While Zhan et al. (2021) combine neural and symbolic encoders in a VAE setting,
highlighting the regularization advantages of symbols for unsupervised clustering, they rely on a
program synthesizer to search for symbolic transformations in a DSL—introducing scalability and
expressiveness issues. C OSMOS also crafts a neurosymbolic encoding, but addresses scalability and
expressiveness concerns of program synthesis by using a foundation model to generate the symbolic
encodings.
Foundation Models as Symbol Extractors: Many works employ foundation models to decompose
complex visual reasoning tasks (Wang et al., 2023a; Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023; Nayak et al., 2022).
(Hsu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) decompose natural language instructions into executable pro-
grams using a Code LLM for robotic manipulation and 3D understanding. Notably, ViperGPT (Surı́s
et al., 2023) uses Code LLMs to decomposes natural language queries to API calls in a library of
pretrained models. Such approaches necessitate hand-engineering the API to be expressive enough
to generalize to all attributes in a domain. C OSMOS builds upon the idea of using compositionality
of symbols to execute parameterized modules but sidesteps the symbolic decomposition bottleneck
by parsimoniously using the symbolic encodings only for selecting representative encodings. I.e.,
C OSMOS does not need its symbols to learn perfect reconstructions. The symbolic encoding is only
used for selecting modules, while the neural encoding can learn fine-grained dynamics-relevant at-
tributes that may not be known ahead of time. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, C OSMOS
is the first work to leverage vision-language foundation models for compositional world modeling.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have presented C OSMOS, a new neurosymbolic approach for compositionally generalizable
world modeling. Our two key findings are that annotating entities with symbolic attributes can
help with CompGen and that it is possible to get these symbols “for free” from foundation models.
We have considered two definitions of CompGen — one new to this paper — and show that: (i)
CompGen world modeling still has a long way to go regarding performance, and (ii) neurosymbolic
grounding helps enhance CompGen.
Our work here aimed to give an initial demonstration of how foundation models can help composi-
tional world modeling. However, foundation models are advancing at a breathtaking pace. Future
work could extend our framework with richer symbolic representations obtained from more power-
ful vision-language or vision-code models. Also, our neurosymbolic attention mechanism could be
naturally expanded into a neurosymbolic transformer. Finally, the area of compositional world mod-
eling needs more benchmarks and datasets. Future work should take on the design of such artifacts
with the goal of developing generalizable and robust world models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7     R EPRODUCIBILITY AND E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
7.1   R EPRODUCIBILITY C ONSIDERATIONS

We encourage reproducibility of our work through the following steps:
Providing Code and Setup Environments: Upon acceptance of our work, we will release the complete
source code, pretrained models, and associated setup environments under the MIT license. This is
to ensure researchers can faithfully replicate our results without any hindrance.
Improving Baseline Reproducibility: Our methodology extensively utilizes these public repositories
(Zhao et al., 2022; Kipf et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2021) for generating data and computing evaluation
metrics. During development of our method, we made several improvements to these repositories:
(1) We enhanced the performance and usability of the models, (2) We updated the algorithms to ac-
commodate the latest versions of the machine learning libraries, and (3) we constructed reproducible
anaconda environments for each package to work on Ubuntu 22.04. We intend to contribute back by
sending pull requests to the repositories with our improvements, including other bug fixes, runtime
enhancements, and updates.
Outlining Methodology Details: The details of our model are meticulously described in Section 3.
A comprehensive overview is available in Algorithm 1, and a deeper dive into the transition function
is in Appendix Section A.3. We mention training details in appendix section A.4.

7.2   E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

Potential for Misuse: As with other ML techniques, world models can be harnessed by malicious
actors to inflict societal harm. Our models are trained on synthetic block pushing datasets, which
mitigates their potential for misuse.
Privacy Concerns: In the long term, as world models operate on unsupervised data, they enable
learning behavioral profiles without the active knowledge or explicit consent of the subjects. This
raises privacy issues, especially when considering real-world, non-synthetic datasets. We did not
collect or retain any human-centric data during the course of this project.
Bias and Fairness: World models, generally, enable learning unbiased representations of data. How-
ever, we leverage foundation models which could be trained on biased data and such biases can
reflect in our world models.

8     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the NSF National AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning
(IFML), ARO award #W911NF-21-1-0009, and DARPA award #HR00112320018.

R EFERENCES
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Learning to compose neural
  networks for question answering. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  1545–1554, San Diego, California, June 2016a.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural module networks. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 39–48, 2016b.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. In ICLR, 2015.
Michael Chang, Tom Griffiths, and Sergey Levine. Object representations as fixed points: Training
 iterative refinement algorithms with implicit differentiation. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 35:32694–32708, 2022.
Michael Chang, Alyssa L. Dayan, Franziska Meier, Thomas L. Griffiths, Sergey Levine, and
 Amy Zhang. Hierarchical abstraction for combinatorial generalization in object rearrangement.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali,
  Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?
  id=fGG6vHp3W9W.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016a.
Taco S Cohen and Max Welling. Steerable cnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08498, 2016b.
Kevin Ellis, Daniel Ritchie, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Josh Tenenbaum. Learning to infer graph-
  ics programs from hand-drawn images. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
  pp. 6059–6068, 2018.
Anirudh Goyal, Aniket Didolkar, Nan Rosemary Ke, Charles Blundell, Philippe Beaudoin, Nicolas
  Heess, Michael Mozer, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural production systems. Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 14953–14962, 2023.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Stevan Harnad. The symbol grounding problem. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1-3):335–
  346, 1990.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Joy Hsu, Jiayuan Mao, and Jiajun Wu. Ns3d: Neuro-symbolic grounding of 3d objects and relations.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2614–2623, 2023.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Baoxiong Jia, Yu Liu, and Siyuan Huang. Improving object-centric learning with query optimiza-
  tion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Aniket Didolkar, Sarthak Mittal, Anirudh Goyal, Guillaume Lajoie, Stefan
  Bauer, Danilo Rezende, Yoshua Bengio, Michael Mozer, and Christopher Pal. Systematic
  evaluation of causal discovery in visual model based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.00848, 2021.
Daniel Keysers, Nathanael Schärli, Nathan Scales, Hylke Buisman, Daniel Furrer, Sergii Kashubin,
  Nikola Momchev, Danila Sinopalnikov, Lukasz Stafiniak, Tibor Tihon, Dmitry Tsarkov, Xiao
  Wang, Marc van Zee, and Olivier Bousquet. Measuring compositional generalization: A com-
  prehensive method on realistic data. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Thomas Kipf, Elise Van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of structured world models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12247, 2019.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot atten-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiayuan Mao, Xiuming Zhang, Yikai Li, William T Freeman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu.
   Program-guided image manipulators. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
   Computer Vision, pp. 4030–4039, 2019.
Jiayuan Mao, Tomas Lozano-Perez, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Leslie Pack Kaelbing. PDSketch:
   Integrated Domain Programming, Learning, and Planning. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Nihal V Nayak, Peilin Yu, and Stephen H Bach. Learning to compose soft prompts for compositional
  zero-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03574, 2022.
Jung Yeon Park, Ondrej Biza, Linfeng Zhao, Jan Willem van de Meent, and Robin Walters. Learning
  symmetric embeddings for equivariant world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11371, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Balaraman Ravindran. An algebraic approach to abstraction in reinforcement learning. University
  of Massachusetts Amherst, 2004.
Ameesh Shah, Eric Zhan, Jennifer J Sun, Abhinav Verma, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
 Learning differentiable programs with admissible neural heuristics. In Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems, 2020.
Jennifer J Sun, Ann Kennedy, Eric Zhan, Yisong Yue, and Pietro Perona. Task programming:
  Learning data efficient behavior representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13917, pp. 2876–
  2885, 2020.
Dı́dac Surı́s, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
   reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08128, 2023.
Hao Tang and Kevin Ellis. From perception to programs: regularize, overparameterize, and amor-
  tize. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33616–33631. PMLR, 2023.
Lazar Valkov, Dipak Chaudhari, Akash Srivastava, Charles Sutton, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Houdini:
  Lifelong learning as program synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 8701–8712, 2018.
Elise Van der Pol, Thomas Kipf, Frans A Oliehoek, and Max Welling. Plannable approximations to
  mdp homomorphisms: Equivariance under actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11963, 2020a.
Elise Van der Pol, Daniel Worrall, Herke van Hoof, Frans Oliehoek, and Max Welling. Mdp homo-
  morphic networks: Group symmetries in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:4199–4210, 2020b.
Rishi Veerapaneni, John D. Co-Reyes, Michael Chang, Michael Janner, Chelsea Finn, Jiajun Wu,
  Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Entity abstraction in visual model-based reinforcement
  learning. In Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura (eds.), Proceedings of
  the Conference on Robot Learning, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 1439–1456. PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v100/veerapaneni20a.html.
Robin Walters, Jinxi Li, and Rose Yu. Trajectory prediction using equivariant continuous convolu-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11344, 2020.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Renhao Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Joy Hsu, Hang Zhao, Jiajun Wu, and Yang Gao. Programmatically
  grounded, compositionally generalizable robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13826,
  2023b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Matko Bosnjak, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner.
  Cobra: Data-efficient model-based rl through unsupervised object discovery and curiosity-driven
  exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09275, 2019a.
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner. Spatial broadcast
  decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled representations in vaes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1901.07017, 2019b.
Ziyi Wu, Nikita Dvornik, Klaus Greff, Thomas Kipf, and Animesh Garg. Slotformer: Unsupervised
  visual dynamics simulation with object-centric models, 2023.
Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Neural-
  symbolic vqa: Disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Eric Zhan, Jennifer J. Sun, Ann Kennedy, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Unsupervised learn-
  ing of neurosymbolic encoders. CoRR, abs/2107.13132, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2107.13132.
Linfeng Zhao, Lingzhi Kong, Robin Walters, and Lawson LS Wong. Toward compositional gener-
  alization in object-oriented world modeling. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 26841–26864. PMLR, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Entity Composition                                                 Relational Composition
                   Generalization to composition of shapes not seen               Scene Composition + Objects with shared attributes have shared
                                together during training                                                   dynamics.
                          Sampled                                                             Sampled
 Distribution of
                          Composition                                                         Composition
 Atoms ( )
                          (     )                                                             (     )


                                                                                    “Sticky”                                    “Team”
                                                                      Shared Attributes = Color + Adjacency              Shared Attributes = Color


                      Image (       )             Ground Truth
                                                   Next Image

                          Actions



                                                                        Actions                                       Actions



Figure 5: Overview of types of compositions studied. Entity composition (left) necessitates learning
a world model that is equivariant to object replacement. Relational compositions (right) necessitates
learning the properties of entity composition as well as additional constraints where objects with
shared attributes also have shared dynamics. We study two instantiations of shared attributes sets:
“Sticky” and “Team”. Details on these instantiations are given in Appendix A.2.


A      A PPENDIX

The Appendix is divided into eight sections. Section A.1 explains how we leverage SAM to gen-
erate a set-structured representation, Section A.2 surveys the types of compositions we study in
detail, Section A.3 introduces a faster algorithm used in implementation for module selection, Sec-
tion A.4 outlines experiment details and, notably, presents justification for the Equivariant MRR
metric employed to study encoding separation, Section A.5 presents details of how the downstream
planning experiments were conducted, Section A.6 goes over our reasoning for selecting relevant
benchmarks, Section A.7 details an ablation study with a “fully-symbolic” model, and Section A.8
showcases qualitative results on a randomly sampled subset of five-object state-action pairs.

A.1       G ENERATING SET- STRUCTURED REPRESENTATIONS WITH S EGMENT A NYTHING

We prompt SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) with the image (I) and a 8 × 8 grid of points. This yields
64 × 3 potential masks (as there are three channels). To ensure a set structured representation, we
must ensure that (1) each mask captures a specific property of the image, (2) collectively, all masks
describe the entire image. We ensure (1) by removing duplicate masks and (2) by evaluating all
combinations of remaining slots and selecting the k tuple (where k is the number of slots) that,
when summed, most closely matches the image. The resulting masks {M1′ , . . . Mk′ } are point-wise
multiplied with the image to yield {I1 , . . . Ik }. Each masked image is passed through a finetuned
Resnet to yield {S1 , . . . Sk }.

A.2       T YPES OF C OMPOSITIONS

Entity Composition: Entity composition (Figure 5) necessitates learning a world model that is
equivariant to object replacement. The dynamics of the environment depends on which objects are
present in the scene.
Relational Composition: Relational composition (Figure 5) necessitates learning all the properties
present in entity composition. Additionally, in relational composition, the composition is determined
by constraints placed on observable attributes of individual objects. For instance, in Sticky block
pushing (Fig 5), the scene is constrained so that two objects start out with the same color adjacent
to each other; and an action on one object moves all objects of the same color with it. This gives the
appearance of two objects being stuck to each other. At test time, the objects stuck together change.
Sticky block pushing demonstrates compositionality constraints based on two attributes: position
and color. In the team block pushing (Figure 5), we relax the adjacency constraint in the sticky
block pushing domain. An action on any object also moves other objects of the same color. This


                                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


allows us to study whether the adjacency constraint places a larger burden on dynamics learning
than the color constraint.

A.3   T RANSITION A LGORITHM

NPS (Goyal et al., 2021) necessitates selecting a primary slot (p) to be modified, a contextual slot
(c), and a rule (r) to modify the primary slot in the presence of the contextual slot. The naive
algorithm to compute this tuple has a runtime of O(k 2 l) where k is the number of slots and l is the
number of rules. However, in implementation, the selection of (r, p, c) can be reduced to a runtime
of O(kl + k) by partial application of the query-key attention. This is achieved by selecting the
primary slot p and M LPi , partially transforming Sp using a partial transition module M LP(i,left) ,
selecting the contextual slot c, and performing a final transformation of M LP(i,left) (Sp ) with Sc
using M LP(i,right) . Algorithm 2 presents this faster algorithm.

Algorithm 2 Faster Transition Algorithm. This algorithm has a faster runtime than the one presented
in the manuscript. The main difference is that the transition step is bifurcated into two parts, reducing
the runtime of the selection from O(k 2 l) to O(kl + k) where k is the number of slots and l is the
number of rules.
 1: function T RANSITION(Key={Λ1 , . . . Λk }, Query={R     ⃗ 1, . . . R
                                                                       ⃗ l }, Value={S1 , . . . Sk })
 2:      ⋆
       A ← GumbelSoftmax(KQAttention(key={Λ1 , . . . Λk }, query={R                ⃗ 1, . . . R
                                                                                              ⃗ l }))
 3:    p, r ← argmax(A⋆ , axis = ‘all’)
 4:                                  ⃗ r ))
       S ⋆ ← M LPr,left (concat(Sp , R
         ⋆
 5:    A2 ← GumbelSoftmax(KQAttention(key={Λ1 , . . . Λk }, query={S ⋆ , S ⋆ , S ⋆ }))
 6:    c, ← argmax(A⋆2 , axis = ‘all’)
 7:    S2⋆ ← M LPr,right (concat(Sc , S ⋆ ))
 8:    return S2⋆


A.4   E VALUATION P ROCEDURE

Dataset Generation: To generate each dataset,
we first create a scene configuration file that
prescribes the permissible shapes and col-
                                                            Eq.MRR accounts for all
ors for objects within a given dataset. The                 permutation and
scene configuration ensures that FC (Dtrain ) ∩             correctly calculates this
                                                            as closest embedding.
FC (Deval ) = ∅. Next, we sample Dtrain
and Deval from the permissible scenes. Each                                             MRR
dataset is a trajectory of state-action pairs,                                          incorrectly
                                                                                        calculates
where the state is the image of the shape 3 ×                                           this as the
224 × 224 and the action is a vector, factor-                                           closest
                                                                                        embedding
ized by object ID (Object x North-East-South-
West). Overall, we generate 3000 trajectories
of length 32 each where the actions are sam-
pled from a random uniform distribution. Our
domain is equivalent to the observed weighted
shapes setup studied in Ke et al. (2021) with a
compositionality constraint where the weight of
the objects depend only on the shapes.
                                                 Figure 6: Intuition for shortcomings of MRR
Baselines: We compare against past works when number of slots k = 2 and dslot = 1. The
in compositional world modeling with publi- MRR metric incorrectly finds a point (x̂, ŷ) that
cally available codebases at the time of writ- is ϵ + 1 units away from (x, y) while Equivari-
ing. For the block pushing domain, we compare ant MRR considers all possible permutations and
against homomorphic world models (G NN) finds a point (ỹ, x̃) that is ϵ units away from (y, x)
(Zhao et al., 2022) and an ablation of our model and, in turn, closer to (x, y) than (x̂, ŷ).
without symbols (A LIGNED NPS). G NN uses
a slot autoencoder, an action attention module
and a graph neural network for modeling transitions. It requires a two-step training process: first


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        3 objects                                                               5 objects
Dataset    Model          MSE ↓                   AE-MSE ↓                Eq.MRR ↑                MSE ↓                   AE-MSE ↓                Eq.MRR ↑
RC         C OSMOS        4.23E-03 +/- 1.49E-04   4.90E-04 +/- 1.03E-04   1.20E-01 +/- 2.05E-02   4.15E-03 +/- 3.21E-03   1.68E-03 +/- 1.48E-03   3.67E-01 +/- 7.73E-02
(Sticky)   A LIGNED NPS   1.14E-02 +/- 9.89E-04   7.72E-03 +/- 1.21E-03   8.01E-02 +/- 6.79E-02   6.07E-03 +/- 8.30E-04   2.47E-03 +/- 3.60E-04   3.62E-01 +/- 1.81E-02
           G NN           7.94E-03 +/- 5.47E-03   5.11E-03 +/- 4.94E-03   6.03E-04 +/- 1.02E-04   6.21E-03 +/- 1.26E-03   2.73E-03 +/- 1.27E-03   5.30E-04 +/- 5.15E-05
RC         C OSMOS        4.60E-03 +/- 2.32E-03   4.33E-04 +/- 1.58E-04   1.04E-01 +/- 3.19E-02   5.53E-03 +/- 1.95E-03   1.86E-03 +/- 1.61E-03   2.86E-01 +/- 4.32E-02
(Team)     A LIGNED NPS   1.24E-02 +/- 4.11E-04   8.36E-03 +/- 6.78E-04   1.75E-01 +/- 2.68E-02   9.64E-03 +/- 1.95E-04   3.12E-03 +/- 6.07E-04   2.93E-01 +/- 2.02E-02
           G NN           8.92E-03 +/- 6.05E-03   3.82E-03 +/- 3.64E-03   7.16E-04 +/- 1.09E-04   7.01E-03 +/- 9.81E-04   1.62E-03 +/- 1.04E-03   5.46E-04 +/- 1.37E-04
EC         C OSMOS        7.66E-04 +/- 4.08E-04   6.34E-05 +/- 2.01E-05   2.99E-01 +/- 2.85E-02   4.08E-04 +/- 4.68E-06   2.92E-06 +/- 6.34E-07   3.03E-01 +/- 3.88E-02
           A LIGNED NPS   3.51E-03 +/- 6.30E-04   2.69E-03 +/- 6.89E-05   2.97E-01 +/- 7.99E-02   2.45E-03 +/- 3.47E-04   1.22E-03 +/- 9.06E-04   3.19E-01 +/- 1.01E-01
           G NN           9.89E-03 +/- 5.77E-03   1.03E-02 +/- 5.44E-03   5.50E-01 +/- 5.18E-01   1.20E-02 +/- 1.13E-02   1.28E-02 +/- 1.08E-02   5.25E-01 +/- 2.67E-01



Table 2: Evaluation results on the 2D block pushing domain for entity composition (EC) and rela-
tional composition (RC) averaged across three seeds. This table includes standard deviation numbers
as well. Our model (C OSMOS) achieves best next-state reconstructions for all datasets.


warm starting the slot-autoencoder and then training the action attention model and GNN with an
equivariant contrastive loss (Hungarian matching loss). A LIGNED NPS uses a slot autoencoder for
modeling perceptions and a NPS module (Goyal et al., 2021) for modeling transitions. The pipeline
is trained end to end with contrastive loss. We use action attention with NPS as well. For both mod-
els, we weren’t able to reproduce the results using the provided codebases due to issues in training
robust perception models for large images (3 × 224 × 224). To ensure a fair comparison, and since
both these methods are agnostic to the perception model, we opt to reimplement the core ideas for
both these models and use the same fine-tuned perception model for all models.
Evaluation Procedure: We evaluate all models on a single 48 GB NVIDIA A40 GPU with a
(maximum possible) batch size of 64 for 50 epochs for three random seeds. Contrastive learning
necessitates a large batch size to ensure a diverse negative sampling set. As a result, the small
batch size made contrastive learning challenging in our domain. To ensure a fair comparison, we
report results for all models trained using reconstruction loss. We first train the slot autoencoder
(E NTITY E XTRACTOR and S PATIAL D ECODER) until the model shows no training improvement for
5 epochs. This is sufficient to learn slot autoencoders with near-perfect state reconstructions. All
transition models are initialized with the same slot-autoencoder and are optimized to minimize a
mixture of the autoencoder reconstruction loss and the next-state reconstruction loss. For composi-
tional world modeling, we are interested in two aspects of model performance: next-state predictions
and separation between latent states. We evaluate next-state predictions on all models using the mean
squared error (MSE) between the predicted next image and the ground truth next image in the ex-
perience buffer. We also measure the performance of the autoencoder on reconstructing the current
state by calculating the slot-autoencoder mean squared error (AE-MSE). Generally, training world
models improves the perception model’s ability to reconstruct states as well. We also evaluate the
separability of the learned latent encodings. This is done by measuring the L2 distance between the
predicted next slot encodings and the ground-truth next slot encodings obtained from the encoder
and using information theoretic measures such as mean reciprocal rank (MRR) to measure simi-
larity. Notably, the MRR computation in previous work does not to account for the non-canonical
order of slots, causing higher L2 distance and, consecutively, higher MRR scores when the target
and predicted slots have different orderings. The core issue here is that MRR computation, as used
in previous works, fixed the order of the slots before calculating L2 distance. This ignored k! − 1
possible orderings where a closer target encoding could be found. To rectify this, we propose a
new metric, Equivariant MRR (Eq.MRR), which uses the minimum L2 distance among all permu-
tations of slot encodings to calculate mean reciprocal rank. This metric ensures that the latent slot
encodings are not penalized for having different slot orders. Figure 6 presents an illustration of the
shortcomings of MRR on a simple example. This limitation is characteristic of algorithms which do
not align the slots to a canonical slot ordering. In practice, we observe that the Equivariant MRR is
always lower than or equal to the MRR.

A.5        D OWNSTREAM E VALUATION S ETUP

Following Veerapaneni et al. (2020), we use a greedy planner that chooses the action that minimizes
the Hungarian distance between the current and the goal state. These actions are applied t − 1
times over a trajectory of length t, with the output from the world model at the (d − 1)-th step
becoming the state for step d in the trajectory. Due to this compounding nature, we see an increased
divergence from the ground truth as we get deeper into the trajectory. At each step d in the trajectory,


                                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dataset                     Only Symbols (MSE ↓)          Only Neural / AlignedNPS (MSE ↓)      COSMOS (MSE ↓)
 3 Object RC - Sticky        1.36E-02                      1.14E-02                              4.23E-03
 3 Object RC - Team          1.39E-02                      1.24E-02                              4.60E-03
 3 Object EC                 1.21E-02                      3.51E-03                              7.66E-04


        Table 3: Evaluation results on the 2D block pushing domain for ablations of C OSMOS.


the accuracy of the world model is evaluated as the L1 error of the difference between the current
ground truth and predicted states in the form of their xy-coordinates. These xy-coordinates are
initialized for each object to the origin and updated with every action taken by the corresponding
rule. For example, after one step, if the ground truth moves an object to the east, but the planner
chooses to move the same object to the west, then the distance between the two states would be 2.
We run these experiments for the 500 trajectories of length t = 32 in our test dataset and average
the scores at each trajectory depth. We showcase results in Figure 4. Our model (C OSMOS) shows
the most consistency and least deviation from the goal state in all datasets, which suggests that
neurosymbolic grounding helps improve the downstream efficacy of world models.

A.6     DATASET C OMPARISON

The focus of our paper is to demonstrate the first neuro-symbolic framework leveraging foundation
models for compositional object-oriented world modelling, and we evaluate on the same benchmarks
as existing work (Kipf et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022). We chose our evaluation
domain based on four properties: (1) object-oriented state and action space, (2) history-invariant dy-
namics, (3) action conditioned (plannable) dynamics, and (4) ease of generating new configurations
(to evaluate entity and relational composition). We curate the following list of domains from related
work to explain what properties are missing for each dataset.

Dataset and Relevant Works                                 Object Oriented      History       Action        Configurable
                                                           State and Action   Independent   Conditioned
                                                                 Space                      (Plannable)
2D Block Pushing (Kipf et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2021)
(Zhao et al., 2022; Ke et al., 2021)                              ✓               ✓             ✓                ✓
Physion (Wu et al., 2023)                                         ✓                                              ✓
Phyre (Wu et al., 2023)                                           ✓                                              ✓
Clevrer (Wu et al., 2023)                                         ✓
3DObj (Wu et al., 2023)                                           ✓                                              ✓
MineRL (Hafner et al., 2023)                                                                    ✓
Atari (Pong/Space invaders/Freeway) (Goyal et al., 2021)          ✓
Minigrid/BabyAI Mao et al. (2022)                                 ✓                             ✓                ✓


A.7     S YMBOLIC A BLATION OF C OSMOS

A LIGNED NPS serves as a “fully neural” ablation to demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. In
this section, we detail another “fully symbolic” ablation of our model to demonstrate the need for
a neurosymbolic approach. Specifically, we maintain the algorithm presented in 1 but modify the
transition model to use the symbolic embedding to predict the next state. Specifically, line 9 changes
to:
                                                                         ⃗ r ))
                                 Sp ← Sp + M LP BANK[r](concat(Λp , Λc , R
The results, detailed in Table 3, indicate that the “symbols-only” model significantly underperforms
compared to C OSMOS. We believe this is because the symbolic embedding is constructed by con-
catenating symbolic attributes, and the rule module is not aware of this structure. This causes the
MLP to overfit to the attribute compositions seen at train time. C OSMOS sidesteps this issue by using
the symbolic embedding in the key-query attention module to select the relevant rule module, while
allowing the real vector to learn local features useful for modeling action-conditioned transitions.

A.8     Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS


                                                              17
      Entity Composition
                                 Image                   Ground Truth        Predicted                 Image                  Ground Truth        Predicted
                                                          Next Image        Next Image                                         Next Image        Next Image



         COSMOS


       AlignedNPS



            GNN
                                                                                                                                                                       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Relational Composition (Sticky Shapeworld)


18
         COSMOS


      AlignedNPS



            GNN


     Figure 7: Qualitative outputs on randomly chosen state-action pairs for all baselines. We show two samples for each experiment and dataset type with 5 objects.
     Color is shown for illustrative purposes only; in implementation, the action conditioning does not carry any information about color.
