Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W EAKLY- SUPERVISED AUDIO S EPARATION VIA B I -
MODAL S EMANTIC S IMILARITY

 Tanvir Mahmud1†∗, Saeed Amizadeh2†, Kazuhito Koishida2 & Diana Marculescu1
 1
   The University of Texas at Austin, USA, 2 Microsoft Corporation
 {tanvirmahmud, dianam}@utexas.edu, {saamizad, kazukoi}@microsoft.com



                                                A BSTRACT
             Conditional sound separation in multi-source audio mixtures without having ac-
             cess to single source sound data during training is a long standing challenge. Ex-
             isting mix-and-separate based methods suffer from significant performance drop
             with multi-source training mixtures due to the lack of supervision signal for sin-
             gle source separation cases during training. However, in the case of language-
             conditional audio separation, we do have access to corresponding text descrip-
             tions for each audio mixture in our training data, which can be seen as (rough)
             representations of the audio samples in the language modality. That raises the
             curious question of how to generate supervision signal for single-source audio ex-
             traction by leveraging the fact that single-source sounding language entities can
             be easily extracted from the text description. To this end, in this paper, we pro-
             pose a generic bi-modal separation framework which can enhance the existing
             unsupervised frameworks to separate single-source signals in a target modality
             (i.e., audio) using the easily separable corresponding signals in the conditioning
             modality (i.e., language), without having access to single-source samples in the
             target modality during training. We empirically show that this is well within
             reach if we have access to a pretrained joint embedding model between the two
             modalities (i.e., CLAP). Furthermore, we propose to incorporate our framework
             into two fundamental scenarios to enhance separation performance. First, we
             show that our proposed methodology significantly improves the performance of
             purely unsupervised baselines by reducing the distribution shift between train-
             ing and test samples. In particular, we show that our framework can achieve
             71% boost in terms of Signal-to-Distortion Ratio (SDR) over the baseline, reach-
             ing 97.5% of the supervised learning performance. Second, we show that we
             can further improve the performance of the supervised learning itself by 17% if
             we augment it by our proposed weakly-supervised framework. Our framework
             achieves this by making large corpora of unsupervised data available to the super-
             vised learning model as well as utilizing a natural, robust regularization mecha-
             nism through weak supervision from the language modality, and hence enabling
             a powerful semi-supervised framework for audio separation. Code is released at
             https://github.com/microsoft/BiModalAudioSeparation/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Environmental sounds often appear in mixtures containing diverse sounding events from differ-
ent sources (Kim et al., 2019). Separating sounds from mixtures has significant applications in
speech (Liu & Wang, 2018), audio (Chen et al., 2022), and music processing (Stöter et al., 2019).
Humans gather the perception of every single sounding source through experience and interactions
with environment. To train sound separation models, most prior works require well-curated, sin-
gle source samples (Yu et al., 2017; Sawata et al., 2021). However, procuring large-scale single
source datasets for all possible sounding entities can be quite costly and time-consuming in many
real scenarios (Wisdom et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022). Nevertheless, classical unsupervised at-
tempts to separate all sounding sources in a mixture typically require complex post-processing to
    ∗
        Work done in part during an internship at Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, USA
    †
        Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: (Left) The proposed conditional audio separation framework. (Right) The comparison of
our framework and the mix-and-separate baseline in unsupervised and semi-supervised settings.
isolate the target source which limits their applicability (Wisdom et al., 2020). In contrast, condi-
tional sound separation directly separates the target sound from the input mixture via conditioning
signals possibly presented in another modality. Prior work introduced image (Gao & Grauman,
2019), video (Zhao et al., 2018), reference audio (Chen et al., 2022), and language conditions (Dong
et al., 2022) to represent the sounds to be separated. Most of these works are built upon the idea of
mix-and-separate, originally introduced by Zhao et al. (2018).
Despite the success of mix-and-separate approach, the model does not see single-source cases during
training which means that the single-source conditioning signals are not seen at the training time
either. This creates a shift between training and test distributions, which, in turn, harms the model’s
generalization. The problem is further exacerbated by the increasing number of components in the
training mixtures, because now the model has to indirectly discover single-source patterns from even
more complex training patterns. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, the performance of mix-and-
separate method on 2-component test mixtures drops below 35% of that of the supervised approach
when the number of components in training data increases to four.
Aside from mix-and-separate, incorporating sound classification has been proposed to generate weak
supervision for single source samples during unsupervised training (Tzinis et al., 2020; Pishdadian
et al., 2020). However, such methods suffer from fixed and limited number of single-source sounding
entities (i.e., the number of classes) as well as dependency on seeing prototypical, single source
examples for each class during training, which severely restricts their applicability in real world
scenarios. In a similar vein, in this paper, we seek a methodology to generate weak supervision,
but without having to deal with the restrictions of the classification-based methods. To this end,
we propose a weakly-supervised audio separation framework that relies on incorporating pretrained
audio-language embedding models (specifically CLAP (Wu et al., 2023)) into the unsupervised
learning training loop. Since models such as CLAP (i) show promising open-ended recognition and
zero-shot capabilities, and (ii) are already pretrained on large corpora of audio-language pairs, our
proposed framework breaks the classification-based methods’ barrier while at the same time (unlike
mix-and-separate) provides weak supervision for single-source audio separation during training.
More generally, the main contributions of our work are:

(1) We propose a weakly supervised source separation framework capable of extracting single-
    source signals from a mixture in a target modality (e.g., audio) using a conditioning modality
    (e.g., language) if (i) we can easily separate the corresponding entities in the conditioning modal-
    ity, and (ii) we have access to a pretrained joint embedding model between the two modalities.
    In this paper, we adapt this general framework for language-conditional audio separation.
(2) We incorporate our framework into a pure unsupervised setting and show that, compared to
    mix-and-separate, our method achieves up to 71%, 102% and 129% SDR boost on 2-component
    separation test when trained on 2-, 3-, and 4-component mixture data, respectively (Figure 1).
(3) We further propose to use our methodology to augment supervised learning-based audio separa-
    tion into a powerful semi-supervised learning (SSL) counterpart. We show that in moderate SSL
    scenarios, we achieve 17%, 8%, and 6% SDR boost over supervised learning for 2-component
    separation when trained on 2-, 3-, and 4-component mixture data, respectively; whereas for ex-
    treme SSL scenarios, our method still outperforms the supervised training by 8% and 3% when
    trained on 2- and 3-component mixture data, respectively. (Figure 1).
(4) We conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies on MUSIC (Zhao et al., 2018), VG-
    GSound (Chen et al., 2020), and AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) datasets, and report the results.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Unconditional Sound Separation Most prior work focused on unconditional sound separation
on speech (Wang & Chen, 2018; Yu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021; Luo & Mesgarani, 2018), and
music (Stöter et al., 2019; Sawata et al., 2021; Takahashi & Mitsufuji, 2021). For these methods,
post-processing mechanisms have been employed to pick the target sound. Kavalerov et al. (2019)
used permutation invariant training (PIT) for universal sound separation, originally introduced by
Yu et al. (2017). PIT measures permutations of all predictions to match the ground truth sounds.
Nevertheless, these methods still need single source samples for training. Later, Wisdom et al.
(2020) proposed a mixture invariant training (MixIT) to use multi-source mixtures during training,
but suffers from over-separation of sounding sources, and still requires post-processing to separate
the sounds. Later, Wisdom et al. (2021) proposed to use a pretrained sound-classifier to separate
the sounds while training. Such a classifier, however, requires single-source samples for training.
MixPIT (Karamatlı & Kırbız, 2022) proposed direct predictions of mixtures from mixture of mix-
tures (MoM) in training but it suffers from under-separation. Pishdadian et al. (2020) proposed a
weakly supervised training by applying sound classifiers on estimated sources; however, the model
is restricted by the fixed number of classes. In contrast, our framework achieves single-source audio
separation with open-ended natural language prompts, without relying on any post-processing or
having access to single-source samples during training.
Conditional Sound Separation Prior work on conditional sound separation utilized visual infor-
mation (Gao & Grauman, 2019; Zhao et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2021; Chatterjee et al., 2021; Lu et al.,
2018), as well as text information (Dong et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Kilgour et al., 2022; Tan
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) of sources in mixtures for separation. Most of these methods employ
the mix-and-separate framework originally introduced by Zhao et al. (2018). Recently, Dong et al.
(2022); Tan et al. (2023) introduced modality inversion conditioning by leveraging CLIP model
with mix-and-separate, where video/image conditioning is used for training while both video and
text can be used for test conditioning. However, with increasing number of sources in training mix-
tures, the performance of these methods significantly drop compared to supervised training. Gao
& Grauman (2019) introduced a sound classifier in mix-and-separate for clustering single source
samples. AudioScope (Tzinis et al., 2020) added a classifier in the MixIT baseline for separating
on-screen samples based on visual conditioning. Another line of research uses reference audio sig-
nal for conditioning in mixture separation (Chen et al., 2022; Gfeller et al., 2021). However, it is
generally costly to gather reference signals for single sources. In contrast, our approach can provide
competitive results of single source training under completely unsupervised scenarios.
Contrastive Learning on Audio, Language, and Vision Foundation Models Radford et al.
(2021) first introduced CLIP model which learns joint visual-language embedding from 400M
image-text pairs. CLIP has been extensively studied in diverse visual-language applications, such
as zero-shot classification (Radford et al., 2021), open-vocabulary segmentation (Luo et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2023), and object detection (Zareian et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022). Guzhov et al. (2022)
later integrates audio modality to learn joint representations of audio, vision, and language. Wu
et al. (2023) introduced joint audio-language embedding with CLAP model by large-scale pretrain-
ing with 633, 526 audio-caption pairs. In this work, we leverage pretrained CLAP model to generate
weak supervision with representative texts in multi-source sound separation training.

3   T HE P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
We propose a robust language-conditional sound source separation framework capable of separat-
ing single sources from mixtures without having access to single-source audio data during train-
ing. To this end, we develop a generic weakly-supervised training framework to separate/segment
a single-source signal from a mixture in modality A conditioned on a single-source, concurrent
signal in modality T assuming that we have access to (i) single-source signals in modality T , and
(ii) a pretrained joint embedding model between modalities A and T . If these requirements are
met, our framework can learn a conditional source separation model in modality A without needing
single-source instances from this modality during training. In this sense, our proposed framework
is weakly-supervised. In this paper, we focus on the specific scenario where modality A is audio
and modality T is language. As such, requirement (i) boils down to having access to single-source
entities in language (e.g., “the sound of violin”) which is easily obtainable from the caption associ-
ated with an audio mixture sample using standard NLP techniques such as Name Entity Recognition


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(NER) (Li et al., 2020) combined with basic prompt engineering. Also requirement (ii) is met as we
do have access to language-audio pretrained models such as CLAP (Wu et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, driving training purely based on weak supervision will only get us so far. In practice,
pure weak supervision through language is quite often coarse and therefore produces low fidelity au-
dio samples during inference. To overcome this problem, the conventional wisdom is to incorporate
some form of reconstruction loss minimization during training. However, traditionally, reconstruc-
tion loss relies on having access to supervised training data (i.e., single-source audio samples) which
we are trying to circumvent. As a result, here we propose to incorporate the unsupervised version
of the reconstruction loss minimization, aka the mix-and-separate approach (Zhao et al., 2018) in
combination with our weakly-supervised training, as depicted in Figure 1.
3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Let D = {(M1 , T1 ), (M2 , T2 ), . . . , (MP , TP )} be a set of P audio mixture and text description
pairs. We assume each audio mixture Mi is composed of K > 1 single source audio sounds Sik ,
           PK
i.e. Mi = k=1 Sik , which we do not have access to during training. Furthermore, we assume each
audio single source Sik corresponds to a sounding language entity Tik ∈ Ti , which is either given or
easily obtainable from the textual prompts Ti . For example, for a music audio mixture accompanying
with the textual description “a trio of violin, piano, and cello”, the sounding language entities are
“violin”,“piano”, and “cello”. Given this setting, our goal is to train a neural network model fθ using
D such that, at inference time, given a mixture M and a sounding language entity T k , it extracts the
corresponding single-source audio S k = fθ (M, T k ) from M1 . More precisely, we design fθ as a
residual conditional U-Net that operates on the magnitude spectrogram of the input audio mixture:
                  fθ (M, T k ) = S −1 |S(M)| ⊙ gθ (|S(M)|, εL (T k )), ϕ S(M)

                                                                                                    (1)
where S(·) is the Short Term Fourier Transform (STFT) function, | · | and ϕ(·) are the magnitude
and phase functions, gθ is the masking U-Net function parameterized by θ, εL (·) is the (frozen)
language embedding model, and ⊙ is the Hadamard product. Note that our design choices for
modeling fθ are specifically guided by the nature of the problem at hand. First, our U-Net operates
only on the magnitude of the input mixture as it is known that the phase information is not crucial
to many audio prediction tasks. Second, we have intentionally chosen the mask architecture for fθ
as opposed to directly predicting the output in order to encode the inductive bias that the output
of fθ should be a component of its input mixture. This inductive bias is crucial for the case of
weakly supervised learning, as the supervision signal does not contain the fine-grained information
necessary for reconstructing the output from scratch.
The masking function gθ is a conditional U-Net that predicts a (soft) binary mask for an input mag-
nitude spectrogram mixture conditioned on the encoding of the text prompt condition (via εL (·)).
We have extended the common audio U-Net architecture to incorporate the conditioning signal at
different resolutions of the input by using multi-scale cross attention modules. For more details of
the proposed architecture and our architecture ablation study, see Appendices C, and G.1.
3.2   U NSUPERVISED M IX - AND -S EPARATE T RAINING
A common methodology to train the neural model presented in equation 1 is to synthetically mix two
or more single-source audio samples at the training time and have the model predict each component
by incorporating the ℓ1 reconstruction loss on the prediction of the model and the original single-
source ground truth components. However, in our setting, we do not have access to single-source
audio samples during training; instead, we can mix two or more multi-source mixtures and have
the model separate them. This is the essence of the unsupervised Mix-and-Separate approach. In
particular, during training, we synthetically mix two or more audio mixtures to form a mixture of
mixtures (MoM) which is then fed to the model to separate the original ingredient mixtures.
For example, suppose we have two audio mixtures M1 , with description T1 as “a duet of piano and
cello”, and M2 with description T2 as “a duet of guitar and violin”. We can mix M1 and M2 to
produce the MoM M = M1 + M2 , which is fed to the model conditioned by either of T1 or T2 to
estimate M1 or M2 , respectively. Then the unsupervised reconstruction loss (URL) for M is:
                LU RL (M; θ) = ∥fθ (M, T1 ) − M1 ∥ℓ1 + ∥fθ (M, T2 ) − M2 ∥ℓ1                  (2)
   1
     Note that in practice, the sounding entity is presented as a prompt phrase to the model, e.g., “the sound of
violin” instead of just “violin”. For more details of our prompt engineering pipeline, see Appendices G.8 & E


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Unsupervised mix-and-separate training with language conditioning (for N = 2, K = 2)
The generalization of this loss function to more than two components is then straightforward.

3.3   W EAKLY S UPERVISED AUDIO -L ANGUAGE T RAINING
Despite its merits, the mix-and-separate approach presented in the previous section suffers from
a major drawback: due to our unsupervised restriction, the model never sees any single-source
conditioning prompt during training; whereas, during inference, most realistic scenarios involve
querying for separation of a single-source sound from the mixture input. This creates a distribution
shift between the training and testing samples which significantly harms the model generalization.
Therefore, the main question is, if we introduce single-source text prompts during training, how can
we generate supervision without requiring to see the corresponding single-source audio samples?
Our key idea in response to this question is to use the single-source text prompts themselves for
supervision! In order to achieve this, we note that the conditioning text prompts and the model’s
predictions belong to two different modalities (i.e., language and audio) which means that in order
to define any notion of similarity between them (which is needed to define a loss function), we would
need to map both to a common semantic space. Fortunately, this is a solved problem already with
the recent rise of joint multi-modal embedding frameworks such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
CLAP (Wu et al., 2023). In particular, we propose to use the pretrained CLAP language encoder
(denoted by εL (·)) and the pretrained CLAP audio encoder (denoted by εA (·)) to calculate cosine
similarity between the the model’s prediction and the conditioning text prompts and subsequently
generate weak supervision signal for single-source text prompts. However, directly using (negative)
cosine similarity as the loss function can result in degenerate outputs, which leads to incorporating
cosine similarity within a discriminative setting, i.e., the contrastive loss (Radford et al., 2021). In
particular, given a batch of N mixture and text description pairs B = {(M1 , T1 ), . . . , (MN , TN )},
if each text description Ti consists of Ki single-source sounding language entities Tik , k ∈ 1..Ki
(e.g., “the duet of piano and cello” consists of “piano” and “cello” single-source sounding language
entities), then our flavor of contrastive loss for mixture Mi is defined as:
                                 Ki
                            1 X
    LCN T (Mi ; θ) = −                log ζτ (cikik ; {ciajb : a ∈ 1..Ki , j ∈ 1..N, b ∈ 1..Kj }) +
                           2Ki
                                k=1

                                      log ζτ (cikik ; {cjbia : a ∈ 1..Ki , j ∈ 1..N, b ∈ 1..Kj })    (3)
where                         exp(x/τ )

                                                                εA fθ (Mi , Tik ) · εL Tjt

             ζτ (x; Y ) = P                 , and cikjt =                                            (4)
                             y∈Y exp(y/τ )                   ∥εA fθ (Mi , Tik ) ∥2 ∥εL Tjt ∥2
are the Softmax function with (learnable) temperature parameter τ and the cosine similarity, respec-
                                                                         PM
tively. If Mi is a MoM with M component mixtures (that is, Mi = j=1 Mij ), then we define
                   PM
LCN T (Mi , θ) = j=1 LCN T (Mij , θ). We emphasize that the weak supervision signal generated
as above does not contain enough information to reconstruct the fine-grain details of the queried
single-source audio signal; in fact, the contrastive loss in equation 3 only enforces the predicted
audio to contain the “characteristic features” such that it can be encoded close to the corresponding
text prompt in the CLAP semantic space. That is why we refer to this process as “weak” supervision
and why it is crucial to use this loss function combined with the unsupervised reconstruction loss in


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Our proposed weakly-supervised audio-language training framework: bi-modal con-
trastive loss (LCN T ) combined with consistency reconstruction loss (LCRL ).
equation 2, which requires us to use MoMs instead of the original mixtures during training. More-
over, since now we can query for single-source audio components, we can add an additional (soft)
consistency constraint to have the predicted single source samples sum up to the original mixture.
                                      PM
More precisely, for a MoM Mi = j=1 Mij where each component mixture Mij itself consists
                                                k
of Kij (unknown) single-source component Sij      for which we have access to the sounding language
           k
entities Tij , we define the consistency reconstruction loss (CRL) as:
                                             M            Kij
                                            X            X
                           LCRL (Mi ; θ) =      ∥Mij −        fθ (Mij , Tijk )∥ℓ1                (5)
                                            j=1           k=1
Putting everything together, at each training step, given a batch of audio mixtures and their language
descriptions B = {(M1 , T1 ), . . . , (MN , TN )}, first we randomly combine pairs of mixtures and
their text prompts from B to form the synthetic batch of MoMs B ′ = {(M′1 , T1′ ), . . . , (M′N , TN′ ′ )}.
Once we have B ′ , we minimize the Total Weak-supervision Loss (TWL) to find the optimal parameter
values for our segmentation model fθ :
                            N′
                ′       1 X
                                  α · LCN T (M′i , θ) + β · LCRL (M′i , θ) + γ · LU RL (M′i , θ)

       LT W L (B , θ) = ′                                                                               (6)
                        N i=1
where α, β and γ are the scalar relative weights for each loss term. Note that the parameters of the
CLAP encoder models are kept frozen during training.
3.4   S EMI - SUPERVISED L EARNING
As mentioned earlier, the proposed learning framework not only boosts the performance of unsu-
pervised audio separation by introducing weak supervision, but also improves the performance of
supervised audio separation by incorporating potentially large corpora of mixture audio data which
are not naturally accessible to supervised learning methods. The latter scenario effectively presents a
semi-supervised learning (SSL) scheme which can be significantly impactful in practice, as mixture
audio datasets are generally way more abundant than their well-curated single source counterparts.
Moreover, as we will later see in our experiments, the introduction of unsupervised samples in the
supervised training loop via the weak supervision signal provides an elegant regularization mecha-
nism which protects the supervised method from potential overfitting.
In the SSL scenario, in addition to the mixture data, we also have a portion of single-source audio
samples in each batch, S, from which we can generate the synthetic set of mixtures S ′ . Then we
simply augment our total loss in equation 6 to include the standard reconstruction loss for S ′ :
                   LSSL (B ′ ∪ S ′ , θ) = λs · LU RL (S ′ , θ) + λu · LT W L (B ′ , θ)            (7)
where λs and λu are the relative weights. Note that, as opposed to the unsupervised case, the LU RL
here is computed over S ′ for which we have access to the ground-truth single sources (i.e., S).
4     E XPERIMENTS
Datasets: We experiment on synthetic mixtures produced from single source MUSIC (Zhao et al.,
2018) and VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020) datasets by mixing samples from n sources. We use the


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison on MUSIC Dataset under the unsupervised setup. The supervised column is
also provided as an upperbound. SDR on 2-Source separation test set is reported for all cases. All
methods are reproduced under the same setting. * denotes implementation with our improved U-Net
model. Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in each group, respectively.

                                                                  Single-Source    Multi-Source (Unsupervised)
      Method
                                                                  (Supervised)    2-Source     3-Source     4-Source
      Unconditional
      PIT* (Yu et al., 2017)                                        8.0 ± 0.26        -            -            -
      MixIT (Wisdom et al., 2020)                                       -         3.2 ± 0.34   2.3 ± 0.57   1.4 ± 0.35
      MixPIT (Karamatlı & Kırbız, 2022)                                 -         3.6 ± 0.46   2.1 ± 0.41   1.7 ± 0.35
      Image Conditional
      CLIPSep-Img (Dong et al., 2022)                               6.8 ± 0.25    3.8 ± 0.27   2.9 ± 0.35   2.1 ± 0.32
      CLIPSep-Img* (Dong et al., 2022)                              7.4 ± 0.22    4.6 ± 0.31   3.8 ± 0.28   2.9 ± 0.43
      CoSep* (Gao & Grauman, 2019)                                  7.9 ± 0.28    4.9 ± 0.37   4.0 ± 0.29   3.1 ± 0.36
      SOP* (Zhao et al., 2018)                                      6.5 ± 0.23    4.1 ± 0.41   3.5 ± 0.26   2.7 ± 0.42
      Language Conditional
      CLIPSep-Text (Dong et al., 2022)                              7.7 ± 0.21    4.6 ± 0.35   3.5 ± 0.27   2.7 ± 0.45
      CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)                             8.3 ± 0.27    5.4 ± 0.41   4.7 ± 0.32   3.8 ± 0.28
      BertSep*                                                      7.9 ± 0.27    5.3 ± 0.31   4.0 ± 0.22   3.1 ± 0.27
      CLAPSep*                                                      8.1 ± 0.31    5.5 ± 0.36   4.3 ± 0.28   3.5 ± 0.33
      LASS-Net (Liu et al., 2022)                                   7.8 ± 0.25    5.2 ± 0.26   4.2 ± 0.29   3.6 ± 0.36
      Weak-Sup (Pishdadian et al., 2020)                                -         3.1 ± 0.47   2.2 ± 0.38   1.9 ± 0.33
      Proposed (w/ Timbre Classifier - concurrent training)             -         5.0 ± 0.29   4.5 ± 0.32   3.5 ± 0.27
      Proposed (w/ Timbre Classifier - pretrained)                      -         6.1 ± 0.33   5.2 ± 0.37   4.1 ± 0.35
      Proposed (w/ Bi-modal CLAP)                                       -         7.9 ± 0.35   7.1 ± 0.42   6.2 ± 0.38

same test set containing samples of 2 sources for each dataset in all experiments. We also experiment
with AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), a natural mixture dataset containing 1 ∼ 6 sounding sources
in each mixture with full-length captions, where we use Constituent-Tree language parser (Halvani,
2023) to extract single source text phrases. See Appendix E for more details on dataset preparation.
Training: All the models are trained for 50 epochs with initial learning rate of 0.001. The learning
rate drops by a factor of 0.1 after every 15 epochs. Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is used
with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and ϵ = 10−8 . The training was carried out with 8 RTX-A6000 GPUs
with 48GB memory. For more implementation and training details, see Appendix D.
Evaluation: We primarily use signal-to-distortion ratio (SDR) (Vincent et al., 2006) for evaluating
different models. However, we have also calculated other evaluation metrics for comparisons, the
details of which can be found in Appendices F and G.3.
Setup: Every instance of training in our experiments is carried out under one of these three settings:
(I) supervised, where the training data consists of only single-source samples, (II) unsupervised,
where the training data consists of only multi-source samples either natural or synthetic, and finally
(III) semi-supervised, where the training data is a mix of single-source and multi-source samples.

4.1     T HE U NSUPERVISED S ETTING
We have compared our proposed framework on MUSIC dataset with various types of state-of-the-art
baselines, as presented in Table 1. For comparison studies on VGGSound and AudioCaps datasets,
see Appendix G.4. Here, the performance is measured for different complexities of training sce-
narios containing 1 ∼ 4 single source components in training mixtures. We use the same test
set for all training scenarios containing two components in mixtures. For comparison test results
on 3-component mixtures, see Appendix G.5. There are three baseline categories: unconditional,
image-conditional, and language-conditional methods. Most conditional models are primarily built
on top of the mix-and-separate method introduced in Zhao et al. (2018). We have reproduced the
results for all baselines under the same training and test conditions. For a fair comparison, we have
incorporated our improved conditional U-Net architecture in most baselines.
Comparison to Unconditional Methods: Unconditional methods rely on complex post-processing
selection to extract the target sound from the predicted sounds. Following their training methods, we
use similar selection methods on test set to find the best match with ground truths which can be a po-
tential limitation in real-time scenarios. PIT (Yu et al., 2017) can only be used in supervised training


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on single source sounds that gives comparable results with conditional methods. MixIT (Wisdom
et al., 2020) and MixPIT (Karamatlı & Kırbız, 2022) are built for multi-source training on top of the
PIT framework. MixIT suffers from over-separation by predicting more components than the actual
input mixtures. Though MixPIT reduces the over-separation by directly predicting the mixture in
training, it often suffers under-separation on the test set. Our framework, however, achieves +4.7
and +4.3 SDR improvements compared to MixIt and MixPIT, respectively.
Comparison to Image Conditional Methods: The MUSIC dataset also comes with correspond-
ing YouTube videos for audio samples which can be used as visual conditioning signal for audio
separation. To this end, we use the mean embedding of multiple sounding source images extracted
with corresponding pretrained image encoders for conditioning. CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022) intro-
duces CLIP-Image encoder for conditioning in the SOP framework (Zhao et al., 2018) substituting
its ResNet-18 encoder. CoSep (Gao & Grauman, 2019) further adds a pre-trained object detector
for finer conditioning and uses co-separation loss for classifying each sounding source. However,
CoSep is limited by the number of training classes and pretraining of the object detectors on the tar-
get classes. On 2-source training, our method achieves +3.8, +3.0, and +3.3 SDR improvements
compared to SOP, CoSep, and CLIPSep methods, which use our improved U-Net model.
Comparison to Language Conditional Methods: CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022) also includes the
CLIP-text encoder which can be used for language conditioning. Additionally, we train separate
CLIPSep models with its CLIP-text encoder replaced by frozen Bert (Devlin et al., 2018), and
CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) text encoders denoted by BertSep and CLAPSep, respectively. LASS-
Net (Liu et al., 2022) is another baseline that uses Bert text encoder with custom ResUnet model
architecture. Note that all these methods lack fine-grain conditioning on single source predictions
which results in significant performance drop on multi-source training. As for weak supervision, we
experimented with Weak-Sup (Pishdadian et al., 2020) which introduces a separate classifier on top
of separation models. Apart from restricting the model to certain number of classes, such fine-grain
weak supervision often results in spectral loss; plus, without proper pre-training of the classifier
on single-source samples, such methods face convergence issues that deteriorates the performance.
In comparison, our method consistently achieves significant performance improvements in all chal-
lenging multi-source training scenarios over all these baselines. Notably, we achieve 97.5% of the
supervised method’s performance trained on 2-source mixtures.
Bi-modal Embedding vs. Timbre Classification: A key question one might ask is whether we
can get similar gain if instead of using the bi-modal embedding CLAP model, we incorporate a
simpler timbre classification model to generate weak-supervision for single source prompts, similar
to CoSep (Gao & Grauman, 2019) and Weak-Sup (Pishdadian et al., 2020). After all, CLAP can
be seen as a zero-shot audio classifier with an open-ended set of classes. To test this idea, we have
replaced our CLAP-based loss with a timbre classification-based loss, where the classifier shares the
exact same architecture as that of the CLAP audio encoder but the contrastive loss is replaced by the
cross-entropy loss. Since, in general, the conditioning prompt can contain more than one classes, we
have treated this problem as a multi-label classification problem with C binary classification outputs
in the last layer, where C is the number of classes. Furthermore, we have trained our classifier-based
loss under two scenarios: (I) concurrently with the separation model, and (II) pretrained beforehand.
In both cases, the training dataset is the same as that of the original separation task. The results are
shown in Table1. As the results show, the concurrent version performs worse than some of the
baselines that do not even have weak-supervision. And while the pretrained version does better
than the baselines, its performance is still significantly lower than our proposed framework using
the CLAP loss, not to mention its restricted applicability due to the fixed number of classes. We
hypothesize the superiority of CLAP-based supervision comes from the large-scale pretraining of
CLAP which enables us to transfer that knowledge to source separation. In other words, in the
limit for large-scale training data and gigantic number of classes, the classification approach should
perform as well as the CLAP-based loss, but at that point, we might as well use CLAP.

4.2   T HE S EMI - SUPERVISED S ETTING
To demonstrate semi-supervised performance on synthetic mixtures, we form the training set by
combining supervised and unsupervised training subsets. The results are given in Table 2. As
shown in the table, when we use only 5% of MUSIC and VGGSound datasets as supervised data
for both our semi-supervised method and the supervised baseline, while letting our semi-supervised
framework use the rest of 95% as unsupervised data, we get the dramatic 6.2 SDR boost over the su-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparisons of the proposed semi-supervised learning with different portions of single-
source and multi-source subsets. Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance.

       Training          Test Set       Single-source Data      Multi-source Mixture Data      Performance
       Method            Mixture        Dataset    Fraction    Dataset    Fraction   #Source     (SDR)
      Supervised       MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC        100%        -            -        -        8.1 ± 0.31
      Supervised       MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC          5%        -            -        -        2.6 ± 0.33
     Unsupervised      MUSIC-2Mix         -             -      MUSIC       100%        2        7.9 ± 0.35
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC         5%       MUSIC        95%        2        8.8 ± 0.28
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC         5%       MUSIC        95%        3        8.2 ± 0.22
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC         5%       MUSIC        95%        4        7.4 ± 0.31
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC        10%       MUSIC        90%        2        8.9 ± 0.26
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC         25%      MUSIC        75%        2        9.2 ± 0.24
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC         75%      MUSIC        25%        2        9.5 ± 0.29
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix       MUSIC        100%     VGGSound     100%        2        9.9 ± 0.35
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix      VGGSound      100%      MUSIC       100%        2        9.7 ± 0.35
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix      VGGSound      100%      MUSIC       100%        3        9.2 ± 0.31
    Semi-Supervised    MUSIC-2Mix      VGGSound      100%      MUSIC       100%        4        8.9 ± 0.42
      Supervised      VGGSound-2Mix    VGGSound      100%        -            -        -        2.3 ± 0.23
      Supervised      VGGSound-2Mix    VGGSound       5%         -            -        -        0.4 ± 0.35
     Unsupervised     VGGSound-2Mix       -            -      VGGSound     100%        2        2.2 ± 0.29
    Semi-Supervised   VGGSound-2Mix    VGGSound       5%      VGGSound      95%        2        3.1 ± 0.31
    Semi-Supervised   VGGSound-2Mix    VGGSound      75%      VGGSound      25%        2        3.4 ± 0.26
     Unsupervised     AudioCaps-2Mix      -            -      AudioCaps    100%       1∼6       2.9 ± 0.23
    Semi-Supervised   AudioCaps-2Mix   VGGSound      100%     AudioCaps    100%       1∼6       4.3 ± 0.34


pervised method. This shows that our semi-supervised framework can make a significant difference
in scenarios where well-curated, single source samples are scarce and costly to acquire by lever-
aging a large corpora of unsupervised data. More interestingly, even when we let the supervised
baseline use 100% of the data as supervised single-source data, our semi-supervised approach still
beats it by +0.7, and +0.8 SDR boost on the two datasets using only 5% of the supervised data!
Based on this result, we hypothesize that, in addition to data augmentation for training, our proposed
framework offers a powerful regularization mechanism that boosts the generalization of the super-
vised method by encouraging it to also discover salient patterns from unsupervised data. For a more
comprehensive study of our framework’s regularization effects, see Appendices G.2, G.5, and G.7.
Finally, we note that for realistic, natural mixture datasets where single source audio samples are not
available for semi-supervised learning, we can still utilize our semi-supervised scheme by running it
across multiple datasets and let supervised and unsupervised training samples come from different
datasets. To this end, we have trained our model using the AudioCaps natural mixtures as the
unsupervised subset and the VGGSound dataset as the supervised subset, and have achieved +1.4
SDR boost over the weakly-supervised baseline trained on AudioCaps only.

5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we proposed a weakly supervised learning framework for language conditional audio
separation when single source audio samples are not available during training. By leveraging cross
modal similarity between the audio and language modalities through the pretrained CLAP model,
our methodology is capable of generating weak supervision signal for single-source prompts during
training, which in turn, enables the model to reduce the shift between the training and test data
distributions. By conducting extensive experiments, we demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
framework over the SOTA baselines by significant margin, shrinking the gap between unsupervised
and supervised methods. Furthermore, by incorporating our framework into the semi-supervised
setting, we showed that our framework beats the supervised method itself. More interestingly, as
shown by the experiments, our framework still maintains its superiority even when the supervised
baseline had access to 20x more supervised single source data than our framework. This latter
result highlights the ability of our framework to employ natural regularization through the language
modality during training.
As mentioned earlier, aside from the implementation details, the core idea of our proposed frame-
work is generic and modality-independent, and therefore can be adopted for conditional segmenta-
tion tasks in other modalities as well (e.g., unsupervised image segmentation in Computer Vision).
This property provides a fertile ground for future research directions and novel applications.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported in part by ONR Minerva program, iMAGiNE - the Intelligent Machine
Engineering Consortium at UT Austin, and a UT Cockrell School of Engineering Doctoral Fellow-
ship.

R EFERENCES
Moitreya Chatterjee, Jonathan Le Roux, Narendra Ahuja, and Anoop Cherian. Visual scene graphs
 for audio source separation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
 puter Vision, pp. 1204–1213, 2021.
Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggsound: A large-scale audio-
  visual dataset. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 721–725. IEEE, 2020.
Ke Chen, Xingjian Du, Bilei Zhu, Zejun Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov. Zero-
  shot audio source separation through query-based learning from weakly-labeled data. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 4441–4449, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Hao-Wen Dong, Naoya Takahashi, Yuki Mitsufuji, Julian McAuley, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick.
  Clipsep: Learning text-queried sound separation with noisy unlabeled videos. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.07065, 2022.
Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, Zihe Zhang, Miaojing Shi, Yue Gao, and Guoqi Li. Learning to prompt for
  open-vocabulary object detection with vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14084–14093, 2022.
Ruohan Gao and Kristen Grauman. Co-separating sounds of visual objects. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3879–3888, 2019.
Beat Gfeller, Dominik Roblek, and Marco Tagliasacchi. One-shot conditional audio filtering of
  arbitrary sounds. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 501–505. IEEE, 2021.
Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Audioclip: Extending clip to
  image, text and audio. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 976–980. IEEE, 2022.
Oren Halvani. Constituent Treelib - A Lightweight Python Library for Constructing, Process-
  ing, and Visualizing Constituent Trees., 3 2023. URL https://github.com/Halvani/
  constituent-treelib.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Ertuğ Karamatlı and Serap Kırbız. Mixcycle: Unsupervised speech separation via cyclic mixture
  permutation invariant training. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 29:2637–2641, 2022.
Ilya Kavalerov, Scott Wisdom, Hakan Erdogan, Brian Patton, Kevin Wilson, Jonathan Le Roux, and
   John R Hershey. Universal sound separation. In 2019 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal
   Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), pp. 175–179. IEEE, 2019.
Kevin Kilgour, Beat Gfeller, Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Scott Wisdom, and Marco Tagliasacchi.
  Text-driven separation of arbitrary sounds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05738, 2022.
Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Audiocaps: Generating
  captions for audios in the wild. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
  ume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 119–132, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Jing Li, Aixin Sun, Jianglei Han, and Chenliang Li. A survey on deep learning for named entity
   recognition. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34(1):50–70, 2020.
Xubo Liu, Haohe Liu, Qiuqiang Kong, Xinhao Mei, Jinzheng Zhao, Qiushi Huang, Mark D Plumb-
  ley, and Wenwu Wang. Separate what you describe: Language-queried audio source separation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15147, 2022.
Xubo Liu, Qiuqiang Kong, Yan Zhao, Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Yuzhuo Liu, Rui Xia, Yuxuan
  Wang, Mark D Plumbley, and Wenwu Wang. Separate anything you describe. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.05037, 2023.
Yuzhou Liu and DeLiang Wang. A casa approach to deep learning based speaker-independent co-
  channel speech separation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5399–5403. IEEE, 2018.
Rui Lu, Zhiyao Duan, and Changshui Zhang. Listen and look: Audio–visual matching assisted
  speech source separation. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 25(9):1315–1319, 2018.
Huaishao Luo, Junwei Bao, Youzheng Wu, Xiaodong He, and Tianrui Li. Segclip: Patch aggregation
  with learnable centers for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 23033–23044. PMLR, 2023.
Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. Tasnet: time-domain audio separation network for real-time, single-
  channel speech separation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 696–700. IEEE, 2018.
Juan F. Montesinos. Torch-mir-eval: Pytorch implementation of mir-eval, 2021. URL https:
  //github.com/JuanFMontesinos/torch_mir_eval.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Fatemeh Pishdadian, Gordon Wichern, and Jonathan Le Roux. Finding strength in weakness: Learn-
  ing to separate sounds with weak supervision. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
  Language Processing, 28:2386–2399, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Brian McFee, Eric J Humphrey, Justin Salamon, Oriol Nieto, Dawen Liang, Daniel PW
  Ellis, and C Colin Raffel. Mir eval: A transparent implementation of common mir metrics. In
  ISMIR, volume 10, pp. 2014, 2014.
Ryosuke Sawata, Stefan Uhlich, Shusuke Takahashi, and Yuki Mitsufuji. All for one and one for
  all: Improving music separation by bridging networks. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 51–55. IEEE, 2021.
Fabian-Robert Stöter, Stefan Uhlich, Antoine Liutkus, and Yuki Mitsufuji. Open-unmix-a reference
  implementation for music source separation. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(41):1667, 2019.
Naoya Takahashi and Yuki Mitsufuji. Densely connected multi-dilated convolutional networks for
  dense prediction tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 993–1002, 2021.
Reuben Tan, Arijit Ray, Andrea Burns, Bryan A Plummer, Justin Salamon, Oriol Nieto, Bryan Rus-
  sell, and Kate Saenko. Language-guided audio-visual source separation via trimodal consistency.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10575–10584, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yapeng Tian, Di Hu, and Chenliang Xu. Cyclic co-learning of sounding object visual grounding and
  sound separation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 2745–2754, 2021.
Efthymios Tzinis, Scott Wisdom, Aren Jansen, Shawn Hershey, Tal Remez, Daniel PW Ellis, and
  John R Hershey. Into the wild with audioscope: Unsupervised audio-visual separation of on-
  screen sounds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01143, 2020.
Efthymios Tzinis, Gordon Wichern, Paris Smaragdis, and Jonathan Le Roux. Optimal condition
  training for target source separation. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Emmanuel Vincent, Rémi Gribonval, and Cédric Févotte. Performance measurement in blind audio
  source separation. IEEE transactions on audio, speech, and language processing, 14(4):1462–
  1469, 2006.
DeLiang Wang and Jitong Chen. Supervised speech separation based on deep learning: An overview.
  IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 26(10):1702–1726, 2018.
Scott Wisdom, Efthymios Tzinis, Hakan Erdogan, Ron Weiss, Kevin Wilson, and John Hershey.
  Unsupervised sound separation using mixture invariant training. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:3846–3857, 2020.
Scott Wisdom, Aren Jansen, Ron J Weiss, Hakan Erdogan, and John R Hershey. Sparse, efficient,
  and semantic mixture invariant training: Taming in-the-wild unsupervised sound separation. In
  2021 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA),
  pp. 51–55. IEEE, 2021.
Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, Yuchen Hui, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov.
  Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption
  augmentation. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Mengde Xu, Zheng Zhang, Fangyun Wei, Han Hu, and Xiang Bai. Side adapter network for open-
 vocabulary semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2945–2954, 2023.
Yao-Yuan Yang, Moto Hira, Zhaoheng Ni, Artyom Astafurov, Caroline Chen, Christian Puhrsch,
  David Pollack, Dmitriy Genzel, Donny Greenberg, Edward Z Yang, et al. Torchaudio: Building
  blocks for audio and speech processing. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6982–6986. IEEE, 2022.
Dong Yu, Morten Kolbæk, Zheng-Hua Tan, and Jesper Jensen. Permutation invariant training of
  deep models for speaker-independent multi-talker speech separation. In 2017 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 241–245. IEEE, 2017.
Alireza Zareian, Kevin Dela Rosa, Derek Hao Hu, and Shih-Fu Chang. Open-vocabulary object
  detection using captions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 14393–14402, 2021.
Zhuohuang Zhang, Yong Xu, Meng Yu, Shi-Xiong Zhang, Lianwu Chen, and Dong Yu. Adl-mvdr:
  All deep learning mvdr beamformer for target speech separation. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6089–6093.
  IEEE, 2021.
Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Andrew Rouditchenko, Carl Vondrick, Josh McDermott, and Antonio
  Torralba. The sound of pixels. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
  (ECCV), pp. 570–586, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     OVERVIEW OF SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
We cover the following topics in our supplementary materials:

 • All notations used in the paper are summarized in Appendix B.
 • The proposed conditional U-Net architecture is detailed in Appendix C.
 • The details of the training process for the proposed framework are illustrated in Appendix D.
 • The datasets’ details and the data prepossessing pipeline are presented in Appendix E.
 • The details of evaluation metrics are presented in Appendix F.
 • Additional experimental ablation studies are reported in Appendix G.
 • And finally, a qualitative analysis of the model’s performance can be found in Appendix I.

                      Table 3: The glossary of all notations used in the paper.

                     Type                              Description                        Notation
               Scalar Parameters         Total number of mixtures in dataset                 P
                                        Number of sampled mixtures in a batch                N
                                    Number of single source components in a mixture          K
                                       Temperature parameter in contrastive loss             τ
                                          Unsupervised reconstruction loss                LU RL
                                                    Contrastive loss                      LCN T
                                           Consistency reconstruction loss                LCRL
                                             Total weak-supervision loss                  LT W L
                                         Total semi-supervised learning loss              LSSL
                                            Weak supervision loss weights                 α, β, γ
                                        Semi-supervised learning loss weights             λs , λu
               Vectors/Matrices                       Complete dataset                      D
                                                      Batch of mixtures                      B
                                         Batch of synthetic mixture-of-mixturess            B′
                                                     ith Sound mixture                      Mi
                                                     Mixture of mixture                     M′
                                              Language prompt of ith mixture                Ti
                                    The k th single source component in the ith mixture     Sik
                                        Language prompts of single source sound             Tik
                    Models                  Frozen CLAP language encoder                   εL (·)
                                             Frozen CLAP audio encoder                     εA (·)
                                    Conditional U-Net audio source separation model        fθ (·)
                                            Conditional U-Net mask model                   gθ (·)
              Operators/Functions                 Magnitude function                         |·|
                                                    Phase function                          ϕ(·)
                                            Short Term Fourier Transform                    S(·)
                                     Softmax function with temperature parameter τ          ζτ (·)
                                           Audio-language Cosine Similarity                 cikjt
                                                       L1 loss                             ∥ · ∥ ℓ1
                                                  Hadamard product                            ⊙



B     T HE N OTATION G LOSSARY
Table 3 presents the glossary of all notations used in the paper. We have divided the notations into
four groups: scalars, vectors/matrices, models, and operators/functions.

C     T HE P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE
C.1   T HE L ANGUAGE -C ONDITIONAL U-N ET

To extract rich features for faithful reconstruction of the audio sources conditioned on the input
prompt, we propose an enhanced conditional U-Net architecture. Our U-Net model operates on the
magnitude spectrum of input mixtures, and estimates the segmentation mask for the corresponding


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


source(s) based on conditional feature embedding. Prior works on conditional sound separation,
mostly used unconditional U-Net with post conditioning on final generated features from the U-
Net (Dong et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2018). Some works (Gao & Grauman, 2019) used simple
conditional feature concatenation at the innermost layer of the U-Net. Since most of these methods
are primarily built for supervised separation, which is a much simpler problem, the vanilla U-Net
architecture is often sufficient. However, since post-conditioning methods cannot leverage the con-
ditional language features through the network, their performance can degrade significantly in the
unsupervised setting. To overcome this, we redesign the conditional U-Net architecture by intro-
ducing multi-scale cross attention conditioning on the intermediate feature maps of the U-Net. The
architecture is shown in Figure 5.
We incorporate three main building blocks into the proposed conditional U-Net: residual block
(ResBlock), self-attention (SA), and cross-attention (CA) modules. The residual block is used for
enhancing model capacity following He et al. (2016) at every scale of feature processing. For the
input x, the operation can be represented by,
                                      x = x + ConvBlock(x)                                         (8)
where ConvBlock represents two successive convolutional layers. The self-attention and cross-
attention modules are designed using the multi-head attention (MHA) operations introduced
by (Vaswani et al., 2017). Self-attention re-calibrates the feature space before applying the con-
ditioning modulation. The self-attention operation for input x is given by,
                              x = x + MHA(Q = x, K = x, V = x)                                     (9)
where Q, K, V represent query, key, and values used in the MHA operation, respectively. In contrast,
cross-attention selectively filters the relevant features based on conditional features. For condition
embedding y with input x, the cross-attention mechanism is given by,
                              x = x + MHA(Q = x, K = y, V = y)                                   (10)

We divide the conditional U-Net model into two sub-networks: the Head network and the Modula-
tor network. The Head network operates on the fine-grain features of the higher signal resolutions
to generate coarse-grain features to be conditioned later by the language modality. Only ResBlocks
with traditional skip connections are used at each scale of the Head network. In contrast, the Mod-
ulator network applies the feature modulation based on the conditional language embedding. We
incorporate the self-attention and cross-attention operations in the skip connections of every Modu-
lator network layer. In total, the U-Net contains 7 layers of encoder and decoder. The Head network
contains top four layers of encoding and decoding, and the Modulator network contains the remain-
ing three layers. Table 4 shows the architectural details of each block in our enhanced conditional
U-Net.

C.2   T HE I NFERENCE P IPELINE

For the inference, we use the similar pipeline as baseline methods. As shown in Figure 4, the condi-
tional U-Net takes the input mixture and the language prompt (querying for the target source), and
generates the (soft) magnitude mask. The mask is applied on the mixture’s magnitude spectrogram,
while the phase is directly copied from the input.

D     T HE T RAINING D ETAILS
All the models are trained for 50 epochs with initial learning rate of 0.001. The learning rate drops
by the factor of 0.1 after every 15 epochs. Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is used with
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and ϵ = 10−8 for backpropagation. All the training was carried out with 8
RTX-A6000 GPUs with 48GB memory. We validate the model after every training epoch. We use
the batch size of 32 for the MUSIC dataset, and batch size of 64 for the VGGSound and AudioCaps
datasets. We reproduce all baselines under the same settings. PyTorch library (Paszke et al., 2019)
is used to implement all the models. The complete training algorithm of the proposed framework is
illustrated in Algorithm 1.
Furthermore, in Figure 6, we have visualized the detailed loss curves over the training course of
the proposed weakly supervised training (Fig. 6a) and its semi-supervised flavor (Fig. 6b). We have


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 4: Architectural details of proposed building blocks in the conditional U-Net model.

             Block Type                    Parameters                      Values
                                     No. of attention heads                   8
                                         No. of channels                    512
                                         Head dimension                      64
                                      Condition dimension                 77x768
        Cross Attention Block    No. of linear layers in attention            4
                (CA)                      Attention type                  Softmax
                                      Normalization Layer                LayerNorm
                                  No. of linear layers in MLP                 2
                                  MLP intermediate channels                 1024
                                  MLP intermediate activation              GeLU
                                    Num of attention heads                    8
                                       Channel dimension                    512
                                        Head dimension                       64
                                       No. of linear layers                   4
         Self Attention Block
                                         Attention type                   Softmax
                 (SA)
                                      Normalization layer                LayerNorm
                                   No. of linear layers in MLP                2
                                   MLP intermediate channels                1024
                                   MLP intermediate activation             GeLU
                                        Conv kernel size                    (3, 3)
           Residual Block             No. of convolutions                     1
            (ResBlock)                Normalization layer                BatchNorm
                                          Activation                 Leaky ReLU (th=0.2)
                                     Channel expansion ratio                  1
                                           Operator                  Strided Convolution
        Encoder Downsampler               Kernel size                        4x4
              Module                         Strides                         2x2
                                     Channel expansion ratio                  2
                                       Spatial upsampler             Bilinear upsampling
         Decoder Upsampler                    Scale                           2.0
              Module                  Channel compressor                 Convolution
                                    Channel compression ratio                 2.0


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 4: Inference pipeline for the proposed language conditional sound separation framework.


Figure 5: Proposed conditional U-Net architecture. We incorporate three building blocks: residual
block (ResBlock), self-attention (SA), and cross-attention (CA) blocks. The model is divided into
two modules: the head and the modulator. The head network operates on fine-grained features
and generates latent embedding. The modulator network modulates latent features based on cross-
attention conditioning.


combined both unsupervised reconstruction loss LU RL and consistency reconstruction loss (LCRL )
in the reconstruction loss plot. For further analysis of the loss components as well as their weight
hyper-parameter tuning details, please refer to Appendix G.2.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    (a) Weakly supervised training


                                     (b) Semi-supervised training

Figure 6: Visualization of loss curves over training epochs in proposed (a) weakly supervised train-
ing, and (b) semi-supervised training.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 The Proposed Weakly Supervised Training for Audio Source Separation
Input: Dataset D = {Mi , Ti }P                                            k K
                                i=1 , Single source text prompts {Ti }k=1 , K: # of sources per
    mixture, masking U-Net gθ , Pre-trained joined embedding encoders (εL , εA ).
Require: Initialize weights of gθ , keep pre-trained joint embedding encoders (εL , εA ) frozen.
 1: for t ∈ [1, T ] do                                                           ▷ T: Training iteration
 2:     Sample N Mixture with text prompts {Mn , Tn }N      n=1 ∈ D                  ▷ Batch size ← N
 3:     for n ∈ [1, N ] do
 4:         Sample another mixture {Mm , Tm } ▷ No single sound source overlaps in Mn , Mm
 5:         Prepare MoM M′ ← Mn + Mm
 6:         Predict Mcn ← fθ (M′ , Tn )
 7:         Predict Mcm ← fθ (M′ , Tm )
 8:         Compute LU RL (M; θ) with (Mn , M    cn ; Mm , M    cn ) using equation 2
 9:         for k ∈ [1, K] do
10:             Compute single source sound Sbnk ← fθ (Mn , Tnk )
                                                 k
11:             Compute single source sound Sbm    ← fθ (Mm , Tmk )
12:         end for
13:         Compute LCN T (M′ , θ) with {Sbnk , Tnk ; Sbm
                                                        k
                                                          , Tmk }K
                                                                 k=1 using equation 3 and equation 4
                                          PK bk             fm ← PK Sbk
14:         Reconstruct mixture Mn ← k=1 Sn and M
                                 f
                                                                       k=1 m
15:         Compute LCRL (M′ , θ) with (Mn , M   fn ; Mm , M   fm ) using equation 5
16:     end for
17:     Compute total loss LT W L using LU RL , LCRL , and LCN T for all N mixtures
18:     Back-propagate ∇LT W L and update weights of gθ
19: end for



E     DATASET P REPARATION

E.1   DATASETS D ESCRIPTION

MUSIC Dataset Following prior works, we experiment with MUSIC dataset (Zhao et al., 2018)
for musical instrument separation task. Instead of using the original 11 instrument datasets, we use
its extended version of MUSIC-21 containing around 1, 200 videos from 21 musical instruments.
Since some videos are not available, our aggregated version contains 1, 086 videos in total. The
video duration ranges 1 ∼ 5 minutes. We extract audios and class labels annotations from each
video. We use 80% videos of each classes for training and the remaining for testing. For training,
we randomly sample around 6s duration segments from each audio, while for testing, we prepare
non-overlapping samples from the whole length audio. The dataset only contains sounds of single-
source musical instruments. To use this datset for unsupervised training, we create synthetic training
mixtures by sampling different combinations of K single source sounds. Text prompts are then
generated using the class labels of the single source sounds. We use the common template for
representing the single and multi-source language condition prompts, as presented in Table 6.

VGGSound Dataset VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020) is a large-scale environmental sound datasets
containing more than 190, 000 videos from 309 classes. Since many corresponding videos are not
available in YouTube, our aggregated subset contains 175, 599 videos. We use the official train
and test split of VGGSound that contains 162, 199 training videos and 13, 398 test videos. Every
video contains an audio, mostly with a single source. Each video duration is 10s that contains single
source audio collected from different environments corrupted by natural noise. The sounding event
duration varies from 1 ∼ 10s. Because of that, we use the full-length audio samples in VGGSound
for our experiments. In order to use VGGSound for the unsupervised learning scenario, we mix
K random single source samples for each training mixture. The corresponding text prompts are
generated using the class labels of the the sounding sources in the mixture, similar to Table 6.

AudioCaps Dataset AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) contains around 50, 000 natural sound mix-
tures of 10s duration each. It also includes the complete captions of the prominent sources in each
mixture. We use the official train and test splits that contain 45, 182 and 4, 110 mixtures, respec-


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tively. In general, each mixture contains 1 ∼ 6 single source components. To cover all sounding
events included in the text caption, we use full-length audios of 10s. We use Constituent-Tree li-
brary (Halvani, 2023) to extract fine-grain phrases representing each sounding source from the full
caption. We initially extract several sentence and noun phrases, then perform simple post-processing
on them to eliminate the overlapping phrases. Some examples of extracted phrases from the full cap-
tions are given in Table 5. To handle different number of mixture components, we sample a fixed
number of phrases from each caption. In case there are not enough sounding phrases in the text
prompt, we re-sample some of the phrases, and introduce weighted reconstruction to ensure proper
reconstruction of the mixture.
AudioCaps is primarily used to measure training performance on natural mixtures containing diverse
sounding events, as opposed to synthetic mixtures. However, to evaluate the performance of the
model, we prepare synthetic mixture-of-mixtures by combining two mixtures from the AudioCaps
test set. At the test time, the model is queried with one full-length caption representing one of the
mixtures in synthetic MoM, and evaluated using the corresponding mixture.

E.2   DATA PREPROCESSING P IPELINE

We use the sampling rate of 11kHz for audio samples in all datasets. Only mono-channel audio
is used. The audio clip length is chosen to be 65, 535 for MUSIC dataset, and 110, 000 for the
AudioCaps and VGGSound datasets. Since AudioCaps and VGGSound datasets are noisy, and
usually contain sounding regions on small portion of 10s duration, we use full length audio samples
for these two datasets. For the MUSIC dataset, we extract consecutive 65, 535 segments from the
complete duration of the samples representing 6s audio. We compute the spectrogram for each
sample using short-term Fourier transform (STFT) with a window size of 1024, a filter length of
1024, and a hop size of 256.
The CLAP model is pre-trained with 10s duration audios of 48KHz sampling rate and has different
pre-processing pipeline than ours. To integrate the pretrained CLAP model in our training pipeline,
we initially reconstruct the sound waveform from the predicted spectrogram. For audio samples
extracted from MUSIC dataset that contains 6s duration segments, we repeat the waveform to extract
equivalent 10s duration of audios. Then, the audio waveform is resampled with 48KHz sampling
rate. We use Torchaudio package (Yang et al., 2022) to process predicted audio samples in the
training loop. To estimate the contrastive loss (LCN T ) with the CLAP model, we follow the same
pipeline of CLAP with the pretrained temperature value for τ . We note that the CLAP model is
kept frozen throughout the entire training, as it is only used to generate weak supervision. For
text conditioning signals, instead of the projected mean-pooled token representation of language
prompts, we use the complete language embedding of dimension (77 × 768) representing 77 tokens,
generated by the CLAP language encoder.


F     E VALUATION M ETRICS

We use three evaluation metrics in our experiments: SDR, SIR, and SAR. Here, we provide the
detailed equations as well as the explanation of each metric. We note that a predicted sound Spred
can be represented as a combination of the true sound Strue , the interference of other sources in
the mixture Einterf , and the artifacts generated during reconstruction Eartif act ; that is, Spred =
Strue + Einterf + Enoise + Eartif act . According to Vincent et al. (2006), these evaluation metrics
are described as follows:

Signal-to-Distortion Ratio (SDR): SDR is the primary metric used for evaluating sound sep-
aration performance in most prior work. It represents the overall measure of the sound quality
considering all kinds of distortions. It is given by
                                                     ∥Strue ∥2
                         SDR = 10 log10                                                         (11)
                                          ∥Einterf + Enoise + Eartif act ∥2

Signal-to-Interference Ratio (SIR): SIR is also widely used evaluation metric in sound sepa-
ration. It represents the ”leakage” or ”bleed” from other sounding sources in the mixture to the


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Examples of some extracted phrases from full-length AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) cap-
tions.

             Complete Audio Captions                                 Extracted Phrases
    A young female speaks, followed by spraying             A young female speaks. Spraying
              and a female screaming                            and a female screaming
      Motor noise is followed by a horn honking               Motor noise. A horn honking.
                 and a siren wailing                                A siren wailing.
 Rustling occurs, ducks quack and water splashes,       Rustling occurs. Ducks quack and water
   followed by an adult female and adult male           splashes. An adult female and adult male
       speaking and duck calls being blown                 speaking. Duck calls being blown.
      An audience gives applause as a man yells                An audience gives applause.
                 and a group sings                             A man yells. A group sings.
           A man speaks over intermittent                            A man speaks.
                  keyboard taps                                Intermittent keyboard taps.
               An airplane engine runs                               An airplane engine.


predicted sound. SIR measures the quality of the predicted sound considering the amount of cross-
interference from other sources. It is given by
                                                        ∥Strue ∥2
                                    SIR = 10 log10                                                  (12)
                                                       ∥Einterf ∥2

Signal-to-Artifact Ratio (SAR): SAR is mostly used to measure how realistic the predicted sound
is. It measures the amount of synthetic artifacts present in the predicted audio. Without any separa-
tion applied, the original mixture usually have very high SAR, as it does not contain that many of
artifacts. However, as the model learns to separate single source components from the mixture, it is
expected to introduce more artifacts.
                                            ∥Strue + Einterf + Enoise ∥2
                           SAR = 10 log10                                                           (13)
                                                   ∥Eartif act ∥2

In order to calculate these metrics, we have used the Python package torch-mir-eval (Montesinos,
2021) which is the Pytorch implementation of mir-eval (Raffel et al., 2014).

G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL S TUDIES
In this section, we present additional experimental ablation studies for a deeper analysis of the
proposed framework compared to the state-of-the-art baseline methods as well as some of our design
choices.

G.1    A BLATION STUDY ON CONDITIONAL U-N ET ARCHITECTURE

We have studied the contribution of all three building blocks in the proposed conditional U-Net
architecture. We have experimented with both supervised and unsupervised training settings on

      Table 6: Text query templates with examples for single and synthetic multi-source sounds

           Source                  Query Template                             Example
        Single Source           The sound of {source}                    The sound of guitar.
        Multi-Source            The sound mixture of                 The sound mixture of guitar
         (2-Source)           {source-1} and {source-2}                       and piano.
        Multi-Source            The sound mixture of                 The sound mixture of guitar,
         (3-Source)     {source-1}, {source-2}, and {source-3}            piano, and violin.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Test metric plots during training with two-source mixtures on MUSIC dataset. We use
CLIPSep as the mix-and-separate baseline method. Our proposed method achieves significant im-
provement in terms of SDR and SIR by largely reducing noise and cross-interference in predictions,
respectively. As the model tries to learn to separate single-source sounds, some artifacts are intro-
duced, which in turn result in low SAR value in the early stages of training. However, most of these
artifacts get removed over the course of training which in turn causes SAR to increase to the same
level as the baseline method by the end of training. In other words, by the end of training, both our
method and the baseline produce audio samples with reasonable quality regardless of their separa-
tion performance.


Table 7: Ablation on three building blocks of proposed conditional U-Net architecture: ResBlock,
self-attention (SA), and cross-attention(CA). The vanilla U-Net contains single convolutional layer
instead of ResBlock, and simple skip connections instead of attention modules. Test SDR on 2-
source mixture is reported for various single and multi-source training scenarios on MUSIC dataset.
For the single source training, simple mix-and-separate based on CLAPSep is used. For the multi-
source training, proposed weakly supervised training is used. All three blocks contribute to consid-
erable performance gain mostly in challenging multi-source scenarios. Bold and blue represents the
best and second best performance in each group, respectively.

  ResBlock     SA    CA    Total Params (M)      Single Source   2-Source    3-Source    4-Source
                                  30.7M               7.4            6.7        5.8         4.9
                                  37.4M               7.7            7.1        6.3         5.5
                                  44.7M               7.8            7.3        6.5         5.7
                                  36.6M               7.6            6.9        6.1         5.3
                                  42.9M               7.5            6.8        5.9         5.1
                                  74.3M               7.6            6.9        6.1         5.2
                                 118.8M               7.1            6.4        5.6         5.0
                                  43.7M               7.9            7.4        6.7         5.8
                                  57.7M               7.9            7.2        6.6         5.9
                                  81.4M               8.1            7.9        7.1         6.2



the MUSIC dataset. The test set contains 2-source mixtures as before. The baseline vanilla U-Net
contains single convolutional layer instead of ResBlock, and direct skip connections instead of self-
attention and cross-attention modules. The results are given in Table 7. Utilizing all three building
blocks results in +0.7, +1.2, +1.3, and +1.3 SDR improvements on single source, 2-source, 3-
source, and 4-source training settings, respectively. We note that the performance improvements are
comparatively higher in the challenging unsupervised setting compared to the supervised setting.
Since unsupervised training is mostly guided by weak supervision generated by the bi-modal CLAP
model, we hypothesize that the multi-scale feature modulation based on conditional embedding
becomes more critical in such cases.
Note that the increased number of parameters by the way of adding new blocks can be seen as
the major contributor to the performance gain. To control for this effect, in some of the ablation
scenarios, we have inserted the target block(s) twice in a row merely to increase the capacity of
the model (shown by       in Table 7). As the results show, while increasing the number of model’s
parameters contributes to the performance gain, it is not the major driver. In fact, some of our
smaller candidates beat the larger ones by simply incorporating a new block type. This shows that


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Ablation on loss components of proposed weakly supervised training method with multi-
source training mixtures from the MUSIC dataset. Test SDR on 2-source mixtures is reported for all
cases. Unsupervised reconstruction loss (LU RL ) underperforms in higher mixtures due to the lack
of fine-grain supervision. Contrastive loss (LCN T ), on the other hand, produces weak supervision
that performs the best combined with proposed consistency reconstruction loss (LCRL ). Combining
all three loss components achieves significant performance improvements. Bold and blue represents
the best and second best performance in each group, respectively.

                    LURL      LCNT      LCRL      2-Source     3-Source        4-Source
                                                     5.5          4.3                3.5
                                                     4.9          2.8                1.7
                                                     2.4          1.3                0.6
                                                     6.8          5.9                5.3
                                                     7.9          7.1                6.2

Table 9: Ablation study on loss weights with proposed weakly supervised and semi-supervised
learning. For the weakly supervised training, 2-source mixtures from the (a) MUSIC dataset, (b)
VGGSound dataset, and (c) natural mixtures from the AudioCaps dataset are used. (d) For the semi-
supervised training, 5% single-source and 95% 2-source mixtures are used. Test SDR on 2-source
mixture separation is reported. Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in
each group, respectively.

   (a) Weakly supervised training on MUSIC                 (b) Weakly supervised training on VGGSound

      α(LCNT )   β(LCRL )   γ(LURL )   SDR                    α(LCNT )       β(LCRL )       γ(LURL )    SDR
        0.1          5         5       7.7                       0.2           0.5               10      2.0
        0.1          5        10       7.9                       0.2            1                10      2.1
        0.1          5        15       7.7                       0.2            2                10      2.2
        0.2          5        10       7.8                       0.1            5                15      1.9
        0.1         10        10       7.6                       0.3            5                5       1.7



 (c) Weakly supervised training on AudioCaps                  (d) Semi-supervised training on MUSIC

      α(LCNT )   β(LCRL )   γ(LURL )   SDR                       λs (LURL )       λu (LTWL )           SDR
        0.2        0.5        10       2.8                              5                  0.5         8.5
        0.2         1         10       2.9                              5                   1          8.8
        0.2         2         10       2.7                              5                   2          8.6
        0.1         5         15       2.5                             2.5                  1          8.7
        0.3         5          5       2.4                             0.5                  1          8.2



our proposed blocks encode important inductive bias for our problem which can boost the model
performance without overfitting.
Furthermore, for a fair comparison with the baseline methods, we have reproduced most of the prior
work with our improved U-Net architecture, as shown in Table 1 and 12. We observe consistent
improvements of performance by leveraging our modified U-Net. Nonetheless, the improved U-Net
architecture increases computational burden in general, but the proposed weakly supervised training
can still be applied in resource constrained scenarios by simply using the vanilla U-Net architecture.

G.2    E FFECTS OF DIFFERENT LOSS COMPONENTS

We have also studied the effects of different loss components in the proposed framework under the
challenging unsupervised settings, as shown in Table 8. By only using the unsupervised reconstruc-
tion loss (LU RL ), we get sub-optimal performance due to the training and test distribution shift. On
the other hand, the contrastive loss by itself (LCN T ) results in performance drops with significant
spectral loss due to the lack of fine-grain supervision to reconstruct the target signal. Similarly, the
consistency reconstruction loss(LCRL ) by itself suffers from convergence issues due to the lack of
any supervision to encourage the model for conditional single source separation. In other words,


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


since the final reconstruction administered by the consistency reconstruction loss (LCRL ) greatly
depends on the quality of single-source predictions, a significant performance drop is inevitable
without using any single-source supervision. However, by combining LCN T and LCRL , we achieve
+1.3, +1.6, and +1.8 SDR improvements over the LU RL -only scenario for 2-source, 3-source, and
4-source training settings, respectively. Furthermore, by combining all three losses, we achieve sig-
nificant performance improvements of +2.4, +2.8, +2.7 SDR over the LU RL -only approach for
2-source, 3-source, and 4-source training settings, respectively.
In addition to the elimination study of different loss terms, we have performed an ablation study on
2-component mixtures from the MUSIC and VGGSound datasets, as well as on natural mixtures
of AudioCaps dataset, to find the optimal relative weights of these components (i.e. α, β, and γ in
equation 6). Table 9(a), 9(b), and 9(c) shows these results. It is interesting to observe that, in the
optimal setting, LCN T is weighed two orders of magnitude less than LU RL , which suggests that the
weak-supervision mechanism in our framework acts as an effective regularizer while the backprop-
agated supervision signal is mostly dominated by the reconstruction error. And yet this relatively
small regularization effect makes a significant improvement to the final performance of the model
during inference. Moreover, VGGSound, and AudioCaps dataset contain significant amount of envi-
ronmental noises that result in noisy training particularly with the consistency reconstruction losses.
As a result, the corresponding weight γ of the consistency reconstruction loss LCRL is relatively
reduced in VGGSound and AudioCaps dataset, while LCN T coefficient α is slightly increased for
the best performance. Similar study has been performed to find the optimal relative weights of the
supervised and weakly-supervised components for the semi-supervised loss (LSSL ) (i.e. λs and λu
in equation 7). The results are summarized in Table 9(b).

G.3   A NALYSIS OF EVALUATION METRICS FOR UNSUPERVISED TRAINING

The metric plots in Figure 7 demonstrate comparative analysis of the evaluation metric curves during
the unsupervised (2-source) training. To represent the baseline mix-and-separate framework, we
have used the CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022) method. The mix-and-separate baseline attempts to
extract the single-source components from the mixture without having any supervision on single-
source predictions during training; this results in large noise and cross-interference. In contrast,
our proposed weakly-supervised method significantly reduces noise and cross-interference during
unsupervised training by leveraging weak supervision through the language modality, and results
in a much higher SDR (Figure 7(a) and SIR(Figure 7(b), respectively. However, separating single-
source components is susceptible to producing artifacts that cause lower SAR in the early stages of
training, as shown in Figure 7(c). Nevertheless, as the training continues, such artifacts are largely
eliminated which subsequently improves SAR. In general, SAR represents an style metric measuring
the amounts of artifacts presents in audio. Also note that SAR can be quite high even for an audio
mixture that doesn’t contain any artifact. Initial drops of SAR followed by subsequent improvements
demonstrate that our proposed method attempts to learn to extract single-source components from
the very early stages of training.

G.4   P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON ADDITIONAL DATASETS

We have also conducted additional comparisons between the proposed method and other baselines
on VGGSound (Chen et al., 2020), and AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019) datasets. Both datasets contain
a large variety of sounding source categories as well as significant environmental noise types that
make the single-source separation task particularly challenging. For a fair comparison, we have
reproduced all the baselines under the same setting. Moreover, we have replaced the vanilla U-Net
with our improved U-Net in most baselines.

Comparisons on VGGSound: We have conducted performance comparison on VGGSound
dataset under supervised and unsupervised with synthetic, 2- & 3-source mixtures training sce-
narios, as shown in Table 10. We observe unconditional methods suffer from convergence issues
during unsupervised training that results in significant performance drops. Conditional methods,
on the other hand, achieve considerably higher performance in general compared to their uncon-
ditional counterparts. Since the dataset contains variable length of sounding events with large
amount of noise components, image-conditional methods in general achieves lower SDR compared
to language-conditional methods. However, we observe our method achieves 88%, 68% of the su-


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Performance comparison on VGGSound Dataset under supervised and unsupervised
training scenarios. Same test set of 2-Source separation is used for all cases. All methods are
reproduced under the same setting. * denotes implementation with our improved U-Net model. Our
proposed method largely closes the performance gap between supervised and unsupervised settings.
Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in each group, respectively.

                                              Single-Source     Multi-Source (Unsupervised)
      Method
                                              (Supervised)      2-Source          3-Source
      Unconditional
      PIT* (Yu et al., 2017)                     2.1 ± 0.33          -                -
      MixIT (Wisdom et al., 2020)                    -          -1.7 ± 0.44      -2.9 ± 0.51
      MixPIT (Karamatlı & Kırbız, 2022)              -          -1.4 ± 0.51      -3.1 ± 0.39
      Image Conditional
      CLIPSep-Img (Dong et al., 2022)            1.3 ± 0.34     -0.5 ± 0.27      -1.2 ± 0.35
      CLIPSep-Img* (Dong et al., 2022)           1.7 ± 0.36     0.4 ± 0.31       -0.6 ± 0.28
      SOP* (Zhao et al., 2018)                   1.6 ± 0.23     0.3 ± 0.41       -0.9 ± 0.26
      Language Conditional
      CLIPSep-Text (Dong et al., 2022)           2.1 ± 0.26     0.8 ± 0.31       -0.1 ± 0.27
      CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)          2.5 ± 0.29     1.2 ± 0.44        0.5 ± 0.38
      BertSep*                                   2.0 ± 0.27     0.7 ± 0.31        0.3 ± 0.22
      CLAPSep*                                   2.3 ± 0.32     1.1 ± 0.36        0.5 ± 0.28
      LASS-Net (Liu et al., 2022)                2.2 ± 0.31     0.9 ± 0.28        0.2 ± 0.29
      Weak-Sup (Pishdadian et al., 2020)             -          0.6 ± 0.39       -0.8 ± 0.33
      Proposed Framework                              -         2.2 ± 0.35        1.7 ± 0.39


Table 11: Performance comparison on AudioCaps Dataset representing natural multi-source mix-
ture training. Same test set of 2-Mixture separation is used for all cases. All methods are reproduced
under the same setting. * denotes implementation with our improved U-Net model. Our proposed
method significantly improves the performance over the baselines. Bold and blue represents the best
and second best performance in each group, respectively.

                          Method                                  Test SDR
                         Image Conditional
                         CLIPSep-Image (Dong et al., 2022)        -0.7 ± 0.47
                         CLIPSep-Image* (Dong et al., 2022)        0.4 ± 0.33
                         SOP* (Zhao et al., 2018)                  0.2 ± 0.25
                         Language Conditional
                         CLIPSep-Text (Dong et al., 2022)          0.7 ± 0.36
                         CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)         1.3 ± 0.31
                         BertSep*                                  0.9 ± 0.29
                         CLAPSep*                                  1.2 ± 0.41
                         LASS-Net (Liu et al., 2022)               0.8 ± 0.38
                         Proposed Framework                        2.9 ± 0.35


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: SDR comparison on 3-source separation test set form the MUSIC Dataset under super-
vised and unsupervised training scenarios. All methods are reproduced under the same setting. *
denotes implementation with our improved U-Net model. Bold and blue represents the best and
second best performance in each group, respectively.

                                                Single-Source     Multi-Source (Unsupervised)
           Method
                                                (Supervised)    2-Source      3-Source      4-Source
           Unconditional
           PIT* (Yu et al., 2017)                 2.3 ± 0.26         -             -             -
           MixIT (Wisdom et al., 2020)                -         -2.3 ± 0.34   -3.1 ± 0.57   -4.2 ± 0.35
           MixPIT (Karamatlı & Kırbız, 2022)          -         -1.9 ± 0.46   -2.8 ± 0.41   -3.9 ± 0.35
           Image Conditional
           CLIPSep-Img (Dong et al., 2022)        0.7 ± 0.25    -0.8 ± 0.27   -1.7 ± 0.35   -2.9 ± 0.32
           CLIPSep-Img* (Dong et al., 2022)       1.6 ± 0.22     0.1 ± 0.31   -0.9 ± 0.28   -1.8 ± 0.43
           CoSep* (Gao & Grauman, 2019)           1.8 ± 0.28     0.4 ± 0.37   -0.2 ± 0.29   -0.7 ± 0.36
           SOP* (Zhao et al., 2018)               1.3 ± 0.23    -0.5 ± 0.41   -1.6 ± 0.26   -2.6 ± 0.42
           Language Conditional
           CLIPSep-Text (Dong et al., 2022)       1.8 ± 0.21    -0.2 ± 0.35   -1.1 ± 0.27   -2.1 ± 0.45
           CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)      2.4 ± 0.27     0.9 ± 0.41    0.3 ± 0.32   -0.4 ± 0.41
           BertSep*                               1.9 ± 0.27     0.4 ± 0.31   -0.2 ± 0.22   -1.1 ± 0.27
           CLAPSep*                               2.2 ± 0.31     0.6 ± 0.36    0.1 ± 0.28   -0.8 ± 0.33
           LASS-Net (Liu et al., 2022)            2.1 ± 0.25     0.5 ± 0.26    0.3 ± 0.29   -0.9 ± 0.36
           Weak-Sup (Pishdadian et al., 2020)         -         -1.1 ± 0.47   -2.3 ± 0.38   -3.2 ± 0.33
           Proposed                                   -         3.5 ± 0.35    2.7 ± 0.42    2.2 ± 0.38



pervised method’s performance on 2-source separation test set in 2-source and 3-source training
scenarios, respectively. Furthermore, we achieve 1.83x, and 3.4x SDR improvements over the sec-
ond best method in 2-source and 3-source training scenarios, respectively, while using the same
model architecture.

Comparisons on AudioCaps: AudioCaps contains natural mixtures with 1 ∼ 6 single source
components in each mixture which makes the separation task particularly challenging. To test on
AudioCaps, we prepare a synthetic mixture-of-mixtures (MoM) test set by mixing random mixture
pairs. Table 11 shows the comparison results. Due to severe convergence issues in unconditional
methods, we only present comparisons for image and language conditional methods. Since the au-
dio contains variable number of sounding sources with different durations, it becomes increasingly
difficult to condition with images compared to text prompts which results in lower SDR for image
conditional baselines. Nonetheless, our proposed method achieves superior performance outper-
forming the second highest baseline by achieving 2.3x SDR improvement under the same setting.

G.5   C OMPARISONS ON HIGHER ORDER MIXTURE TEST SETS

So far, we have shown all performance comparisons on a common test set of 2-source mixtures.
Here, we present the same comparisons on more challenging test mixtures containing combinations
of three single source components from the MUSIC dataset. The results are reported in Table 12. In
general, we observe significant performance drops compared to 2-source test setting for all methods
including ours. In particular, the mix-and-separate-based baselines suffer from 62.5% SDR drop
in the supervised setting in the 2-source mixture training scenario. Interestingly, our weakly su-
pervised approach outperforms the supervised method achieving 1.5x and 1.1x higher SDR on the
3-source test set when trained on 2-source, and 3-source mixtures, respectively. This result reveals
a key feature of our framework that is consistent with our observations through our other ablation
studies; namely, the weak supervision proposed in our framework acts as an effective regularization
mechanism, that can significantly improve the model’s generalization, especially when we test it on
the 3-source mixture set. In other words, the supervised method tends to overfit to the separation
task on its training distribution, and that is why it experiences larger performance drop when the
test distribution shifts. Whereas, in our framework, due to the inherent regularization properties of
the weak supervision mechanism, the performance drop is less dramatic when the test distribution
shifts.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: Ablation on the effect of CLAP-constraint in supervised single-source training. Same test
set of 2-Source separation is used for all cases. All methods are reproduced under the same setting.
* denotes implementation with our improved U-Net model. Bi-modal semantic CLAP constraint
introduces additional regularization in supervised training, which results in notable performance
improvement. Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in each group, respec-
tively.

                                                 MUSIC Dataset              VGGSound Dataset
      Method
                                             w/o CLAP       w/ CLAP       w/o CLAP       w/ CLAP
      CLIPSep-Text (Dong et al., 2022)         7.7 ± 0.21    8.2 ± 0.32    2.1 ± 0.26     2.5 ± 0.31
      CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)        8.3 ± 0.27    8.8 ± 0.41    2.5 ± 0.29     2.9 ± 0.44
      BertSep*                                 7.9 ± 0.27    8.3 ± 0.35    2.0 ± 0.27     2.5 ± 0.31
      CLAPSep*                                 8.1 ± 0.31    8.7 ± 0.34    2.3 ± 0.32     2.8 ± 0.31


G.6    E FFECT OF B I - MODAL CLAP CONSTRAINT ON SUPERVISED TRAINING

Apart from using bi-modal CLAP constraint as weak-supervision for multi-source (unsupervised)
training, we study its impact on single source (supervised) training on the baseline methods. In
particular, we add the bi-modal semantic CLAP-constraint in the form LCN T loss to the mix-and-
separate LU RL loss, while training using supervised single-source samples from the MUSIC and
VGGSound datasets. The results are reported in Table 13. As the results show, there is a consis-
tent SDR improvement across the board when we incorporate the CLAP constraint in supervised
learning, even though, intuitively speaking, the weak supervision obtained from LCN T should be
impertinent in the presence of the strong supervision signal coming from the supervised loss. We
hypothesize that the integration of CLAP constraint here introduces additional regularization to su-
pervised training by transferring the knowledge obtained through CLAP’s large-scale pre-training
to the problem of audio source separation. This result further shows that our proposed framework
not only boost the separation quality in unsupervised and semi-supervised training scenarios, it can
also help the supervised training itself by introducing extra cross-domain regularization.

G.7    A DDITIONAL COMPARISONS FOR SEMI - SUPERVISED TRAINING

Table 14 depicts additional performance comparisons between supervised training on single source
sounds, unsupervised training on multi-source mixture sounds, and proposed semi-supervised train-
ing on both single-source and multi-source mixture sounds. We split the MUSIC training dataset
with different ratios for single-source and multi-source training as mentioned before. Multi-source
mixtures are composed of two single-source components here. In general, semi-supervised training
significantly outperforms both supervised and unsupervised training. With the increase in single
source data portion, we note the performance improves in general. Similarly, unsupervised perfor-
mance on multi-source mixtures also depend on available training data. Also note that the unsu-
pervised performance with different splits of training data largely closes the performance gap in
comparison with single-source supervised training, which is consistent with our prior observations.
More notably, however, by combining both single-source and multi-source training mixtures in the
proposed semi-supervised learning framework, we achieve considerable performance improvement
compared to 100% supervised performance reaching 9.5 SDR, which is 28% higher than the 100%
scenario for the supervised baseline. This result, again, suggests the regularization effects of the pro-
posed framework which can significantly reduce the reliance on single-source data and supervised
training for conditional sound separation.

G.8    E FFECTS OF PROMPT TUNING FOR THE CLAP M ODEL

We primarily use the bi-modal CLAP model to generate weak supervision for single-source sepa-
ration from the corresponding language entity. Since the CLAP model is trained on large corpora
of audio-language pairs, it can effectively generate weak supervision signals for a target dataset
based on hand-crafted language prompts. We have studied the performance impacts of the CLAP
model customization on a target dataset by tuning language prompts with few-shot single-source
reference audio samples. The results are given in Table 15. For this experiment, first we separate


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Performance comparisons between supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised set-
tings using both single source and multi source (2-source) training data from the MUSIC dataset.
Test SDR on 2-source mixtures is reported. x% of training data is used for single-source super-
vised training, while (1 − x)% of data is used for multi-source weakly-supervised training with
synthetic mixtures. CLAPSep is used for supervised training, while our proposed weakly super-
vised training is applied for the multi-source data. Lastly, the semi-supervised training is applied
on the combination of single source and multi-source data. Semi-supervised learning consistently
achieves better performance in all data splits. Training on single-source, multi-source, and joint
single- and multi-source data are referred as “Supervised”, “Unsupervised”, and “Semi-supervised”
method, respectively. Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in each group,
respectively.

         Single Source      Two Source                          SDR Performance
             Split            Split          Supervised         Unsupervised     Semi-Supervised
                   -            100%               -                7.9                   -
                 5%              95%              2.6               7.6                  8.8
                 10%            90%               3.9               7.4                  8.9
                 25%            75%               5.3               7.1                  9.2
                 50%            50%               6.6               6.2                  9.4
                 75%            25%               7.4               4.9                  9.5
                100%              -               8.1                -                    -


Table 15: The effects of prompt tuning for our proposed framework. We use the 2-source training
mixtures from MUSIC dataset. Test SDR on 2-source mixtures is reported. We initially separate
several full length single source audio samples from each category for training learnable prompts.
Bold and blue represents the best and second best performance in each group, respectively.

(a) Ablation study on learnable prompt length with number of
training audio samples per category. Each full-length audio
represents a single source audio. We extract several overlap-
ping frames from audio samples to train the learnable text
prompts.

    Prompt Length       #Audios/Category      Test SDR             (b) Comparison between the learnable and
                                 1                8.1              the template-based prompts.
            8                    2                8.4
                                 5                8.6                      Prompt Type             Test SDR
                                                                         Template-based              7.9
                                 1                8.2
                                                                            Learnable                8.8
           16                    2                8.5                 OCT (Tzinis et al., 2023)      8.7
                                 5                8.7                OCT++ (Tzinis et al., 2023)     9.0
                                 1                8.0
           32                    2                8.6
                                 5                8.8


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 16: Subjective evaluation performance analysis. * denotes implementation with our improved
U-Net model. Bold and blue represent best and second best performance, respectively.

    Training Data               Method                  Correct (%) ↑   Wrong (%) ↓   Both (%) ↓   None (%) ↓
     Supervised     CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)        71.1           0.9          26.9         1.1
                    CLIPSep-Text* (Dong et al., 2022)        30.4          20.5          40.6         8.5
    Unsupervised
                         Proposed Framework                  68.9          1.5           27.4         2.2
  Semi-supervised         Proposed Framework                 82.6           0.4          16.2         0.8


few samples of full-length single-source audio samples for each category to incorporate learnable
language prompts instead of the template-based ones. We then randomly sample single-source audio
segments from a hold-out dataset to train learnable language prompts. By learning such prompts,
we can customize the CLAP model for our target dataset to generate more informative supervision
signal. In Table 15a, we report the effects of the prompt lengths as well as the number of full-length
audio samples per category on the 2-Source test set using the proposed weakly supervised training
on 2-source mixtures. By using 5-shot single-source audio samples per category and the prompt
length of 32, we achieve around 12% SDR improvement compared to the template-based prompts
(Table 15b).
Apart from the text-based prompt tuning using CLAP model, our proposed framework can also
integrate heterogeneous prompting with other cues of the target source. Following Tzinis et al.
(2023), we experiment with heterogeneous training conditions, such as text description, signal en-
ergy, and harmonicity of the target sound for source separation. We use the hold-out single source
samples (5/Category) for each category to estimate the additional cues for prompting target sounds
in mixtures. The baseline OCT method performs on-par with our learnable text prompting technique
(8.7 vs. 8.8). We note that OCT with the embedding refinement approach (OCT++) achieves the
best performance of 9.0 SDR. Hence, our proposed framework can effectively integrate advanced
prompting techniques to separate the target sounds from the mixture.



H      S UBJECTIVE E VALUATION

We conduct a subjective human evaluation to compare different models’ performances based on
human perception. Following prior work (Zhao et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2022), we have randomly
sampled separated sounds from 2-source mixtures and presented them to the evaluators, who are
then asked “Which sound do you hear? 1. A, 2.B, 3. Both, or 4. None of them”. Here, A and B are
replaced by the single-source sounding entities present in the input mixture, e.g. A. cat meowing,
B. pigeon, dove cooing. In Table 16, we present the percentages of predicted samples that are
correctly identified by the evaluator as the source class (Correct), which are incorrectly perceived
by the evaluator (Wrong), which contains audible sounds of both sources (Both), and which doesn’t
contain any of the target sounds (None). We use the same 30 sample predictions on 2−source
mixture test sets for comparing models trained with supervised single-source, unsupervised multi-
source, and semi-supervised single with multi-source data. 20 human evaluators have participated
in this evaluation. We use the CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022) method as the competitive baseline of
the mix-and-separate framework with the text prompts.
As the results show, our proposed framework improves over the CLIPSep baseline’s correct percent-
age statistics of 30.4% in the unsupervised setting by more than twice, reaching 68.9% and almost
closing the gap with the performance of CLIPSep under the supervised regime (i.e. 71.1%). Further-
more, our framework’s performance under the semi-supervised training setup goes even beyond that
of the supervised setting by significantly reducing the number of under-separated instances from
26.9% to 16.2%, leading to 11.5% increase in correct percentage statistics to the total of 82.6%.
This result shows the efficacy of our weakly-supervised training strategy under both unsupervised
and semi-supervised training regimes. But more importantly, these results are consistent with our
quantitative evaluation results, which further corroborate our conclusions.


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   Q UALITATIVE COMPARISONS
In this appendix, we present qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and the mix-and-
separate approach represented by the CLIPSep Dong et al. (2022) framework under the unsupervised
training scenario. The MUSIC dataset is used for this analysis. The models are trained and tested us-
ing 2-source mixtures. The results are given in Figure 8 - Figure 11. Due to the lack of single-source
supervision in the mix-and-separate approach, most of its predictions exhibit significant spectral
leakage, and large cross-interference. In contrast, our proposed method significantly reduces the
spectral loss and cross interference. Also, separation under challenging cases of spectral overlap
produces reasonable performance. These examples demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
weakly supervised training method in disentangling single-source audio components form the input
mixture.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and the mix-and-separate approach
(CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022)): The input mixture contains piano (source 1) and violin(source 2)
sounds. For the lack of single source supervision in CLIPSep, large cross-interference is visible in
its prediction for the piano source . In contrast, our method significantly reduces cross-interference.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and the mix-and-separate approach
(CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022)): The input mixture contains accordion (source 1) and ukulele(source
2) sounds. For accordion sound separation, CLIPSep exhibits significant spectral loss, while for
ukulele sound separation, it shows cross-interference. However, our method largely reduces both
the spectral loss for accordion sound segmentation and the cross-interference for ukulele sound
segmentation.



                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and the mix-and-separate ap-
proach (CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022)): The input mixture contains xylophone (source 1) and accor-
dion(source 2) sounds. CLIPSep can hardly differentiate between these two sources due to a large
spectral overlap. Our method, however, reasonably separates the two sounds despite showing some
spectral loss for the accordion prediction.



                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and the mix-and-separate ap-
proach (CLIPSep (Dong et al., 2022)): The input mixture contains tuba (source 1) and congas(source
2) sounds. CLIPSep cannot properly identify the tuba sound due to the lack of single source train-
ing. Whereas, our method achieves considerable results in separating the tuba sound. nevertheless,
some spectral loss can be observed for the tuba sound separation, which is reasonable considering
the significant spectral overlaps of the two sounds.


                                               33
