Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O PTIMIZED T RADEOFFS FOR P RIVATE M AJORITY E N -
SEMBLING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We study the problem of computing an (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private majority of
         K (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private algorithms for m < K and ╬┤ Ōēź Ōłå Ōēź 0. Standard
         methods such as subsampling or randomized response are widely used, but do they
         provide optimal privacy-utility tradeoffs? Surprisingly, we show that an (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-
         private majority algorithm with maximal utility can be computed tractably for any
         m < K. Specifically, we introduce Data-dependent Randomized Response Major-
         ity (DaRRM), a general privacy framework characterized by a data-dependent noise
         function ╬│ that allows for efficient utility optimization over the class of all private
         algorithms subject to privacy constraints. By deriving a structural understanding of
         DaRRM, our novel learning approach is made tractable by reducing infinitely many
         privacy constraints into a polynomial set. Theoretically, we show that DaRRM en-
         joys a privacy gain of a factor of 2 over common baselines under i.i.d. teachers and
         ╬┤ = 0. Lastly, we demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of our first-of-its-kind
         privacy-constrained utility optimization for ensembling labels and gradients from
         private teachers through applications of private semi-supervised knowledge transfer
         and private distributed Sign-SGD, highlighting the outstanding performance of our
         DaRRM framework with an optimized ╬│ against several baselines.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Differential privacy (DP) is a widely
applied framework for formally rea-
soning about privacy leakage when
releasing statistics on a sensitive
database Erlingsson et al. (2014); Cor-
mode et al. (2018). Differential pri-
vacy protects data privacy by obfuscat-
ing algorithmic output, ensuring that
query responses look similar on ad-
jacent datasets while preserving util- Figure 1: An illustration of the problem setting. The inputs
ity as much as possible Dwork et al. are the dataset D and K (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private (DP)
(2006).                                 mechanisms M1 , . . . , MK . One draws samples Si Ōł╝ Mi (D)
Privacy in practice often requires ag- and computes an aggregated output g(S1 , . . . , SK ) based
gregating or composing multiple pri- on all samples seen. Our goal is to design a randomized
vate procedures. For example, it is algorithm A that approximately computes g and is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-
common to aggregate multiple private differentially private for 0 < m < K and ╬┤ Ōēź Ōłå Ōēź 0. In
algorithmic or model outputs in meth- this work, we focus on the majority function g.
 ods such as boosting or calibration (Sagi & Rokach, 2018). In federated learning, model training
 is distributed across multiple edge devices that send locally private training information, such as
 labels or gradients Konec╠īny╠Ć et al. (2016) to an aggregating server. When translating from a local
 privacy guarantee to a centralized one, one needs to reason about the composition of the local privacy
 leakage Naseri et al. (2020). Thus, we focus on the following ubiquitous setting: Given K (ŽĄ, Ōłå)
-differentially private mechanisms, M1 , . . . , MK , one seeks to compute some aggregation function g
 applied to the outputs of the mechanisms, releasing g(M1 (D), . . . , MK (D)), while ensuring that the
 output is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private for some private budget m < K and ╬┤ Ōēź Ōłå Ōēź 0 (Figure 1).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For g being the private majority function, it has a wide range of applications in aggregating predictions
from a set of models, where each of the models is trained on a private dataset. For example, this occurs
in semi-supervised knowledge transfer with private aggregated teacher ensembles (PATE) Papernot
et al. (2017; 2018), in ensemble learning algorithms Jia & Qiu (2020); Xiang et al. (2018), and in
ensemble feature selection Liu et al. (2018). In the federated setting, the majority aggregation of
distributed gradients for private learning is used in algorithms such as Stochastic Sign-SGD Xiang &
Su (2023a).
However, some of these works heavily rely on the sensitivity assumption of g for improved privacy
bounds and generally provide limited utility guarantees. However, the bounded sensitivity of g can be
too pessimistic in practice, as observed in the problem of private hyperparameter optimization (Liu &
Talwar, 2019). On the other hand, a naive way to bound privacy loss without restrictive assumptions is
to apply simple composition (Theorem B.2) or advanced composition (Theorem B.3) to reason about
the final privacy loss after aggregation. A black-box application of the simple composition theorem
to compute g(M1 (D), . . . , MK (D)) would incur a KŽĄ privacy cost in the pure differential privacy
setting, that is, ╬┤ =
                    ŌłÜ 0, or if one is willing to tolerate some failure probability ╬┤, advanced composition
would yield a O( KŽĄ) privacy cost Dwork et al. (2014). Thus, a natural baseline algorithm A that is
(mŽĄ, mŌłå)-differentially private applies privacy amplification by subsampling and randomly chooses
m of the K mechanisms to aggregate and returns the majority of the subsampled mechanisms. This
technique is reminiscent of the subsampling procedure used for the maximization function g (Liu
& Talwar, 2019) or some general techniques for privacy amplification in the federated setting via
shuffling (Erlingsson et al., 2019).
However, standard composition analysis and privacy amplication techniques can be suboptimal for
computing a private majority, in terms of both utility and privacy. Observe that if there is a clear
majority among the outputs of M1 (D), . . . , MK (D), one can add less noise, since the majority
outcome is unlikely to change based on single isolated changes in D. Furthermore, composition
theorems make two pessimistic assumptions: 1) the worst-case function g and the dataset D are
considered, and 2) all intermediate mechanism outputs M1 (D), . . . , MK (D) are released, rather than
just the final aggregate g(M1 (D), . . . , MK (D)). Therefore, we formally ask the following:
Problem 1.1 (Private Majority Ensembling (Illustrated in Figure 1)). Consider K Ōēź 1 (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-
differentially private mechanisms M1 , . . . , MK for K odd. Given a dataset D, each mechanism
outputs a binary answer ŌĆö that is, Mi : D ŌåÆ {0, 1}, ŌłĆi Ōłł [K]. Given a privacy allowance
0 < m < K and a failure probability ╬┤ Ōēź Ōłå Ōēź 0, how can one find the optimal utility of an
(mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private mechanism A to compute the majority function g(S1 , S2 , . . . , SK ),
where Si Ōł╝ Mi (D)?

1.1   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

We give a (perhaps surprising) affirmative answer to this question: we can provably achieve a constant
factor improvement in utility over simple subsampling by applying data-dependent noise injection
when Mi ŌĆÖs are i.i.d. and ╬┤ = 0. For general cases, by using our novel data-dependent randomized
response framework (DaRRM), which captures all private majority algorithms, we introduce an
efficient noise optimization procedure that computes the best possible privacy-utility tradeoffs. To
our knowledge, this is the first of its work of its kind that gives a tractable utility optimization over
the possibly infinite set of privacy constraints. We detail how our work in the new setting compares
to related prior works in Appendix A.
To define utility for evaluating the output of a private majority algorithm A, we will use the error
metric E as the Total Variation (TV) distance between the output distribution of A and the non-private
distribution of g, where the randomness is induced by the mechanisms. The utility is then defined as
1 ŌłÆ E and, for optimization purposes, we will consider an average utility over a distribution of the
parameters of the underlying mechanisms. The TV distance naturally captures oneŌĆÖs intuition that a
good private mechanism should have an output close to the true majority.
Data-dependent Randomized Response Majority (DaRRM). To motivate our framework, note that
                         m
a na├»ve constant ╬│ = O( K  ) or ╬│ = O( ŌłÜmK ) (aka. Randomized Response (RR)) ensures DaRRM to
be mŽĄ- or (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private, respectively, but the amount of noise added by this approach,
which is determined by the worst case privacy loss, can be too large. The critical observation is that
when there is high consensus in the mechanismsŌĆÖ output distributions, we can do exponentially better.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we propose a general randomized response framework DaRRM (see Algorithm 1) and show
that it actually captures all algorithms computing the majority whose outputs are at least as good as a
random guess (see Lemma 3.2), including random subsampling (see Lemma 3.1). DaRRM draws a
sample Si from each one of Mi (D), ŌłĆi Ōłł [K], and faithfully outputs the true majority based on all
                      1
                        PK            1
the samples, i.e. I{ K     i=1 Si Ōēź 2 } with probability ╬│, while outputting randomly otherwise.

Designing ╬│ with Provable Privacy Amplification. Our choice of ╬│ therefore allows us to explicitly
control noise while trading off privacy and utility. As it is data-dependent, we can design ╬│(L) to
                                                       PK
depend on the observed sum of all mechanisms L = i=1 Si and is symmetric around K           2 , and still
ensure privacy in all regimes as long as ╬│ does not vary drastically. Using this observation, we show
privacy amplification by a factor of 2 in computing the majority of i.i.d mechanisms when ╬┤ = 0
through a tighter analysis instead of simply applying simple composition. Specifically, as long as
mŌēź K   2 , we can always output the true majority of K mechanisms without any noise addition, and
when m < K   2 , we can provably improve utility, compared to the natural subsampling approach, by a
factor of 2 by deriving analytical expressions for tighter privacy-utility tradeoffs (see Theorem 4.1).
Finding the Best ╬│ through Dimension-Reduced Optimization. Carefully designing ╬│ leads to
theoretically improved utility, but it is still likely non-optimal. Instead, we exploit the generality
of DaRRM by applying a novel optimization-based approach that applies constrained optimization
to find the optimal data-dependent ╬│ that maximizes some measure of utility; however there are
infinitely many privacy constraints. Surprisingly, we show that we can reformulate the privacy
constraints, which are infinite dimensional, to a finite polynomial-sized constraint set, allowing us to
efficiently constrain the optimization problem to find the best ╬│, even for approximate differential
privacy (see Lemma 5.1). Empirically, we show that with a small m and ŽĄ, the optimized ╬│ (see
Optimized DaRRM╬│ in Figure 2) achieves the best utility among all ╬│ functions, even compared to
the subsampling and the data-independent baseline. To our knowledge, this is the first optimal utility
guarantee over all private algorithms by constrained optimization with dimension reduction.
In downstream tasks, such as semi-supervised knowledge transfer, we compare our DaRRM with an
optimized ╬│ to compute the private label majority against PATE Papernot et al. (2018), which indeed
has a lower utility as it does not exploit that each mechanism/teacher is (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private.
Furthermore, for collaborative model training using private distributed Sign-SGD on the MNIST
and CIFAR10 dataset, we show an improved performance of our optimized DaRRM by > 8% and
> 3.5% test accuracy on the two datasets, against several baselines with the same privacy guarantee.

2     BACKGROUND

Blackbox privacy composition analysis often leads to pessimistic utility guarantees Dwork et al.
(2014); Kairouz et al. (2015). Thus, for specific applications, previous work has turned to white-box
privacy composition analysis for improved utility. This includes, for example, moment accountant
for private SGD Abadi et al. (2016) and the application of contractive maps in stochastic convex
optimization Feldman et al. (2018). For the specific case of model ensembles, Papernot et al. (2018)
shows a data-dependent privacy bound that vanishes as the probability of disagreement goes to
0. Their method provides no utility analysis but they empirically observed less privacy loss when
there is greater ensemble agreement. When g is the maximization function in aggregating private
mechanisms, previous work shows that an approximately maximum value can be outputted with high
probability while incurring O(ŽĄ) privacy loss, independently of K Liu & Talwar (2019); Papernot &
Steinke (2022). Most of these works only claim improved utility and there is no optimality guarantee.
There have been limited works, including Mireshghallah et al. (2020) and Geng & Viswanath
(2015),that attempt to derive or learn the best noise distribution. Although our intuition in designing
DaRRM also relies on the stability of the mode function g, previous usage of stability to improve
privacy-utility tradeoffs, e.g., propose-test-release Vadhan (2017); Dwork et al. (2014), requires the
testing of such stability, based on which one adds a larger (constant) noise ╬│. This can still lead to
adding redundant noise in our case. For more related works on this, see a full survey in Appendix A.

2.1   P RELIMINARIES

We include formal definitions of differential privacy, simple composition and advanced composition
theories in Appendix B. We formalize the error and utility metric as follows:


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2.1 (Error Metric and Utility Metric). For the problem setting in Definition 1.1, let the
observed (random) outcomes set be S = {S1 , .., Sk }, where Si Ōł╝ Mi (D). For a fixed D, we define
the error of an algorithm A in computing the majority function g as the Total Variation (TV) distance
between g(S) and A(S). Specifically, E(A) = ES [DT V (g(S) Ōłź A(S))] = ES [| Pr[A(S) =
1] ŌłÆ Pr[g(S) = 1]|]. And the utility is defined as 1 ŌłÆ E(A).
Notation. Throughout the paper, we use the same notations defined in Problem 1.1 and Definition 2.1.
Furthermore, let D and DŌĆ▓ to denote a pair of adjacent datasets with one entry being different. Also,
let pi = Pr[Mi (D) = 1] and pŌĆ▓i = Pr[Mi (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1], ŌłĆi Ōłł [K]. We omit the subscript i when all pi ŌĆÖs
or pŌĆ▓i ŌĆÖs are equal. I{┬Ę} denotes the indicator function and [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K}. For the purpose of
                         PK           PK
analysis, let L(D) = i=1 Si = i=1 Mi (D), i.e. the sum of all observed outcomes on dataset
D. Unless specified, we use the function ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] as input to our algorithms to
calibrate the probabilistic noise injection.

3    P RIVATE M AJORITY A LGORITHMS
Algorithm 1 DaRRM(┬Ę): Randomized Response             To address the problem of private majority en-
Majority                                              sembling (see Problem 1.1), since the output is
 1: Input: K (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-DP mechanisms {Mi }i=1 , ╬│ discrete, the very first approach to consider is
                                               K

    noise function on support {0, . . . , K}, dataset the classical Randomized Response (RR) mech-
    D, target privacy cost m ┬Ę ŽĄ for m < K, target anism Dwork et al. (2014), where one flips a
    failure probability ╬┤ Ōēź Ōłå Ōēź 0.                    biased coin with a constant probability func-
 2: S = {S1 , .., Sk }, where Si Ōł╝ Mi (D)             tion ╬│(l)= p╬│ , ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}. If the coin
                              PK                      is head, we output the true majority base on K
 3: Set probability p╬│ ŌåÉ ╬│( i=1 Si )
                                                      samples; if not, then simply output a noisy ran-
 4: Flip the p╬│ - biased coin
                                                      dom answer. However, to make the output mŽĄ-
 5: if Head (with probability  ╬│) then                differential private, the success probability p╬│
                   1          1
                     P
 6:    Output I{ K i Si Ōēź 2 }                         can be at most O( K m
                                                                            ) (or O( ŌłÜmK )) when ╬┤ = 0
 7: else
 8:    Output 0/1 with equal probability              (or ╬┤ > 0) (see Appendix C.1), which is too
 9: end if                                            small for any reasonable utility.
The key observation for improved utility is that the probability of success should not be a constant,
but should depend on the unpublished set of observed outcomes from the mechanisms S. If we see
many 1ŌĆÖs or 0ŌĆÖs in S, then there should be a clear majority even on adjacent datasets. On the other
hand, if we see about half 1ŌĆÖs and half 0ŌĆÖs, this means the majority is highly volatile to data changes,
which implies we need more noise to ensure privacy. In summary, if we can calibrate the success
probability based on S to smoothly increase when there is a clear majority, we can improve the utility
without affecting privacy.
Subsampling. While it seems daunting to design ╬│ that is both private and varying, we show that
this is indeed possible. One natural baseline is subsampling and outputting the majority of m out
of K mechanisms for some m. Suppose ╬┤ Ōēź mŌłå, the privacy loss of the aggregated output can be
reasoned through simple composition or advanced composition 1 . Interestingly, we show subsampling
m out of K mechanisms corresponds to a non-constant polynomial ╬│, which we term ŌĆ£╬│Subsampling ŌĆØ,
in Lemma 3.1 (see a full proof in Appendix C.2). Intuitively, subsampling may be seen as implicitly
adding noise by outputting based only a random choice of subset of the mechanism outputs; therefore
this implicit noise is inherently data-dependent on L.
Lemma 3.1. Consider Problem 1.1, and the sum of observed outcomes of the mechanisms, l =
PK                                        +
   i=1 Si Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}. For m Ōłł Z , m Ōēż K, if one sets a success probability ╬│Subsampling ,
dependent on the value of l, by
                                                               ( l )( KŌłÆl )
                     ’Ż▒                              Pm
                     ’Ż▓╬│ Subsampling (K ŌłÆ l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2 j= m+1 j KmŌłÆj
                     ’Ż┤                                                                 for odd m
                                                           2        (m)
  ╬│Subsampling (l) =                                              l   KŌłÆl     l   KŌłÆl
                                                                            ( m )( m )
                     ’Ż│╬│ Subsampling (K ŌłÆ l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2 m m (j)(KmŌłÆj) ŌłÆ 2 K 2
                                                    P
                                                                                       for even m
                     ’Ż┤
                                                       j= 2 +1      (m)         (m)
                                                                                                 (1)
   1
     Deciding on which composition theorem to apply depends on m and ╬┤. When ╬┤ = 0, only simple
composition applies. When moderate ╬┤ > 0, for small m, the simple composition indicates less privacy loss;
and for larger m or larger ╬┤, the advanced composition is clearly better.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then outputting the majority of m out of K subsampled mechanisms without replacement and
DaRRM╬│Subsampling have the same output distribution.

Data-dependent Randomized Response (DaRRM). Does subsampling give optimal utility? In-
spired by the connection between RR and subsampling, we propose Data-dependent Randomized
Response Majority (DaRRM) in Algorithm 1, to study the optimal privacy-utility tradeoffs in private
majority ensembling. In particular, DaRRM has a parameterized success probability p╬│ that depends
on the set of observed outcomes S = {S1 , . . . , SK }. In fact, we can show that DaRRM is general:
any reasonable algorithm A, name one whose output is at least as good as a random guess, can
be captured by the DaRRM framework in Lemma 3.2 (see a full proof in Appendix C.3). We call
DaRRM instantiated with a specific noise function ╬│ DaRRM╬│ . Note the ╬│ function stated in Lemma
3.2 is more general than what we need.
Lemma 3.2 (Generality of DaRRM). Let A be any randomized algorithm to compute the majority
function g on S such that for all S, Pr[A(S) = g(S)] Ōēź 1/2 (i.e. A is at least as good as a random
guess). Then, there exists a a general ╬│: {0, 1}K+1 ŌåÆ [0, 1] such that if one sets p╬│ by ╬│(S) in
DaRRM, the output distribution of DaRRM╬│ is the same as the output distribution of A.

Designing the ╬│ function. With the DaRRM framework, we ask how to design a good ╬│ function
that maximizes the utility? First, to characterize the privacy cost constraint, we introduce two
characteristics of ╬│ that do not affect the utility, while simplifying the analysis and the empirical
optimization. Note that ╬│Subsampling satisfies both characteristics. (a) A function of the sum of
observed samples: Since the observed samples P        set S is a permutation-invariant set, a sufficient
statistic that captures the full state of S is L = i Si , the mean vote. This allows us to reduce
╬│(S) = ╬│(L), and hence, in the rest of the paper, we only consider ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1].
(b) Symmetric around K   2 : If ╬│ is asymmetric, we can symmetrize by reflecting one region about 2
                                                                                                      K

and achieve better or equal expected utility, where the utility is summed over symmetric distributions
of pi . Let L(D) and L(DŌĆ▓ ) denote the sum of observed outcomes on adjacent datasets D and DŌĆ▓ . Also,
recall pi = Pr[Mi (D) = 1] and pŌĆ▓i = Pr[Mi (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] are the output probabilities of the mechanisms
on D, DŌĆ▓ . Now, we derive conditions for a ╬│ function such that DaRRM╬│ is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially
private in Lemma 3.3 (see a full proof in Appendix C.4).
Lemma 3.3 (╬│ privacy condition and privacy cost objective). Consider using DaRRM to solve
Problem 1.1. Let ╬▒l = Pr[L(D) = l] and ╬▒lŌĆ▓ = Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l], for l in support {0, . . . , K} and
adjacent datasets D, DŌĆ▓ . For ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] such that ╬│(l) = ╬│(K ŌłÆ l), ŌłĆl, DaRRM╬│ is
(mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private if and only if for all ╬▒l , ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ,
                                                KŌłÆ1
                                                X2                                K
                                                                                  X
f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│):=         (emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ ╬▒l ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) +            (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                                                l=0                              l= K+1
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                         (2)
We call f the privacy cost objective.

4     P ROVABLE P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION
We theoretically demonstrate that privacy is provably amplified under improved design of ╬│ in our
DaRRM framework. Specifically, we show when the mechanisms are i.i.d. and ╬┤ = 0, we gain
privacy amplification by a factor of 2 by carefully designing ╬│. Recall pi = Pr[Mi (D) = 1] and
pŌĆ▓i = Pr[Mi (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] are the output probabilities of the mechanisms on adjacent datasets D, DŌĆ▓ .
Theorem 4.1 (Provable Privacy Amplification by 2). Consider using DaRRM to solve Problem 1.1
when the mechanisms are i.i.d., i.e., pi = p, pŌĆ▓i = pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] and Ōłå = 0. Given a privacy
allowance m Ōłł [K], if m Ōēź K+1     2 , one sets ╬│(l) = 1, ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}; and if m Ōēż
                                                                                               KŌłÆ1
                                                                                                 2 ,
                                       KŌłÆ1

                    1 ŌłÆ 2h(l) ŌłĆl Ōēż 2                                  l    KŌłÆl
                                                             P2mŌłÆ1 (i)(2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi)
one sets ╬│(l) =                            , where h(l) =                        , then DaRRM╬│ is
                    2h(l) ŌłÆ 1 ŌłĆl Ōēź K+1                          i=m       K
                                        2
                                                                        (2mŌłÆ1 )
mŽĄ-differentially private.

Interpretation. First, when m Ōēż KŌłÆ12 is small, the ╬│(l) in Theorem 4.1 corresponds to outputting
the majority based on 2m ŌłÆ 1 outcomes. However, simple composition would have indicated that
one can only output the majority based on m outcomes, therefore implying a 2x utility gain. When


                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


m Ōēź K+1 2 , the above theorem indicates that we can set a constant ╬│ = 1, which implies we are
optimally outputting the true majority with no noise while still surprisingly ensuring mŽĄ privacy.
This 2x gain is intuitively possible because the majority is only dependent on half of the mechanismsŌĆÖ
outputs, therefore the privacy leakage is also halved. To see this, we start by analyzing the privacy
cost objective in Eq. 37, where with a careful analysis of its gradient, we show that the maximum
indeed occurs (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) = (0, 0) under this assumption. Now, when (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) ŌåÆ 0, note that the
probability ratio of outputting 1 with 2m ŌłÆ 1 outcomes is approximately emŽĄ , where dependence
on m follows because the probability of outputting 1 is dominated by the probability that exactly m
mechanisms output 1. To rigorize this, we derive sufficient conditions for ╬│ functions that satisfy
f (0, 0; ╬│) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 as indicated by Lemma 3.3, to ensure DaRRM to be mŽĄ-differentially private
and a more detailed overview and the full proof can be found in Appendix D.

5    O PTIMIZING THE F UNCTION ╬│ IN DA RRM
Theoretically designing ╬│ and extending privacy amplification results to the ╬┤ > 0 case is difficult
and it is likely that our crafted ╬│ is not even optimal. On the other hand, one can to optimize for
such ╬│ ŌłŚ but this involves solving a ŌĆ£Semi-infinite ProgrammingŌĆØ problem, due to the infinitely many
privacy constraints. We show that this is in fact tractable, proposing a novel learning approach based
on DaRRM that can efficiently optimize the best noise distribution to achieve maximal utility. To the
best of our knowledge, such optimization is the first of its kind and is the following:
                       min Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T [E(DaRRM╬│ )]                                          (3)
                    ╬│Ōłł[0,1]K+1

                   s.t.         max            f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                          {(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )ŌłłF }K
                                         i=1

                    ╬│(l) = ╬│(K ŌłÆ l), ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}
where f is the privacy cost objective defined in Lemma 3.3. F is the feasible region where (pi , pŌĆ▓i )
lies. Since ╬│ is symmetric around K                                    K+1
                                        2 , we only need to optimize 2 variables. When we have no
prior knowledge about p1 , . . . , pK , T is set to be the uniform distribution 2 .
Optimizing Over All Algorithms. We want to stress that while it is in general hard to optimize
for all algorithms, since we show in Lemma 3.2 DaRRM that captures all reasonable algorithms
computing a private majority, we are indeed optimizing over all algorithms for maximal utility.
Perhaps surprisingly, it turns out that optimizing for ╬│ ŌłŚ is a Linear Programming (LP) problem!
Linear Optimization Objective.            Indeed, after expanding the objective by the utility
definition (see Definition 2.1), optimizing the above objective is essentially same as op-
timizing the following objective linear in ╬│ (see a full derivation in Appendix E.1):
                  PK
min╬│Ōłł[0,1]K+1 ŌłÆ 12 l= K+1 Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T [(╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )] ╬│(l).
                               2

Although taking the expectation over p1 , . . . , pK involves integrating over K variables and this can
be computationally expensive, we discuss how to formulate a computationally efficient approximation
of the objective in Appendix E.2 and demonstrate the effectiveness of optimization over ╬│ with the
practical version of the objective in the experiments. Note that the objective only minimizes the utility
and hence approximating the objective does not affect the privacy guarantee.
Reducing Infinitely Many Constraints to A Polynomial Set. From Eq. 37 the constraint of the
optimization problem is linear in ╬│. Though it appears we need to solve for infinitely many constraints,
we show that through a structural understanding of DaRRM, we can surprisingly reduce the number
of privacy constraints from infinitely many to an exponential set, and further to a polynomial set.
First, we observe the privacy cost objective f is linear in each independent pair of (pi , pŌĆ▓i ), hence
finding the worst case probability (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                           i ) = arg max(pi ,pŌĆ▓i ) f that causes the maximum privacy loss
is a linear programming (LP) problem. Furthermore, since pi and pŌĆ▓i are the probability of outputting
1 from the i-th (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private mechanism Mi , by definition, they are close and lie in
a feasible region F, which we show has 8 corners when ╬┤ > 0 (and only 4 corners when ╬┤ = 0).
This implies (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                     i ) only happens at one of the corners of F, and hence the number of constraints
reduces to K 8 (and K 4 when ╬┤ = 0). Second, observe that ╬▒l in the privacy cost objective f is the
    2
      Note one also has the flexibility of incorporating prior knowledge about the mechanisms by choosing some
prior distribution T to further improve the utility, if one has any.


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pmf of a Poison Binomial (PB) distribution at l Ōłł {0, . . . , K}. Notice that PB is invariant under the
permutation of its parameters, i.e. PB(p1 , . . . , pK ) has the same distribution as PB(ŽĆ(p1 , . . . , pK )),
under some permutation ŽĆ. Based on this observation, we show the number of constraints can be
further reduced to O(K 7 ) (and this is O(K 3 ) when ╬┤ = 0). We formalize the two-step reduction of
the number of privacy constraints in Lemma 5.1 (see a full proof in Appendix E.3) as follows 3 .
Lemma 5.1. Consider using DaRRM to solve Problem 1.1. Given an arbitrary ╬│, let the global worst
case probabilities be (pŌłŚ1 , . . . , pŌłŚK , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ             ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                             1 , . . . , pK ) = arg max{(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )}K   i=1
                                                                                           f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│),
where f is the privacy cost objective defined in Lemma 3.3. Each pair (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                                     i ) satisfies
                                                                                             eŽĄ +Ōłå 1ŌłÆŌłå            1ŌłÆŌłå eŽĄ +Ōłå
(pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
        i  ) Ōłł {(0,  0), (1, 1),    (0,  Ōłå),   (Ōłå,    0),   (1    ŌłÆ  Ōłå,  1), (1, 1 ŌłÆ  Ōłå),  (        ,
                                                                                             eŽĄ +1 eŽĄ +1     ), ( eŽĄ +1 , eŽĄ +1 )},
ŌłĆi Ōłł [K]. Furthermore, there exists a set P of size O(K ) such that (p1 , . . . , pK , p1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                                                              7                 ŌłŚ          ŌłŚ     ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                                                                                                               K) =
                                                  ŌĆ▓             ŌĆ▓                                                 3
arg max{(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )}K
                   i=1 ŌłłP f (p 1 , . . . , p K , p1 , . . . , p K  ; ╬│) if ╬┤ >  0 and a set  P   of size   O(K      ) if  ╬┤  =   0.

6     E XPERIMENTS

We empirically solve4 the above optimization problem (Eq. 3) using the Gurobi5 solver and first
present the shape of the optimized ╬│ function and its utility in Section 6.1. Then, we demonstrate
the compelling effectiveness of DaRRM with an optimized ╬│ function, which we call optimized
DaRRM╬│ , in aggregating private mechanisms through two applications: private distributed Sign-SGD
in Section 6.2 and private semi-supervised knowledge transfer in Section 6.3.

6.1     O PTIMAL ╬│ IN S IMULATIONS

We compare the shape and E(DaRRM╬│ ) of an optimized ╬│, ╬│subsampling (see Lemma 3.1) and the
constant data-independent ╬│ in randomized response (see Lemma C.1) with K = 11, ŽĄ = 0.1, Ōłå =
10ŌłÆ5 and m Ōłł {1, 3, 5, 7}. Note when K, m are small as in this case, simple composition indeed
indicates a smaller privacy loss than advanced composition. Hence, the subsampling baseline we
compare here subsamples m votes from the private mechanisms. Since the failure probability of
privacy composition composes linearly, to ensure a fair comparison against the subsampling baseline,
we set ╬┤ = m ┬Ę Ōłå. That is, for all baselines and our optimized DaRRM╬│ , the output is required to
be (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private. We plot each ╬│ functions over the support {0, 1, . . . , K} and the
corresponding error of each algorithm in Figure 2.
In summary, the optimized ╬│ has a larger magnitude over the support than the baselines. This implies
the optimized ╬│ has lower error, which is verified on the right set of plots. More results on comparing
the optimized DaRRM╬│ against the subsampling baseline by advanced composition and comparison
under pure differential privacy settings (i.e.Ōłå = ╬┤ = 0) for large K can be found in Appendix F.1.

6.2     A PPLICATION 1: P RIVATE D ISTRIBUTED S IGN -SGD

Distributed Sign-SGD. We now demonstrate the performance of our optimized DaRRM╬│ in aggre-
gating private sign gradients with distributed Sign-SGD, a Byzantine resilient optimization algorithm.
Consider a central server and K distributed clients. At each communication round, each client sends
the sign of each coordinate of its gradient to the server, and the server wants to aggregate the clientsŌĆÖ
sign gradients by taking a majority vote of the signs for each coordinate. The server then uses the
aggregated sign gradient to update its model and sends the new model back to the clients.
We consider an ŌĆ£honest-but-curiousŌĆØ server which wants to infer clientsŌĆÖ information through their
sign gradients. And so the clients add noises to each coordinate of their gradients before sending them
to the server. We adopt ╬▓ Stochastic Sign-SGD Xiang & Su (2023a;b), a variant of distributed Sign-
SGD that ensures coordinate-wise ŽĄ-differential privacy of the clientŌĆÖs gradients. For completeness,
we include the algorithm and its privacy guarantees in Appendix F.2.
    3
      Practical Limitation. Although the number of constraints is polynomial in K and optimizing ╬│ in DaRRM
is an LP, O(K 7 ) can still make the number of constraints intractably large when K is large. In practice, we
observe with the Gurobi optimizer, one can optimize ╬│ for K Ōēż 41 when ╬┤ > 0. But when ╬┤ = 0, since the
number of privacy constraints is O(K 3 ), one can optimize for K over 100.
    4
      All code for the experiments can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
optimized_private_majority-E469
    5
      https://www.gurobi.com/


                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          functions                                                                                         Error
              m=1                        m=3                                                   m=1                                          m=3
         1                                                                         0.200                                     0.15
     0.5                                                                           0.175                                     0.10
                                                                                   0.150


                                                                          TV Distance
                                                                                                                             0.05
values


         0
              m=5                        m=7                                                   m=5                                          m=7
         1
                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                             0.05
     0.5                                                                                0.05

         00                                                                             0.00                                 0.00
                5.5       11     0        5.5                        11
                         Support                                                                                           functions

Figure 2: Plots of ╬│ functions corresponding to optimized, subsampling, the data-independent ╬│ in
randomized response and the error in TV distance of the majority ensembling output of DaRRM with
different ╬│ functions, when K = 11, m Ōłł {1, 3, 5, 7}, Ōłå = 1e ŌłÆ 5 and ╬┤ = mŌłå.
We further consider a user who                                   Private SignSGD on dataset MNIST                          Private SignSGD on dataset CIFAR10
wants to obtain a trained model at                         0.8                                                       0.4
the server and we want to ensure                           0.6
                                           Test Accuracy


                                                                                                     Test Accuracy
privacy of the final model w.r.t. all                                                                                0.3
clientsŌĆÖ training data. This requires                      0.4
the server to provide privacy guar-                                    Subsampling                                   0.2          Subsampling
                                                           0.2         Laplacian                                                  Laplacian
antees of the aggregated sign gradi-                                   Optimized DaRRM                                            Optimized DaRRM
ent vector at each communication                            0 0 20 40 60 80 100                                      0.1
                                                                                                                         0 50 100 150 200 250 300
round, which by simple composi-                                 # Communication Rounds                                     # Communication Rounds
tion, is KŽĄ per coordinate. To limit
the per-coordinate privacy loss, we     Figure 3: Test accuracy of the aggregated model by private
set a per-round privacy allowance       clients trained using ╬▓ Sotchastic SignSGD on MNIST and
of m such that each coordinate of       CIFAR10. Each solid line represents the mean test accuracy
the aggregated signed gradient vec-     across five random runs, and the shaded region represents 1 std.
tor using majority voting is mŽĄ-        There are K = 11 clients, whose sign gradients are ŽĄ = 0.1-
differentially private at the server.   differentially private coordinate-wise at each communication
Baselines. ŌĆ£LaplacianŌĆØ Papernot round. We aggregate client sign gradients using different pri-
et al. (2017): the most naive base- vate majority ensembling methods, ensuring that each coordi-
line to aggregate ŽĄ-differentially pri- nate of the aggregated sign gradient is 0.3-differentially private.
vate clients is to add Laplacian noise With the same privacy loss, it is clear that the proposed op-
to the counts of ┬▒1 and pick the timized DaRRM╬│ achieves the fastest convergence rate and
sign with the noisy maximum count. the highest test accuracy within 100 and 300 communication
However, this method does not con- rounds on the two datasets, respectively, compared to the other
sider the gradient vectors being pri- two baselines.
vate themselves and hence adds redundent noises, as we show in the results. An improved baseline is
ŌĆ£SubsamplingŌĆØ, which subsamples and aggregates m clientŌĆÖ gradient vectors.
Experiment Setup and Results. We collaboratively train a model with K = 11 clients on the
MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. The training set for each dataset is divided equally among the
clients and each client has 5454 local training samples. Each dataset has 10000 test samples. At
each communication round, each client sends a sign gradient vector, with each coordinate being
ŽĄ = 0.1-differentially private, to the server and we set the privacy allowance m = 3. We perform
private distributed Sign-SGD for a total of 100 and 300 communication rounds on MNIST and
CIFAR10, respectively6 , and report the test accuracy per communication round. We report the mean
test accuracy across five random runs and one std. in Figure 3.

    6
      Note the total privacy loss of the final model obtained from the server after T communication rounds can be
empirically computed using a tight moment accountant method for private majority ensembling from Papernot
et al. (2017). The overall privacy loss of the model does scale with the number of parameters d. And to further
reduce this privacy cost, Jin et al. (2021); Xiang & Su (2023b) proposes to sparsify the gradient vector so that
only a subset of the coordinates is sent from each client to the server at each communication round. Note our
private aggregation framework DaRRM can also be combined with any sparsification techinque.


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.3    A PPLICATION 2: P RIVATE S EMI - SUPERVISED K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER

Semi-supervised Knowledge Transfer. We apply our DaRRM framework to aggregate labels from
private teachers in the application of semi-supervised knowledge transfer. We follow a similar
setup as in PATE Papernot et al. (2017; 2018), where K teachers are trained on different sensitive
datasets and one uses majority voting to aggregate the teachersŌĆÖ votes at inference time. Each time
a label is queried from the teachers, one suffers certain privacy loss. To limit the total privacy
loss over all queries, a student model is trained on a public dataset without labels. The student
model queries labels of a small portion of the training samples from the teachers and is then trained
using semi-supervised learning algorithms on both labeled and unlabeled samples. Different from
PATE which aggregates non-private teachers while ensuring the aggregated vote from the teachers
is private, we aggregate (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private teachers and ensure the aggregated vote to be
(mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private for m < K. The motivation is that the aggregator is not guaranteed to
be trustworthy in practice, and so each teacher privatizes their votes before informing the aggregator.
This semi-supervised knowledge transfer setting is illustrated in Figure 11 in Appendix F.3, where
we highlight the difference between our setting and PATEŌĆÖs setting.
Baselines. ŌĆ£GNMaxŌĆØ Papernot et al. (2018), which adds Gaussian noise with parameter Žā 7 to
the number of votes from each class, and report the vote with the noisy maximum count. Again,
this approach does not consider each teacher being private and leads to adding redundant noise.
ŌĆ£SubsamplingŌĆØ, which outputs the majority vote from m subsampled votes. The overall privacy loss
of the aggregated vote is reasoned by simple composition. Note in our setting with a small m, simple
composition indeed indicates less privacy loss than advanced composition.
Experiment Setup and Results. We use the MNIST dataset from two randomly chosen classes:
class 5 and 8, resulting in a total of 11272 training samples and 1866 testing samples. We train
K = 11 private teachers, each for 10 epochs, using DP-SGD Abadi et al. (2016), with zero-mean
Guassian noises having std. ŽāSGD = 10 and the gradient norm clipping threshold C = 1; this
leads to each teacher being (ŽĄ, Ōłå) = (0.2825, 10ŌłÆ8 )-differentially private after training. The privacy
allowance is m = 3 so that each aggregated vote from the teachers is (mŽĄ, mŌłå)-differentially private.
After training the teachers, we treat the test dataset as the public dataset for training a student model.
We query the teachers for Q randomly chosen samples from the test dataset. Papernot et al. (2018)
empirically shows querying Q = 1%N , where N is the size of the public dataset, suffices to train
a student model with a good performance. Therefore, we pick Q = {20, 50, 100}. We repeat the
selection of Q samples 10 times and report the mean test accuracy with one std. in parentheses in
Table 1. Note that the Q queried samples serve as the labeled samples in training the student model.
The higher the accuracy of the queried labels, the better the performance of the student model8 .

                               Majority Ensembling Algorithm
                                                                 GNMax         Optimized DaRRM╬│ (Ours)   Subsampling
 # Queries
                          Q = 20                               0.5950 (0.11)        0.9150 (0.04)        0.8550 (0.07)
                          Q = 50                               0.5480 (0.05)        0.9120 (0.02)        0.8560 (0.06)
                          Q = 100                              0.5970 (0.03)        0.9130 (0.02)        0.8520 (0.04)

Table 1: Accuracy of Q query samples randomly chosen from the public test datast. The output label
of each query sample is aggregated using different private majority ensembling algorithms. With the
same output privacy guarantee, our optimized DaRRM╬│ achieves the highest accuracy on the queried
samples. A higher accuracy of the queried samples indicates a higher performance of the student
model trained with labels from those queried samples.

7     C ONCLUSION
In computing a private majority from K private mechanisms, we propose the DaRRM framework with
a customizable ╬│ function that is provably general. We show a privacy amplification by a factor of 2
in the i.i.d. mechanisms and a pure differential privacy setting. For the general setting, we propose an
efficient optimization algorithm that maximizes utility while ensuring privacy guarantees. We hope
that this work inspires more research on the intersection of privacy frameworks and optimization.
    7
      We discuss how to choose this Žā parameter to ensure the aggregated teachersŌĆÖ vote being (ŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially
private and other details about GNMax in Appendix F.3.
    8
      We skip the actual training of the student model with semi-supervised learning algorithms here.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308ŌĆō318, 2016.
Raef Bassily, Om Thakkar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Model-agnostic private learning via stability.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05101, 2018.
Graham Cormode, Somesh Jha, Tejas Kulkarni, Ninghui Li, Divesh Srivastava, and Tianhao Wang.
  Privacy at scale: Local differential privacy in practice. In Proceedings of the 2018 International
  Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1655ŌĆō1658, 2018.
Jinshuo Dong, David Durfee, and Ryan Rogers. Optimal differential privacy composition for
   exponential mechanisms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2597ŌĆō2606.
   PMLR, 2020.
David Durfee and Ryan M Rogers. Practical differentially private top-k selection with pay-what-you-
  get composition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Cynthia Dwork and Jing Lei. Differential privacy and robust statistics. In Proceedings of the forty-first
  annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 371ŌĆō380, 2009.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pp. 265ŌĆō284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends
  Theor. Comput. Sci., 9(3-4):211ŌĆō407, 2014.
├Ülfar Erlingsson, Vasyl Pihur, and Aleksandra Korolova. Rappor: Randomized aggregatable privacy-
  preserving ordinal response. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
  and Communications Security, CCS ŌĆÖ14, pp. 1054ŌĆō1067, New York, NY, USA, 2014. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450329576. doi: 10.1145/2660267.2660348. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660348.
├Ülfar Erlingsson, Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep
  Thakurta. Amplification by shuffling: From local to central differential privacy via anonymity. In
  Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pp. 2468ŌĆō
  2479. SIAM, 2019.
Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Privacy amplification by
  iteration. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp.
  521ŌĆō532. IEEE, 2018.
Quan Geng and Pramod Viswanath. The optimal noise-adding mechanism in differential privacy.
 IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(2):925ŌĆō951, 2015.
Junjie Jia and Wanyong Qiu. Research on an ensemble classification algorithm based on differential
  privacy. IEEE Access, 8:93499ŌĆō93513, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2995058.
Richeng Jin, Yufan Huang, Xiaofan He, Huaiyu Dai, and Tianfu Wu. Stochastic-sign sgd for federated
  learning with theoretical guarantees, 2021.
Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. The composition theorem for differential
  privacy. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1376ŌĆō1385. PMLR, 2015.
Jakub Konec╠īny╠Ć, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richt├Īrik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Jingcheng Liu and Kunal Talwar. Private selection from private candidates. In Proceedings of
   the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2019, pp. 298ŌĆō309,
   New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450367059. doi:
  10.1145/3313276.3316377. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316377.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhongfeng Liu, Yun Li, and Wei Ji. Differential private ensemble feature selection. In 2018
  International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1ŌĆō6, 2018. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.
  2018.8489308.
Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Mohammadkazem Taram, Prakash Ramrakhyani, Ali Jalali, Dean
  Tullsen, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. Shredder: Learning noise distributions to protect inference
  privacy. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for
  Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 3ŌĆō18, 2020.
Mohammad Naseri, Jamie Hayes, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Local and central differential privacy
 for robustness and privacy in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03561, 2020.
Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam Smith. Smooth sensitivity and sampling in private
  data analysis. In Proceedings of the thirty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pp. 75ŌĆō84, 2007.
Nicolas Papernot and Thomas Steinke. Hyperparameter tuning with renyi differential privacy. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=-70L8lpp9DF.
Nicolas Papernot, Martin Abadi, Ulfar Erlingsson, Ian Goodfellow, and Kunal Talwar. Semi-
  supervised knowledge transfer for deep learning from private training data. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1610.05755.
Nicolas Papernot, Shuang Song, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and ├Ülfar
  Erlingsson. Scalable private learning with pate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08908, 2018.
Omer Sagi and Lior Rokach. Ensemble learning: A survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
 Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 8(4):e1249, 2018.
Abhradeep Guha Thakurta and Adam Smith. Differentially private feature selection via stability
  arguments, and the robustness of the lasso. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 819ŌĆō850.
  PMLR, 2013.
Salil Vadhan. The Complexity of Differential Privacy, pp. 347ŌĆō450. Springer International Publishing,
  Cham, 2017. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-57048-8_7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-319-57048-8_7.
Ming Xiang and Lili Su. $\beta$-stochastic sign SGD: A byzantine resilient and differentially
 private gradient compressor for federated learning, 2023a. URL https://openreview.
 net/forum?id=oVPqFCI1g7q.
Ming Xiang and Lili Su. Distributed non-convex optimization with one-bit compressors on heteroge-
 neous data: Efficient and resilient algorithms, 2023b.
Tao Xiang, Yang Li, Xiaoguo Li, Shigang Zhong, and Shui Yu. Collaborative ensemble learning
  under differential privacy. Web Intelligence, 16:73ŌĆō87, 03 2018. doi: 10.3233/WEB-180374.
Ying-Ying Zhang, Teng-Zhong Rong, and Man-Man Li. Expectation identity for the binomial distri-
  bution and its application in the calculations of high-order binomial moments. Communications in
  Statistics - Theory and Methods, 48(22):5467ŌĆō5476, 2019. doi: 10.1080/03610926.2018.1435818.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1080/03610926.2018.1435818.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

A Related Work                                                                                        12

B Preliminaries: Differential Privacy                                                                 13

C Details of Section 3: Private Majority Algorithms                                                   14
    C.1 Randomized Response with Constant ╬│ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             14
    C.2 Proof of Lemma 3.1: the Subsampling ╬│ Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            15
    C.3 Proof of Lemma 3.2: Generality of DaRRM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             17
    C.4 Proof of Lemma 3.3: ╬│ Privacy Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17

D Provable Privacy Amplification in i.i.d. Setting under Pure DP                                      21
    D.1 Characterizing Worst Case Probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
    D.2 Proof of Main Results on Privacy Amplification (Theorem 4.1) . . . . . . . . . . .            24

E Details of Optimizing ╬│ in DaRRM                                                                    37
    E.1 Deriving the Optimization Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37
    E.2 Practical Approximation of the Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          37
    E.3 Reducing # Constraints From Ōł× to A Polynomial Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             39

F Full Experiment Results                                                                             40
    F.1   Optimal ╬│ in Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      40
    F.2   Private Distribued Sign-SGD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       44
    F.3   Private Semi-supervised Knolwedge Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          44

A    R ELATED W ORK
Private Composition. In the blackbox composition setting, one can do no better than the O(KŽĄ)
privacy analysis for pure differential privacy Dwork et al. (2014). For approximate differential privacy,
previous work has found optimal constants for advanced composition by reducing to the binary case
of hypothesis testing with randomized response; and optimal tradeoffs between ŽĄ, ╬┤ for black box
composition are given in Kairouz et al. (2015), where there could be a modest improvement 20%.
Thus, for specific applications, some work has turned to white-box composition analysis for improved
utility analysis. Abadi et al. (2016) applied a technique called moment accountant for private SGD
to reduce the log(1/╬┤) dependence in the ŽĄ term and linear dependence on k in the ╬┤ term. For
general private stochastic convex optimization, one can avoid the linear dependence on k in ŽĄ by
using iterative application of contractive maps Feldman et al. (2018). For the specific case of model
ensembles, Papernot et al. (2018) uses student model learning to privately aggregate a ensemble of
teacher models trained on disjoint datasets and shows a data-dependent privacy bound that vanishes
as the probability of disagreement goes to 0. Their method provides no utility analysis but they
empirically observed less privacy loss when there is greater ensemble agreement.
When g is the maximization function, some previous work shows that an approximately maximum
value can be outputted with high probability while incurring O(ŽĄ) privacy loss, independently of K.
They proposed a random stopping mechanism for m = 1 that draws samples uniformly at random
from Mi (D) at each iteration. In any given iteration, the sampling halts with probability ╬│ and the
final output is computed based on the samples collected until that time. This leads to a final privacy
cost of only 3ŽĄ for the maximization function g, which can be improved to 2ŽĄ (Papernot & Steinke,


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2022). In addition to the aforementioned works, composing top-k and exponential mechanisms also
enjoy slightly improved composition analysis via a bounded-range analysis Durfee & Rogers (2019);
Dong et al. (2020).
Bypassing the Global Sensitivity. To ensure differential privacy, it is usually assumed the query
function g has bounded global sensitivity ŌĆö that is, the output of g does not change much on any
adjacent input datasets differing in one entry. The noise added to the output is then proportional to
the global sensitivity of g. If the sensitivity is large, the output utility will thus be terrible due to a
large amount of noises added. However, the worst case global sensitivity can be rare in practice, and
this observation has inspired a line of works on designing private algorithms with data-dependent
sensitivity bound to reduce the amount of noises added.
Instead of using the maximum global sensitivity of g on any dataset, the classical Propose-Test-
Release framework of Dwork Dwork & Lei (2009) uses a local sensitivity value for robust queries
that is tested privately and if the sensitivity value is too large, the mechanism is halted before the
query release. The halting mechanism incurs some failure probability but deals with the worst-case
sensitivity situations, while allowing for lower noise injection in most average-case cases.
One popular way to estimate average-case sensitivity is to use the Subsample-and-Aggregate frame-
work by introducing the notion of perturbation stability, also known as local sensitivity of a function
g on a dataset D Thakurta & Smith (2013); Dwork et al. (2014), which represents the minimum
number of entries in D needs to be changed to change g(D). One related concept is smooth sensitivity,
a measure of variability of g in the neighborhood of each dataset instance. To apply the framework
under smooth sensitivity, one needs to privately estimate a functionŌĆÖs local sensitivity Ls and adapt
noise injection to be order of O( LŽĄs ), where Ls can often be as small as O(eŌłÆn ), where n = |D|, the
total dataset size Nissim et al. (2007). Generally, the private computation of the smooth sensitivity of
a blackbox function is nontrivial but is aided by the Subsample and Aggregate approach for certain
functions.
These techniques hinge on the observation that a function with higher stability on D requires less
noise to ensure worst case privacy. Such techniques are also applied to answer multiple online
functions/queries in model-agnostic learning Bassily et al. (2018). However, we highlight two
key differences in our setting with a weaker stability assumption. First, in order to estimate the
perturbation stability of g on D, one needs to downsample or split D into multiple blocks Thakurta &
Smith (2013); Dwork et al. (2014); Bassily et al. (2018), D╠é1 , . . . , D╠éB , and estimate the perturbation
stability based on the mode of g(D╠é1 ), . . . , g(D╠éB ). This essentially reduces the amount of change in
the output of g due to a single entry in D, with high probability and replaces the hard-to-estimate
perturbation stability of g with an easy-to-compute perturbation stability of the mode. Such a
notion of stability has also been successfully applied, along with the sparse vector technique, for
model-agnostic private learning to handle exponentially number of queries to a model Bassily et al.
(2018). Note that in these cases, since a private stochastic test is applied, one cannot achieve pure
differential privacy Dwork et al. (2014). In practice, e.g. federated learning, however, one does not
have direct access to D, and thus it is impractical to draw samples from or to split D. Second, to
ensure good utility, one relies on a key assumption, i.e. the subsampling stability of g, which requires
g(D╠é) = g(D) with high probability over the draw of subsamples D╠é.
Learning the Optimal Noise Distribution. Most of these works only claim improved utility and
there is no optimality guarantee. There have been limited works that attempt to derive or learn the
best noise distribution. For deep neural networks inference, Mireshghallah et al. (2020) attempts to
learn the best noise distribution to maximizing utility subject to an entropy Lagragian, but no formal
privacy guarantees were derived. For queries with bounded sensitivity, Geng & Viswanath (2015)
demonstrate that the optimal noise distribution is in fact a staircase distribution that approaches the
Laplacian distribution as ŽĄ ŌåÆ 0.


B    P RELIMINARIES : D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Definition B.1 (Differential Privacy (DP) Dwork et al. (2014)). A randomized mechanism M :
D ŌåÆ R with a domain D and range R satisfies (ŽĄ, ╬┤)-differential privacy for ŽĄ, ╬┤ Ōēź 0 if for any
two adjacent datasets D, DŌĆ▓ and for any subset of outputs S ŌŖå R it holds that Pr[M(D) Ōłł S] Ōēż


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


eŽĄ Pr[M(DŌĆ▓ ) Ōłł S] + ╬┤. ╬┤ = 0 is often called pure differential privacy; while ╬┤ > 0 is often called
approximate differential privacy.
Theorem B.2 (Simple Composition Dwork et al. (2014)). Let M1 : D ŌåÆ R1 be an ŽĄ1 -differentially
privacy mechanism and M2 : D ŌåÆ R2 be an ŽĄ2 -differentially privacy mechanism, then their
combination M1,2 (x) = (M1 (x), M2 (x)) is (ŽĄ1 + ŽĄ2 )-differentially private.
Theorem B.3 (Advanced Composition Dwork et al. (2014)). For all ŽĄ, ╬┤, ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ Ōēź 0, the class of (ŽĄ, ╬┤)-
differentially private mechanisms satisfies (ŽĄŌĆ▓ , k╬┤ + ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ )-differential privacy under k-fold adaptive
composition for
                                      p
                                  ŽĄŌĆ▓ = 2k ln(1/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ )ŽĄ + kŽĄ(eŽĄ ŌłÆ 1)                                  (4)

C     D ETAILS OF S ECTION 3: P RIVATE M AJORITY A LGORITHMS
C.1    R ANDOMIZED R ESPONSE WITH C ONSTANT ╬│

Recall the classical Randomized Response (RR) algorithm that provides a binary output algorithm
with differential privacy guarantee proceeds as follows: With probability p╬│ , one returns the true
output of the algorithm; otherwise, one returns a random answer. In this section, we show the
magnitude of the constant probability p╬│ in RR to use RR to solve Problem 1.1 and to ensure RR is
(mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private. We can view the p╬│ probability in RR as a constant ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ
[0, 1] function such that ╬│(l) = p╬│ , ŌłĆl Ōłł [K].
Lemma C.1 (Randomized Response (constant) ╬│). Consider Problem 1.1 with privacy allowance
m > 0 and failure probability ╬┤ Ōēź 0. Let p╬│ be the probability of outputting the true majority
based on K samples in Randomized Response (RR). Let the majority of K (ŽĄ, Ōłå) mechanisms be
(Žä ŽĄ, ╬╗)-differentially private, reasoned by simple composition or advanced composition for some
0 < Žä Ōēż K, 0 Ōēż ╬╗ < 1. If one sets
                                                  emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                                     p╬│ = 2(eŽä ŽĄ ŌłÆemŽĄ +2╬╗)                                             (5)
                                                eŽä ŽĄ +1    + emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1
then RR is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private.

Proof. For convenience, let x Ōłł {0, 1} denote the output majority, and qx , qxŌĆ▓ denote the probability
the aggregated majority from K samples is x on dataset adjacent D and DŌĆ▓ respectively. Recall each
mechanism we aggregate is (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private. The output of the aggregated majority from
K samples is (Žä ŽĄ, ╬╗)-differentially private, for some Žä Ōēż K. When
                                                               ŌłÜ Ōłå = 0, Žä = K and ╬╗ = 0 can
be reasoned through simple composition. When Ōłå > 0, Žä Ōēł K and ╬╗ Ōēł KŌłå can be reasoned
through advanced composition. And so simultaneously the following four constraints on qx , qxŌĆ▓ apply:
                         qx Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ qxŌĆ▓ + ╬╗,    and 1 ŌłÆ qxŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ qx ) + ╬╗                        (6)
                         qxŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ qx + ╬╗,    and 1 ŌłÆ qx Ōēż e    ŽäŽĄ
                                                                      (1 ŌłÆ qxŌĆ▓ ) + ╬╗                   (7)

To ensure RR is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private, one needs ╬│ such that for all possible qx , qxŌĆ▓ ,
                             Pr[RR(D) = x] Ōēż emŽĄ Pr[RR(DŌĆ▓ ) = x] + ╬┤                                   (8)
                                     1                         1
                             ╬│ ┬Ę qx + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│) Ōēż emŽĄ (╬│ ┬Ę qxŌĆ▓ + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│)) + ╬┤                            (9)
                                     2                         2
                                            1     1           1      1
                             (qx ŌłÆ emŽĄ qxŌĆ▓ + emŽĄ ŌłÆ ) ┬Ę ╬│ Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ + ╬┤                                 (10)
                                            2     2           2      2

To maximize the utility, one wants to maximize ╬│ while conforming to the above privacy constraints.
Hence, we solve solve the following Linear Programming (LP) problem:
                                                                                1        1
               Objective:                     max f (qx , qxŌĆ▓ ) = qx ŌłÆ emŽĄ qxŌĆ▓ + emŽĄ ŌłÆ               (11)
                                                   ŌĆ▓
                                              qx ,qx                            2        2
               Subject to:                                         0 Ōēż qx Ōēż 1, 0 Ōēż qxŌĆ▓ Ōēż 1           (12)
                                              qx Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ qxŌĆ▓ + ╬╗, 1 ŌłÆ qxŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ qx ) + ╬╗        (13)


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  qxŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ qx + ╬╗, 1 ŌłÆ qx Ōēż eŽä ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ qxŌĆ▓ ) + ╬╗            (14)


                               Figure 4: A visualization of the LP problem.


The optimum of any LP problem is at the corners of the feasible region. Here, the fea-
sible region F is shown in Figure 4. This means (qxŌłŚ , qxŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) = arg maxqx ,qxŌĆ▓ f (qx , qxŌĆ▓ ) Ōłł
                                                                     eŽä ŽĄ +╬╗      eŽä ŽĄ +╬╗ 1ŌłÆ╬╗
{(0, 0), (1, 1), (0, ╬╗), (╬╗, 0), (1 ŌłÆ ╬╗, 1), (1, 1 ŌłÆ ╬╗), ( e1ŌłÆ╬╗
                                                            Žä ŽĄ +1 , eŽä ŽĄ +1 ), ( eŽä ŽĄ +1 , eŽä ŽĄ +1 )}. The optimum

of the above LP problem is at
                                                eŽä ŽĄ + ╬╗                 1ŌłÆ╬╗
                                     qx ŌłŚ =              ,    qxŌĆ▓ ŌłŚ =                                        (15)
                                                eŽä ŽĄ + 1                eŽä ŽĄ + 1

We need to set ╬│ according to the following upper bound to ensure privacy while maximizing ╬│ to
maximize utility,
                                                              1 mŽĄ
                                   ╬│ ┬Ę maxŌĆ▓ f (qx , qxŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż     (e ŌłÆ 1) + ╬┤                                  (16)
                                       qx ,qx                 2
Hence, we want ╬│ that
                eŽä ŽĄ + ╬╗           1ŌłÆ╬╗     1    1   1 mŽĄ
           ╬│ ┬Ę ŽäŽĄ          ŌłÆ emŽĄ Žä ŽĄ    + emŽĄ ŌłÆ     = (e ŌłÆ 1) + ╬┤                                            (17)
                e +1              e +1 2        2     2
                       eŽä ŽĄ ŌłÆ emŽĄ + 2╬╗ 1            1
                 ╬│┬Ę                    + (e ŌłÆ 1) = (emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1) + ╬┤
                                             mŽĄ
                                                                                                             (18)
                            eŽä ŽĄ + 1     2            2
                                                              emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                                                  ╬│ = 2(eŽä ŽĄ ŌłÆemŽĄ +2╬╗)                                       (19)
                                                            eŽä ŽĄ +1    + emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1

For small m, ŽĄ, K, using the approximation ey Ōēł 1 + y,
                                        mŽĄ + 2╬┤            m + 2╬┤/ŽĄ
                              ╬│ Ōēł 2(Žä ŽĄŌłÆmŽĄ+2╬╗)      = 2(Žä ŌłÆm+2╬╗/ŽĄ)                                           (20)
                                       Žä ŽĄ+2   + mŽĄ        Žä ŽĄ+2   +m


C.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.1: THE S UBSAMPLING ╬│ F UNCTION

Lemma 3.1. Consider Problem 1.1, and the sum of observed outcomes of the mechanisms, l =
PK                                     +
  i=1 Si Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}. For m Ōłł Z , m Ōēż K, if one sets a success probability ╬│Subsampling ,


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dependent on the value of l, by
                                                             ( l )( KŌłÆl )
                     ’Ż▒                              Pm
                     ’Ż▓╬│ Subsampling (K ŌłÆ l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2 j= m+1 j KmŌłÆj
                     ’Ż┤                                                                                                      for odd m
                                                         2        (m)
  ╬│Subsampling (l) =                                            l    KŌłÆl     ( m2l )(KŌłÆl
                                                                                      m )
                     ’Ż│╬│ Subsampling (K ŌłÆ l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2
                                                    Pm       ( j  )( mŌłÆj )
                                                                           ŌłÆ          2
                                                                                                                            for even m
                     ’Ż┤
                                                       m            K               K
                                                     j= 2 +1       (m)             (m)
                                                                                     (21)
then outputting the majority of m out of K subsampled mechanisms without replacement and
DaRRM╬│Subsampling have the same output distribution.

Proof. Let algorithm SS denote outputting the majority based on m out of K subsampled mechanisms
without replacement. Note the output of SS is the same as drawing one sample per mechanism
S = {Si }Ki=1 , where Si Ōł╝ Mi (D), subsample m of the observed   samples without replacement and
                                                          PK
outputs the majority based on the m subsamples. Let L = i=1 Si be the sum of observed outcomes
from K mechanisms, and conditioned on L, notice the output follows a hypergeometric distribution.
Hence, the output probability of SS can be written as
                         K
                         X
   Pr[SS(D) = 1] =             Pr[SS(D) = 1 | L = l] ┬Ę Pr[L = l]                                                                         (22)
                         l=0
                         K          m
                         X        X         m
                    =          Pr[     Sj Ōēź   | L = l] ┬Ę Pr[L = l]                                                                       (23)
                                   j=1
                                            2
                         l=0
                                     ( l )( KŌłÆl )
                     ’Ż▒P
                       K Pm
                     ’Ż▓ l=0 ( j= m+1 j KmŌłÆj ) ┬Ę Pr[L = l]
                     ’Ż┤                                           if m is odd
                                 2        (m)
                    = P                 l   KŌłÆl       l   KŌłÆl
                                                    ( m )( m )                                                                           (24)
                     ’Ż│ K ( m m (j)(KmŌłÆj) + 1 2 K 2 ) ┬Ę Pr[L = l] if m is even
                     ’Ż┤      P
                       l=0   j= 2 +1      (m)     2     (m)

Recall ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] is the noise function in DaRRM. The output probability of
DaRRM╬│ is:
                                             K
                                             X
          Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] =                     Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1 | L = l] ┬Ę Pr[L = l]                                                (25)
                                             l=0
                                             K
                                             X               K +1    1
                                        =      (╬│(l) ┬Ę I{l Ōēź      } + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l))) ┬Ę Pr[L = l]                                            (26)
                                                               2     2
                                             l=0

To let Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] = Pr[SS(D) = 1], if m is odd, for l Ōēż KŌłÆ1
                                                                 2 ,
                                  l KŌłÆl                                                                     l
                            m
                                                                 m
                                                                                                                  KŌłÆl
             1              X j mŌłÆj                             X                                           j    mŌłÆj
               (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) =          K
                                              ŌćÆ ╬│(l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2                                                     K
                                                                                                                                         (27)
             2               m+1     m                           m+1                                             m
                                   j=    2                                                  j=     2

and for l Ōēź K+1
             2 ,
                                              l
                          m
                                                    KŌłÆl                                  m       l
                                                                                                       KŌłÆl
                1 1       X                   j        mŌłÆj
                                                                                         X       j         mŌłÆj
                 + ╬│(l) =                              K
                                                                        ŌćÆ ╬│(l) = 2                         K
                                                                                                                     ŌłÆ1                  (28)
                2 2       m+1                          m                                                   m
                                  j=    2                                            j= m+1
                                                                                         2

Similarly, if m is even, for l Ōēż KŌłÆ1
                                  2 ,
                                                       l
                          l KŌłÆl
                                                             KŌłÆl                                                 l
                                                                                                                       KŌłÆl           l
                                                                                                                                           KŌłÆl
                    m                                                                              m

1                  X j mŌłÆj            1                m           m                               X             j    mŌłÆj
                                                                                                                                    m        m
  (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) =               K
                                  +                    2
                                                           K
                                                                   2
                                                                             ŌćÆ ╬│(l) = 1 ŌłÆ 2                           K
                                                                                                                                ŌłÆ   2
                                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                                              2
2                                     2
                j= m2 +1
                              m                            m                                  j= m
                                                                                                 2 +1
                                                                                                                      m                  m
                                                                                                                                         (29)
and for l Ōēź K+1
             2 ,
                                                   l
                          l
                                KŌłÆl                      KŌłÆl                                           l
                                                                                                             KŌłÆl            l
                                                                                                                                  KŌłÆl
          m                                                                               m
1 1       X               j    mŌłÆj        1       m            m                          X            j    mŌłÆj
                                                                                                                            m       m
 + ╬│(l) =                      K
                                        +         2
                                                           K
                                                               2
                                                                            ŌćÆ ╬│(l) = 2                      K
                                                                                                                       +    2
                                                                                                                                K
                                                                                                                                     2     ŌłÆ1
2 2       m                               2
               j= 2 +1         m                           m                             j= m
                                                                                            2 +1
                                                                                                            m                   m
                                                                                                                                         (30)

                                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that this ╬│(l) is symmetric around K
                                        2 , since for l Ōēż
                                                          KŌłÆ1
                                                           2 (and so K ŌłÆ l Ōēź
                                                                             K+1
                                                                              2 ), if m is odd,
                                                                                              mŌłÆ1
                                           m          KŌłÆl          l                                     KŌłÆl        l

                                                                                        2
                                                       j          mŌłÆj                                     j        mŌłÆj
                                           X                                            X
                 ╬│(K ŌłÆ l) = 2                                 K
                                                                                ŌłÆ1=2 1ŌłÆ                        K
                                                                                                                                  ŌłÆ1               (31)
                                      j= m+1                  m                               j=1              m
                                          2
                                               mŌłÆ1
                                                          KŌłÆl          l                             l
                                                                                            m
                                                                                                           KŌłÆl
                                                2
                                                           j          mŌłÆj                            j    mŌłÆj
                                               X                                            X
                                 =1ŌłÆ2                             K
                                                                                    =1ŌłÆ2                  K
                                                                                                                                                   (32)
                                                j=1               m                        j= m+1         m
                                                                                               2

                                 = ╬│(l)                                                                                                            (33)
Similarly, if m is even,
                                                                                                m
                                                                                            2 ŌłÆ1
                                                              l
                                 KŌłÆl        l
                                                                    KŌłÆl                                       KŌłÆl        l                 l
                                                                                                                                                 KŌłÆl
                      m

                      X           j        mŌłÆj
                                                              m           m                 X                  j        mŌłÆj         1      m       m
╬│(K ŌłÆ l) = 2                           K
                                                      +       2
                                                                      K
                                                                          2
                                                                                    ŌłÆ1=2 1ŌłÆ                         K
                                                                                                                                  ŌłÆ        2
                                                                                                                                               K
                                                                                                                                                  2         ŌłÆ1
                                                                                                                                    2
                    j= m
                       2 +1
                                       m                              m                         j=1                 m                          m
                                                                                                                                                   (34)
                          m
                          2 ŌłÆ1
                                                                  l
                                   KŌłÆl          l
                                                                        KŌłÆl                               l
                                                                                                                KŌłÆl               l
                                                                                                                                        KŌłÆl
                                                                                              m

                                                                  m           m                                                   m        m
                                    j          mŌłÆj                                                        j    mŌłÆj
                           X                                                                  X
              =1ŌłÆ2                         K
                                                          ŌłÆ       2
                                                                          K
                                                                             2       =1ŌłÆ2                      K
                                                                                                                          ŌłÆ       2
                                                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                                                          2
                           j=1             m                              m                 j= m
                                                                                               2 +1
                                                                                                               m                       m
                                                                                                                                                   (35)
              = ╬│(l)                                                                                                                               (36)
Therefore, setting ╬│ as in Eq. 27 if m is odd, and as in Eq. 29 if m is even makes DaRRM╬│ have the
same output distribution as SS. We hence call this ╬│ function ╬│Subsampling .

C.3      P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.2: G ENERALITY OF DA RRM

Lemma 3.2 (Generality of DaRRM). Let A be any randomized algorithm to compute the majority
function g on S such that for all S, Pr[A(S) = g(S)] Ōēź 1/2 (i.e. A is at least as good as a random
guess). Then, there exists a a general ╬│: {0, 1}K+1 ŌåÆ [0, 1] such that if one sets p╬│ by ╬│(S) in
DaRRM, the output distribution of DaRRM╬│ is the same as the output distribution of A.

Proof. For some D and conditioned on S, we see that by definition Pr[DaRRM╬│ (S) = g(S)] =
╬│(S) + (1/2)(1 ŌłÆ ╬│(S)). We want to set ╬│ such that Pr[DaRRM╬│ (S) = g(S)] = Pr[A(S) = g(S)].
Therefore, we set ╬│(S) = 2 Pr[A(S) = g(S)] ŌłÆ 1.
Lastly, we need to justify that ╬│ Ōłł [0, 1]. Clearly, ╬│(S) Ōēż 2 ŌłÆ 1 Ōēż 1 since Pr[A(S) = g(S)] Ōēż 1.
Note that the non-negativity follows from assumption.

C.4      P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.3: ╬│ P RIVACY C ONDITION

Lemma 3.3 (╬│ privacy condition and privacy cost objective). Consider using DaRRM to solve
Problem 1.1. Let ╬▒l = Pr[L(D) = l] and ╬▒lŌĆ▓ = Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l], for l in support {0, . . . , K} and
adjacent datasets D, DŌĆ▓ . For ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] such that ╬│(l) = ╬│(K ŌłÆ l), ŌłĆl, DaRRM╬│ is
(mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private if and only if for all ╬▒l , ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ,
                                                KŌłÆ1
                                                 2
                                                 X                                          K
                                                                                            X
f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│):=          (emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ ╬▒l ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) +                     (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                                                 l=0                                       l= K+1
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                   (37)
We call f the privacy cost objective.
Proof. By the definition of differential privacy,
            DaRRM╬│ is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private


                                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               ŌćÉŌćÆ Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] Ōēż emŽĄ Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] + ╬┤,                                               (38)
                                                          mŽĄ                   ŌĆ▓                               ŌĆ▓
           and Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 0] Ōēż e                          Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D ) = 0] + ╬┤,      ŌłĆ adjacent D, D       (39)

                                                        PK                ŌĆ▓
                                                                                   PK       ŌĆ▓
Consider random variables L(D) =                          i=1 S(D) and L(D ) =       i=1 S(D ), based on which one
sets ╬│. Note, when the output is 1,
                                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] Ōēż emŽĄ Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] + ╬┤                                  (40)

          K
          X
 ŌćÉŌćÆ                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1 | L(D) = 1] ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l]                                                    (41)
          l=0
           K
           X
Ōēż emŽĄ                  Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1 | L(DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] + ╬┤
           l=0
      K
      X                            K    1
ŌćÉŌćÆ                 ╬│(l) ┬Ę I{l Ōēź      } + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l]                                                 (42)
                                   2    2
      l=0
           K
           X                           K    1
Ōēż emŽĄ                   ╬│(l) ┬Ę I{l Ōēź     } + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l))} ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] + ╬┤
                                       2    2
           l=0
                                                                        KŌłÆ1
          K                                                   2
          X                      1                            X 1
ŌćÉŌćÆ                         ╬│(l) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l] +     (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l]                        (43)
                                 2                              2
      l= K+1
          2
                                                                         l=0
                                                                                   KŌłÆ1
            K                                                        2
            X                      1                                 X 1
Ōēże   mŽĄ
                             ╬│(l) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l] + emŽĄ      (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] + ╬┤
                                   2                                   2
           l= K+1
               2
                                                                                   l=0
                                      KŌłÆ1
          K                            2
          X   1          X 1          1
ŌćÉŌćÆ              ╬│(l)╬▒l ŌłÆ     ╬│(l)╬▒l +                                                                              (44)
          K+1
              2            2          2
      l=                              l=0
               2
                                            KŌłÆ1
           K                   2
           X   1               X 1          1
Ōēże   mŽĄ
                 ╬│(l)╬▒lŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ emŽĄ     ╬│(l)╬▒lŌĆ▓ + emŽĄ + ╬┤
           K+1
               2                 2          2
          l=                                l=0
                   2
                                               KŌłÆ1
          K
          X                                     2 X
ŌćÉŌćÆ                     (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ            (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤                         (45)
      l= K+1
          2
                                                  l=0

where ╬▒l = Pr[L(D) = l] and ╬▒lŌĆ▓ = Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l], ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}.
Similarly, when the output is 0,
                                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 0] Ōēż emŽĄ Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 0] + ╬┤                                  (46)

          K
          X
 ŌćÉŌćÆ                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 0 | L(D) = 0] ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = 0]                                                    (47)
          l=0
           K
           X
 Ōēż emŽĄ                  Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 0 | L(DŌĆ▓ ) = 0] ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = 0] + ╬┤
               l=0
          K
          X                           K    1
 ŌćÉŌćÆ                    ╬│(l) ┬Ę I{l <     } + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l]                                              (48)
                                      2    2
          l=0
           K
           X                           K    1
 Ōēż emŽĄ                  ╬│(l) ┬Ę I{l <     } + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] + ╬┤
                                       2    2
               l=0


                                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          KŌłÆ1
           2                                         K
          X             1                            X   1
  ŌćÉŌćÆ              ╬│(l) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l] +       (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(D) = l]                                 (49)
                        2                            K+1
                                                         2
          l=0                                                                  l=   2
             KŌłÆ1
              2                                                K
           X                    1                              X   1
  Ōēż emŽĄ                   ╬│(l) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] +       (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ┬Ę Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l] + ╬┤
                                2                              K+1
                                                                   2
             l=0                                                                    l=   2
          KŌłÆ1
           2
          X 1                       K
                                    X      1          1
  ŌćÉŌćÆ                 ╬│(l)╬▒l ŌłÆ                ╬│(l)╬▒l +                                                                (50)
                 2                     K+1
                                           2          2
          l=0                     l=    2
           KŌłÆ1
            2
           X 1                               K
                                             X   1          1
  Ōēż emŽĄ                  ╬│(l)╬▒lŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ emŽĄ             ╬│(l)╬▒lŌĆ▓ + emŽĄ + ╬┤
                     2                       K+1
                                                 2          2
           l=0                              l=    2
          KŌłÆ1
          X2                                          K
                                                      X
  ŌćÉŌćÆ            (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ                     (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤                         (51)
          l=0                                    l= K+1
                                                     2



Therefore,
                 DaRRM╬│ is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private
                                                                        KŌłÆ1
                                K
                                X                                       X2

                     ŌćÉŌćÆ                (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ                  (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤     (52)
                             l= K+1
                                 2
                                                                        l=0
                          KŌłÆ1
                          X2                                     K
                                                                 X
                 and            (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ                    (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤          (53)
                          l=0                                   l= K+1
                                                                    2


where ╬▒l = Pr[L(D) = l] and ╬▒lŌĆ▓ = Pr[L(DŌĆ▓ ) = l], ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K} and D, DŌĆ▓ are any adjacent
datasets.
If ╬│ is symmetric around K 2 , i.e. ╬│(l) = ╬│(K ŌłÆ l), we show as follows satisfying either one of
Eq. 52 or Eq. 53 implies satisfying the other one. The intuition is that there is nothing special about
outputting 0 or 1.


                                        KŌłÆ1
 K
 X                                      X2

         (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ                   (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤                                  (54)
l= K+1
    2
                                        l=0
         KŌłÆ1
         X2                                                             K
                                                                        X
                             ŌĆ▓                                                              ŌĆ▓
 ŌćÉŌćÆ             (╬▒KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(K ŌłÆ l) ŌłÆ                                (╬▒KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(K ŌłÆ l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
          l=0                                                       l= KŌłÆ1
                                                                        2
                                                                                                                     (55)
         KŌłÆ1
         X2                                                     K
                                                                X
                             ŌĆ▓                                                       ŌĆ▓
 ŌćÉŌćÆ             (╬▒KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ                             (╬▒KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤     (56)
          l=0                                                  l= KŌłÆ1
                                                                   2

Since ╬│(l) = ╬│(K ŌłÆ l)
         KŌłÆ1
         X2                                            K
                                                       X
 ŌćÉŌćÆ             (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ                       (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤                 (57)
          l=0                                         l= KŌłÆ1
                                                          2


Since the above holds for all possible ╬▒l , ╬▒lŌĆ▓ , one can consider another distribution such that the pmf
of L(D) is ╬▓l = ╬▒KŌłÆl and the pmf of L(DŌĆ▓ ) is ╬▓lŌĆ▓ = ╬▒KŌłÆl    ŌĆ▓
                                                                . Then, we rename ╬▓l as ╬▒l and ╬▓lŌĆ▓ as ╬▒lŌĆ▓ .


                                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above implies Eq. 52 and Eq. 53 are equivalent. Therefore,
            DaRRM╬│ is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private
                                                    KŌłÆ1
                     K
                     X                              X2

             ŌćÉŌćÆ             (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) ŌłÆ         (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ )╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤   (58)
                   l= K+1
                       2
                                                    l=0


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     P ROVABLE P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION IN I . I . D . S ETTING UNDER P URE DP
Recall in the i.i.d. mechanisms setting, Pr[Mi (D) = 1] = p and Pr[Mi (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1] = pŌĆ▓ , for all
mechanisms Mi . Under pure differential privacy setting, each mechanisms Mi is ŽĄ-differentially
private, and we want the aggregated majority voting output by DaRRM╬│ with a certain choice of ╬│ to
be mŽĄ-differentially private for m < K.
For analysis, we restrict our search for a ╬│ function with good utility to the class with a mild
monotonicity assumption: ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēż KŌłÆ1 2 and ╬│(l) Ōēż ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēź
                                                                                 K+1
                                                                                   2 . This matches
our intuition that as L, i.e., the number of mechanisms outputting 1, approaches 0 or K, there is a
clearer majority and so not much noise is needed to ensure privacy, which implies a larger value of ╬│.
Worst case probabilities. We call (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) =
arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ; ╬│) the worst case proba-
bilities since they incur the largest privacy loss,
where f is the simplified privacy cost objec-
tive defined in Eq. 37 with ╬┤ = Ōłå = 0. If
we can show f (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ; ╬│) Ōēż eŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 for some
╬│, then DaRRM╬│ is is mŽĄ-differentially private
by Lemma 3.3. To find the worst case prob-
abilities, first note (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) are close to each
other and lie in a feasible region F, due to each
mechanism being ŽĄ-differentially private in our
setting. The feasible region is illustrated in Fig-
ure 5, and the four boundaries of which, i.e.
(a) pŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽĄ p (b) p Ōēż eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ (c) 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ Ōēż eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p),
and (d) 1 ŌłÆ p Ōēż eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ ), are derived from the
definition of differential privacy.

D.1 C HARACTERIZING                                     Figure 5: The feasible region F is plotted as the
W ORST C ASE P ROBABILITIES                             blue area. The four boundaries are implied by p, pŌĆ▓
                                                        satisfying ŽĄ-differential privacy.
We first show a key lemma, later used in the
proof of our main privacy amplification result, that allows us to further refine the search region for
(pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) under ╬│: {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] functions that are symmetric around K   2 and that satisfy the
above mild monotonicity assumption. We call such ╬│ functions well-behaved.
Lemma D.1 (Characteristics of worst case probabilities). Consider well-behaved ╬│ functions such
                                                                           ŌłŚ ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                           ŌĆ▓
that ╬│( KŌłÆ1                   K+1
            2 ) > 0 and ╬│( 2 ) > 0, the worst case probabilities (p , p ) = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, p ; ╬│)
must satisfy exactly one of the following:
                                                                       1                   1
                pŌłŚ = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ,                             ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, ŌłÆŽĄ       ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0,         ]         (59)
                                                                    e +1                1 + eŽĄ
                                                                     1                  1
                1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌłŚ ),                   ŌłĆp Ōłł [         , 1], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [        , 1]         (60)
                                                                 1 + eŌłÆŽĄ              1 + eŽĄ
 See the blue line and the orange line in Figure 5, respectively.
To show the above Lemma D.1, we show Lemma D.2 and Lemma D.3 as follows, each of which
gives partial characteristics of the worst case probabilities. Lemma D.1 directly follows by combining
the two lemmas.
Lemma D.2. Consider a ╬│: {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] function that is symmetric around K           2 . If ╬│ further
satisfies: 1) ╬│(l +1) Ōēż ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēż K  2 , 2) ╬│(l +1) Ōēź ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēź  K
                                                                    2  , and   3) ╬│( KŌłÆ1
                                                                                      2   ) >  0,  ╬│( K+12 ) > 0,
                                      ŌłŚ ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                          ŌĆ▓
then the worst case probabilities (p , p ) = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, p ; ╬│) must satisfy one of the following
four equalities:
                                                                   1                      1
                pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = eŽĄ pŌłŚ ,                         ŌłĆp Ōłł [0,            ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0,           ]             (61)
                                                                1+e     ŽĄ             1 + eŌłÆŽĄ
                                                                    1                      1
                pŌłŚ = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ,                         ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, ŌłÆŽĄ           ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0,         ]             (62)
                                                                e +1                    1 + eŽĄ
                                                                1                       1
                1 ŌłÆ pŌłŚ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ),               ŌłĆp Ōłł [          , 1], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [           , 1]             (63)
                                                              1 + eŽĄ               1 + eŌłÆŽĄ

                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    1                   1
                    1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌłŚ ),             ŌłĆp Ōłł [           , 1], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [        , 1]   (64)
                                                                 1 + eŌłÆŽĄ              1 + eŽĄ


Proof of Lemma D.2. Consider the privacy cost objective f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) as in Lemma 3.3, when the
mechanisms are i.i.d. The gradients w.r.t. p and pŌĆ▓ are
                                    KŌłÆ1
                                     2
                          ŌĆ▓
                                    X   K
             Ōłćp f (p, p ; ╬│) =       ŌłÆ     ╬│(l) ┬Ę (lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )      (65)
                                        l
                                 l=0
                                   K
                                  X     K
                               +           ╬│(l) ┬Ę (lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )
                                   K+1
                                        l
                                   l=    2

and
                              KŌłÆ1
                               2

                    ŌĆ▓
                              XK
      Ōłć f (p, p ; ╬│) =
        pŌĆ▓                 e       ╬│(l) ┬Ę (lpŌĆ▓lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )
                                        mŽĄ
                                                                                                 (66)
                                l
                       l=0
                         K
                        X          K
                     +       ŌłÆemŽĄ      ╬│(l) ┬Ę (lpŌĆ▓lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )
                         K+1
                                   l
                              l=   2



We show ŌłĆp Ōłł (0, 1), Ōłćp f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) > 0 and ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) < 0. This implies there is no local
maximum inside F, and so pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) must be on one of the four boundaries
of F.
To show Ōłćp f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) > 0 for p Ōłł (0, 1), we first show for p Ōłł (0, 1)
       KŌłÆ1
        2
       X            K
              ╬│(l)     ┬Ę (pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ) > 0                           (67)
                    l
       l=0
             KŌłÆ1                                      KŌłÆ1
              2                                        2
             X           K     l              KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                                                      X        K
       Ōćö            ╬│(l)    ┬Ę p (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)      >     ╬│(l)    ┬Ę lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl )              (68)
                         l                                     l
              l=0                                             l=0
             KŌłÆ1
              2
             X            K ŌłÆ1   K
       Ōćö            ╬│(l)             ┬Ę pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1                                       (69)
                            l   K ŌłÆl
              l=0
             KŌłÆ1
              2
             X            K ŌłÆ1 K
       >            ╬│(l)         ┬Ę lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl
                           lŌłÆ1 l
             l=1
                KŌłÆ1                                    KŌłÆ1
                 2                                      2
                X              K ŌłÆ1 l         KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                                                       X         K ŌłÆ 1 lŌłÆ1
       ŌćöK                ╬│(l)        p (1 ŌłÆ p)      >K     ╬│(l)         p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl                (70)
                                 l                                lŌłÆ1
                   l=0                                        l=1
             KŌłÆ1                                 KŌłÆ1
              2                                   2 ŌłÆ1
             X            K ŌłÆ1 l         KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                                                  X              K ŌłÆ1 l
       Ōćö            ╬│(l)        p (1 ŌłÆ p)      >       ╬│(l + 1)        p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1               (71)
                            l                                      l
              l=0                                       l=0


Note that for l Ōēż KŌłÆ1                                                                       KŌłÆ1
                     2 , ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1). Since p Ōłł (0, 1), this implies for l Ōłł {0, . . . , 2 ŌłÆ 1},

                      K ŌłÆ1 l                                 K ŌłÆ1 l
                ╬│(l)           p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 Ōēź ╬│(l + 1)              p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1               (72)
                         l                                       l
                                                                               KŌłÆ1  KŌłÆ1            KŌłÆ1
Furthermore, note the L.H.S. of Eq. 71 has one additional term ╬│( KŌłÆ1    2 ) KŌłÆ1 p
                                                                                          2 (1 ŌłÆ p) 2 .
                                                                                        2
Since ╬│( KŌłÆ1
          2 ) > 0 and p Ōłł (0, 1),

                                           K ŌłÆ 1 K ŌłÆ 1 KŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1
                                        ╬│(      ) KŌłÆ1 p 2 (1 ŌłÆ p) 2 > 0                             (73)
                                             2     2


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, combining Eq. 72 and Eq. 73, we conclude Eq. 71 holds.
Next, we show for p Ōłł (0, 1),
   K
  X       K
             ╬│(l) ┬Ę (lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ) > 0                                 (74)
   K+1
           l
  l=   2

           K                                 K
           X    K                            X    K l
  Ōćö                ╬│(l) ┬Ę lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl >         p (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1                           (75)
           K+1
                l                            K+1
                                                  l
       l=    2                                    l=   2

           K
           X          K ŌłÆ1 K
  Ōćö             ╬│(l)             ┬Ę lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl                                                  (76)
            K+1
                       l ŌłÆ 1   l
       l=    2

       KŌłÆ1
       X              K ŌłÆ1   K
  >             ╬│(l)             ┬Ę pl (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
            K+1
                        l   K ŌłÆl
       l=    2

             K
             X             K ŌłÆ1
  ŌćöK                 ╬│(l)          ┬Ę plŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl                                                 (77)
                 K+1
                           l ŌłÆ 1
            l=    2

             KŌłÆ1
             X             K ŌłÆ1
  >K                 ╬│(l)        ┬Ę pl (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                 K+1
                             l
            l=    2

           K                                               K
           X              K ŌłÆ1                             X                K ŌłÆ1
  Ōćö               ╬│(l)           ┬Ę plŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl >              ╬│(l ŌłÆ 1)         ┬Ę plŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl (78)
                           lŌłÆ1                                              lŌłÆ1
       l= K+1
           2                                           l= K+1
                                                           2 +1


Note that for l Ōēź K+1                                                               K+1
                    2 + 1, ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l ŌłÆ 1). Since p Ōłł (0, 1), this implies for l Ōłł { 2 + 1, . . . , K},

                      K ŌłÆ 1 lŌłÆ1                             K ŌłÆ 1 lŌłÆ1
                ╬│(l)          p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl Ōēź ╬│(l ŌłÆ 1)                 p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl                  (79)
                      lŌłÆ1                                    lŌłÆ1
                                                                              KŌłÆ1  KŌłÆ1             KŌłÆ1
Furthermore, note the L.H.S. of Eq. 78 has one additional term ╬│( K+1    2 ) KŌłÆ1 p
                                                                                      2 (1 ŌłÆ p) 2 .
                                                                                    2
Since ╬│( K+1
          2 ) > 0 and p Ōłł (0, 1),

                                      K + 1 K ŌłÆ 1 KŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1
                                   ╬│(      ) KŌłÆ1 p 2 (1 ŌłÆ p) 2 > 0                                   (80)
                                        2     2
Therefore, combining Eq. 79 and Eq. 80, we conclude Eq. 78 holds. Hence, combining Eq. 67 and
Eq. 74, we have for p Ōłł (0, 1), if ╬│ satisfies the three conditions,
                                              Ōłćp f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) > 0                                   (81)
Similarly, one can show for p Ōłł (0, 1), if ╬│ satisfies the three conditions,
                                             ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) < 0                                   (82)

This implies there is no local minima or local maxima inside the feasible region F. Hence, the worst
case probability (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) is on one of the four boundaries of F, that is,
(pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) satisfy exactly one of the following:
                                                                   1                     1
                  pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = eŽĄ pŌłŚ ,                        ŌłĆp Ōłł [0,         ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0,            ]
                                                                1 + eŽĄ               1 + eŌłÆŽĄ
                                                                    1                     1
                  pŌłŚ = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ,                        ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, ŌłÆŽĄ        ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0,          ]
                                                                e +1                   1 + eŽĄ
                                                                1                     1
                  1 ŌłÆ pŌłŚ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ),              ŌłĆp Ōłł [        , 1], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [           , 1]
                                                              1 + eŽĄ              1 + eŌłÆŽĄ
                                                                 1                     1
                  1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌłŚ ),              ŌłĆp Ōłł [      ŌłÆŽĄ
                                                                       , 1], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [         , 1]
                                                              1+e                   1 + eŽĄ



                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma D.3. Consider a ╬│: {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] function that is symmetric around K 2 . If ╬│
                                  K                          K
satisfies: ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēż 2 and ╬│(l + 1) Ōēź ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēź 2 , then the privacy cost objective
f (p,pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) is maximized when p Ōēź pŌĆ▓ .

Proof of Lemma D.3. WLOG, consider the output of DaRRM to be 1. By Eq. 41, the privacy cost
objective f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│), defined in Lemma 3.3 when ╬┤ = 0, when the mechanisms are i.i.d., is equivalent
to
                                                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1]
                              f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) =                        ŌłÆ1                           (83)
                                                Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1]
Hence, f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) is maximized when Pr[A(D) = 1] Ōēź Pr[A(DŌĆ▓ ) = 1]. Note that
                                                     KŌłÆ1
                       K                              2
                     1 X         K l         KŌłÆl   1 X        K l                1
Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] =       ╬│(l)     p (1 ŌłÆ p)    ŌłÆ       ╬│(l)   p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 +
                     2 K+1       l                 2          l                  2
                             l=                                   l=0
                                  2
                                                                                                  (84)

                  ŌłÆ 12 ╬│(l) ŌłĆl Ōēż K

                                  2                                   K                        K
Define g(l) =     1               K . Since ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēż 2 and ╬│(l + 1) Ōēź ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēź 2 ,
                  2 ╬│(l)    ŌłĆl Ōēź  2
there is g(l + 1) Ōēź g(l), ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, . . . , K}. And replacing ╬│(l) with g(l),
                                                     K
                                                    X         K l
                         Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] =           g(l)      p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl               (85)
                                                              l
                                                     l=0

The gradient of the above probability w.r.t. p is
  Ōłćp Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1]                                                                           (86)
      K
    X           K
  =       g(l)       lplŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ (K ŌłÆ l)pl (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1                                    (87)
                l
     l=0
      K                                         KŌłÆ1
                                                X  K ŌłÆ 1   K
    X           K ŌłÆ 1 K lŌłÆ1              KŌłÆl
  =       g(l)             lp (1 ŌłÆ p)         ŌłÆ                       (K ŌłÆ l)pl (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1      (88)
                lŌłÆ1 l                                   l      K ŌłÆl
     l=1                                        l=0
         K                                    KŌłÆ1
        X      K ŌłÆ 1 lŌłÆ1                      X     K ŌłÆ1 l
  =K                   p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ K                     p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1                        (89)
               lŌłÆ1                                    l
        l=1                                   l=0
        KŌłÆ1                                          KŌłÆ1
        X               K ŌłÆ1 l                        X          K ŌłÆ1 l
  =K         g(l + 1)            p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ K       g(l)           p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1           (90)
                          l                                         l
         l=0                                          l=0
        KŌłÆ1
        X                         K ŌłÆ1 l
  =K           g(l + 1) ŌłÆ g(l)             p (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1                                         (91)
                                     l
         l=0

Since g(l + 1) Ōēź g(l) and the binomial probability is always Ōēź 0, Ōłćp Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] Ōēź 0.
This implies whenever p Ōēź pŌĆ▓ , Pr[DaRRM╬│ (D) = 1] Ōēź Pr[DaRRM╬│ (DŌĆ▓ ) = 1]. Hence, the privacy
cost objective f (p, pŌĆ▓ ) is maximized when p Ōēź pŌĆ▓ .

D.2   P ROOF OF M AIN R ESULTS ON P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION (T HEOREM 4.1)

Roadmap. To show Theorem 4.1, we show two parts separately: in section D.2.1, we show if the
privacy allowance m Ōēź K+1 2 , one can set ╬│ = 1 (see Lemma D.4), and in section D.2.2 we show
        KŌłÆ1
if m Ōēż 2 , one can set ╬│ to be the one such that DaRRM╬│ has the same output distribution as
outputting the majority based on 2m ŌłÆ 1 subsampled mechanisms and DaRRM╬│ still satisfies the
privacy guarantee. We call this ╬│ function ╬│Double Subsampling (see Lemma D.8).
Showing Lemma D.4 is relatively straightforward (see Section D.2.1). To show Lemma D.8, we first
introduce a class of well-behaved ╬│ functions called the ŌĆ£symmetric-formŌĆØ family, and derive two
clean sufficient conditions for ╬│ functions from the ŌĆ£symmetric-formŌĆØ family such that DaRRM╬│


                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is mŽĄ-differentially private. After that, we show setting ╬│Double Subsampling as in Lemma D.8 satisfies
the two conditions, and hence, DaRRM╬│Double Subsampling is mŽĄ-differentially private. Details are in
Section D.2.2.
Finally, Theorem 4.1 follows directly from combining Lemma D.4 and Lemma D.8.

D.2.1     P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION UNDER L ARGE P RIVACY A LLOWANCE
We show the following lemma by showing that if one sets ╬│(l) = 1, ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}, then
                                                            ŌłŚ                                ŌĆ▓
m Ōēź K+1 2 suffices to ensure the worst case probabilities (pi , pi ) = arg maxpi ,pŌĆ▓i f (p, p ; ╬│) satisfy
Eq. 37 in Lemma 3.3, and hence if m Ōēź K+1 2 , DaRRM╬│=1 is mŽĄ-differentially private.
Lemma D.4 (Privacy amplification under large privacy allowance m Ōēź K+1         2 ). Consider using
DaRRM to solve Problem 1.1 with pi = p, pŌĆ▓i = pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] and ╬┤ = Ōłå = 0. If the privacy
allowance is m Ōēź K+1    2 , one can set ╬│(l) = 1, ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, . . . , K} in DaRRM╬│ and DaRRM╬│ is mŽĄ
differentially private.

Proof of Lemma D.4. Consider ╬│(l) = 1, ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , K}. Since ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēż KŌłÆ1        2 ,
                           K+1          KŌłÆ1           K+1
╬│(l + 1) Ōēź ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēź 2 and ╬│( 2 ) = ╬│( 2 ) = 1 > 0, by Lemma D.1, the worst case
probabilities (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ) are on one of the two boundaries of F, that is, they
satisfy either p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, 1+e
                                     1       ŌĆ▓        1            ŌĆ▓   ŽĄ                   1          ŌĆ▓
                                       ŽĄ ], p Ōłł [0, 1+eŽĄ ] or 1 ŌłÆ p = e (1 ŌłÆ p) , ŌłĆp Ōłł [ 1+eŌłÆŽĄ , 1], p Ōłł
   1                                                                      ŽĄ ŌĆ▓            ŌĆ▓     ŽĄ
[ 1+eŽĄ , 1]. We now find the local maximums on the boundary p = e p and 1 ŌłÆ p = e (1 ŌłÆ p)
separately and then find the global maximum (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) = arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│).
Part I: Finding the local worse case probabilities on the boundary p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ .
The privacy cost objective f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) on the boundary p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, eŌłÆŽĄ1+1 ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0, 1+e
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                     ŽĄ ],
                                                        ŌĆ▓
can be written as the following by substituting p with p (and omitting ╬│ for convenience):
                               KŌłÆ1
                                2

                    ŌĆ▓
                               X  K ŌĆ▓l         ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆl     K
              f (p ) =     (e             mŽĄ
                                      p (1 ŌłÆ p )      ŌłÆ     (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l)                     (92)
                                  l                      l
                       l=0
                         K
                        X       K     ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ l      ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆl    mŽĄ K
                     +       (      (e p ) (1 ŌłÆ e p )    ŌłÆe            pŌĆ▓l (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                         K+1
                                l                                 l
                             l=   2


And the gradient w.r.t. pŌĆ▓ is
                           KŌłÆ1
                            2
                ŌĆ▓
                           X                    K
      Ōłć f (p ) =
        pŌĆ▓                            e   mŽĄ
                                                   (lpŌĆ▓lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )              (93)
                                                l
                           l=0

                              K
                        ŌłÆ eŽĄ       (l(eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ eŽĄl pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ) ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                               l
                            K
                           X    K
                        +          eŽĄ         (l(eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ eŽĄl pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 )
                                         l
                          l= K+1
                              2

                                 K
                        ŌłÆ emŽĄ        (lpŌĆ▓lŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓l (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ) ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                 l

ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ )                                                                                                        (94)
         KŌłÆ1
          2                                                   KŌłÆ1
         X                   K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l                         X          K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l
= ŌłÆK            emŽĄ                 p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l) + K      emŽĄ          p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l)
                               l                               K+1
                                                                           l
          l=0                                                           l=     2
       KŌłÆ1
        2
   X  K ŌłÆ 1                                 KŌłÆ1
                                                  ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1
                                            X
                ŌĆ▓ ŽĄ      ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
+K  e ŽĄ
             (ŽĄp ) (1 ŌłÆ e p )      ╬│(l) ŌłÆ K      e        (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l)
        l                                    K+1
                                                      l
        l=0                                                               l=       2


                                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          KŌłÆ1
           2 ŌłÆ1                                                       KŌłÆ1
           X                      K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l                            X         K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l
+K                      emŽĄ             p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ K      emŽĄ         p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1)
                                    l                                  KŌłÆ1
                                                                                  l
           l=0                                                       l=   2
          KŌłÆ1
           2 ŌłÆ1
                                                   KŌłÆ1
       ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1                                             ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1
   X                                               X
                 ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ l      ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
ŌłÆK   e         (e p ) (1 ŌłÆ e p )      ╬│(l + 1) + K      e         (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1)
           l                                        KŌłÆ1
                                                              l
           l=0                                                              l=   2


That is,
ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ )
                                                                                                      (95)
   K
               KŌłÆ1
      X  K ŌłÆ 1  2 ŌłÆ1
                                                           mŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1                      K ŌłÆ1
                                                                       KŌłÆ1         KŌłÆ1
                  ŌĆ▓l        ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
=e    mŽĄ
                 p (1 ŌłÆ p )           ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l) ŌłÆ 2e     KŌłÆ1   pŌĆ▓ 2 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 ╬│(      )
             l                                                  2                          2
       l=0
      KŌłÆ1
      X  K ŌłÆ 1
+ emŽĄ           pŌĆ▓l (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)
        K+1
            l
           l=       2
          KŌłÆ1
           2 ŌłÆ1
     X  K ŌłÆ 1
                                                                 ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1                                K ŌłÆ1
                                                                                  KŌłÆ1            KŌłÆ1
                  ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ l         ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
+e    ŽĄ
               (e p ) (1 ŌłÆ e p )            ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1) + 2e    KŌłÆ1   (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 ╬│(      )
           l                                                         2                                   2
     l=0
     KŌłÆ1
     X  K ŌłÆ 1
+e ŽĄ
               (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
      K+1
          l
          l=    2


When ╬│(l) = 1, the above gradient is then
 ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ )

                   mŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1      ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1       ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1      ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1           KŌłÆ1            KŌłÆ1
             = ŌłÆ2e     KŌłÆ1     p    2  (1 ŌłÆ p ) 2  + 2e    KŌłÆ1   (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2  (96)
    K                    2                                  2

If pŌĆ▓ = 0, then p = 0, and the original privacy cost objective is f (0, 0ŌĆ▓ ; ╬│ = 1) = emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1, which
satisfies Eq. 37 in Lemma 3.3 (i.e. DaRRM╬│=1 is mŽĄ-differentially private at (p, pŌĆ▓ ) = (0, 0)).
For pŌĆ▓ > 0, if ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0, then we know f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż f (0), i.e. the worst case probabilities on the
boundary p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ is (p, pŌĆ▓ ) = (0, 0). To ensure ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0,
     ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0                                                                              (97)

                   K ŌłÆ1          KŌłÆ1         KŌłÆ1           K ŌłÆ1             KŌłÆ1           KŌłÆ1
      Ōćö ŌłÆ2emŽĄ KŌłÆ1 pŌĆ▓ 2 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 Ōēż ŌłÆ2eŽĄ KŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2                           (98)
                      2                                         2

          mŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1          ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1       ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1    ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1                KŌłÆ1            KŌłÆ1
      Ōćöe         KŌłÆ1      p    2  (1 ŌłÆ p ) 2  Ōēźe    KŌłÆ1        (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2          (99)
                              2                                  2

Let
                                      ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1         KŌłÆ1

                L.H.S.     emŽĄ KŌłÆ1
                                KŌłÆ1 p    2 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ ) 2
                                                             emŽĄ     1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ KŌłÆ1
           R :=        =         2
                                                          =      ┬Ę (         ) 2                     (100)
                                                            e 2 ŽĄ 1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ p ŌĆ▓
                                        KŌłÆ1           KŌłÆ1    K+1
                R.H.S.   eŽĄ KŌłÆ1

                                   ŽĄ ŌĆ▓           ŽĄ ŌĆ▓
                            KŌłÆ1 (e p ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ e p ) 2
                                              2
                                                     ŌĆ▓                K+1
                                    1ŌłÆp
and R Ōēź 1 Ōćö ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0. Since 1ŌłÆe ŽĄ pŌĆ▓ Ōēź 1, R Ōēź e
                                                       (mŌłÆ 2 )┬ĘŽĄ
                                                                 .

Hence, to make sure R Ōēź 1 (and so ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0), m Ōēź K+1
                                                         2 suffices.
Part II: Finding the local worst case probabilities on the boundary 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p).
Now consider the maximum point on the other boundary 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p) for pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [ 1+e     1
                                                                                              ŽĄ , 1] and

p Ōłł [ 1+eŌłÆŽĄ , 1]. Following the privacy cost objective f (p, p ; ╬│) and let q = 1 ŌłÆ p and p = 1 ŌłÆ q ŌĆ▓ ,
        1                                                     ŌĆ▓                            ŌĆ▓

the objective is
                           KŌłÆ1
                            2
                                   mŽĄ K                         K
                           X
                   ŌĆ▓                             ŌĆ▓ l ŌĆ▓KŌłÆl
            f (q, q ; ╬│) =       e        (1 ŌłÆ q ) q      ŌłÆ         (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)          (101)
                                       l                         l
                                        l=0


                                                            26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      K      K
                                                                 mŽĄ K
                                      X
                                    +                   l KŌłÆl
                                                 (1 ŌłÆ q) q    ŌłÆe      (1 ŌłÆ q ŌĆ▓ )l q ŌĆ▓KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                      K+1
                                             l                      l
                                         l=   2


Substituting 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p) Ōćö q ŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ q (and omitting ╬│ for convenience), the privacy cost
objective can be written as
                    KŌłÆ1
                      2
                    X            K                            K
            f (q) =        emŽĄ       (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ      (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)    (102)
                                 l                             l
                    l=0
                      K       K
                     X                                     K
                  +                (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ       (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                       K+1
                               l                           l
                               l=    2


And the gradient w.r.t. q is
            KŌłÆ1
              2
            X             K
 Ōłćq f (q) =        emŽĄ       (ŌłÆeŽĄ )l(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl + eŽĄ (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                           l
                 l=0
                                                                                             (103)

              K
          ŌłÆ          ŌłÆ l(1 ŌłÆ q)lŌłÆ1 q KŌłÆl + (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
               l
             XK       K
          +                  ŌłÆ l(1 ŌłÆ q)lŌłÆ1 q KŌłÆl + (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                       l
            l= K+1
                 2

                   K
          ŌłÆ emŽĄ         (ŌłÆeŽĄ )l(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl + eŽĄ (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                   l

                 KŌłÆ1
                  2
                 X
                               (m+1)ŽĄ         K ŌłÆ1 K
Ōłćq f (q) = ŌłÆ               e                         l(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)              (104)
                                              lŌłÆ1 l
                 l=1
            KŌłÆ1
             2
            X
                          (m+1)ŽĄ         K ŌłÆ1    K
        +             e                              (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                           l    K ŌłÆl
            l=0
            KŌłÆ1                                                               KŌłÆ1
             2
            X  K ŌłÆ 1   K                           X  K ŌłÆ 1  K                 2
                                                         lŌłÆ1 KŌłÆl
        +                                     l(1 ŌłÆ q)       q      (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                                                   ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ
                lŌłÆ1 l                                      l   K ŌłÆl
          l=1                                      l=0
            K
           X K ŌłÆ1 K                                  KŌłÆ1
                                                      X  K ŌłÆ 1  K
                                    lŌłÆ1 KŌłÆl
        ŌłÆ                   l(1 ŌłÆ q) q      ┬Ę ╬│(l) +                     (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
            K+1
                  l ŌłÆ 1   l                            K+1
                                                             l    K  ŌłÆ l
            l=    2                                                            l=   2

          K
                (m+1)ŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1 K
          X
        +     e                l(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)
          K+1
                        lŌłÆ1 l
            l=    2

             KŌłÆ1
             X
                              (m+1)ŽĄ      K ŌłÆ1   K
        ŌłÆ                 e                          (K ŌłÆ l)(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                            l   K ŌłÆl
            l= K+1
                2



                          KŌłÆ1
                           2
                          X                        K ŌłÆ1
Ōłćq f (q) = ŌłÆK                     e(m+1)ŽĄ                 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)          (105)
                                                    lŌłÆ1
                          l=1
                  KŌłÆ1
                   2
                  X
                                  (m+1)ŽĄ          K ŌłÆ1
         +K                   e                         (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                                    l
                  l=0


                                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     KŌłÆ1                                                       KŌłÆ1
                      2
                     X  K ŌłÆ 1                                                   2
                                                                               X  K ŌłÆ 1
                                                        lŌłÆ1 KŌłÆl
              +K                            (1 ŌłÆ q)       q             (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                                                  ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ K
                       lŌłÆ1                                          l
                 l=1                                        l=0
                   K
                  X K ŌłÆ1                                      KŌłÆ1
                                                               X  K ŌłÆ 1
              ŌłÆK                 (1 ŌłÆ q)lŌłÆ1 q KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l) + K                (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                   K+1
                         l ŌłÆ 1                                  K+1
                                                                      l
                     l=   2                                                     l=   2

                      K
                      X                         K ŌłÆ1
              +K               e(m+1)ŽĄ                (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)lŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                                lŌłÆ1
                     l= K+1
                         2

                      KŌłÆ1
                      X
                                   (m+1)ŽĄ       K ŌłÆ1
              ŌłÆK               e                      (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                                  l
                     l= K+1
                         2



The above is
Ōłćq f (q)
  K
         KŌłÆ1
          2 ŌłÆ1
          X
                     (m+1)ŽĄ     K ŌłÆ1
=ŌłÆ               e                    (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1)                      (106)
                                  l
          l=0
    KŌłÆ1
     2
    X                  K ŌłÆ1
+          e(m+1)ŽĄ           (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                         l
    l=0
    KŌłÆ1                                   KŌłÆ1
     2 ŌłÆ1
  X  K ŌłÆ 1                                 2
                    l KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
                                          X     K ŌłÆ1
+           (1 ŌłÆ q) q        ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ               (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
        l                                         l
  l=0                                     l=0
  KŌłÆ1
  X  K ŌłÆ 1                                KŌłÆ1
                                           X  K ŌłÆ 1
                   l KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ           (1 ŌłÆ q) q       ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) +                  (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
   KŌłÆ1
       l                                    K+1
                                                    l
    l=    2                                                          l=   2

     KŌłÆ1
              (m+1)ŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1
     X
+            e              (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1)
         KŌłÆ1
                       l
    l=    2

     KŌłÆ1
     X                        K ŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ             e(m+1)ŽĄ               (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                l
    l= K+1
        2
    KŌłÆ1
     2 ŌłÆ1
     X              K ŌłÆ1
                (m+1)ŽĄ

=        e                   (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)                        (107)
                        l
    l=0
   KŌłÆ1
   X K ŌłÆ1
+                   (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
             l
  l= K+1
      2

     (m+1)ŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1                 KŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1     K ŌłÆ1                                               K +1        K ŌłÆ1
+ 2e          KŌłÆ1      (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q) 2 (eŽĄ q) 2 ┬Ę ╬│(          )                                Since ╬│(        ) = ╬│(      )
                2                                      2                                                 2           2
  KŌłÆ1
    2 ŌłÆ1
    X      K ŌłÆ1
+                   (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
              l
     l=0
     KŌłÆ1
     X
+             (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)
    l= K+1
        2

      K ŌłÆ1                      KŌłÆ1     KŌłÆ1             K ŌłÆ1                                           K ŌłÆ1        K +1
ŌłÆ2        KŌłÆ1        (1 ŌłÆ q) 2 q         2       ┬Ę ╬│(        )                              Since ╬│(        ) = ╬│(      )
           2                                              2                                              2           2


                                                                    28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When ╬│(l) = 1, then the above gradient is then

  Ōłćq f (q)      (m+1)ŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1            ŽĄ KŌłÆ1    ŽĄ KŌłÆ1     K ŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1 KŌłÆ1
           = 2e           KŌłÆ1    (1 ŌłÆ e q)   2 (e q) 2 ŌłÆ 2 KŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ q) 2 q 2                         (108)
     K                     2                                 2


Since p Ōłł [ 1+e1 ŌłÆŽĄ , 1], and q = 1 ŌłÆ p Ōłł [0, 1+e     1            ŽĄ    ŽĄ
                                                        ŽĄ ], (1 ŌłÆ e q)(e q) Ōēź (1 ŌłÆ q)q. Furthermore,
                                                                                        1
since e(m+1)ŽĄ Ōēź 1, Ōłćq f (q) Ōēź 0. Hence, f (q) achieves the maximum at q = 1+e              ŽĄ ŌĆö that is, at
           1         1                ŌĆ▓                                              ŌĆ▓
p = 1ŌłÆ 1+eŽĄ = 1+eŌłÆŽĄ . Since 1ŌłÆp = e (1ŌłÆp), f (q) achieves the maximum at p = 1ŌłÆeŽĄ (1ŌłÆp) =
                                            ŽĄ
                                                ŌĆ▓                                       ŌĆ▓
1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ 1+e1 ŌłÆŽĄ ) = 1+e
                          1                             1       1
                            ŽĄ . Notice that p, p = ( 1+eŌłÆŽĄ , 1+eŽĄ )= arg minp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, p ; ╬│) on the other
                 ŽĄ ŌĆ▓              1                                                     ŌłŚ ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
boundary p = e p , ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, eŌłÆŽĄ +1 ]. Hence, the global worst case probabilities (p , p ) are not on
the boundary 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p).
Part III: Global maximum point (p, pŌĆ▓ )
The above implies the global maximum points (aka. global worst case probabilities) (pŌłŚ , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ ) =
arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ) = (0, 0) if m Ōēź K+1
                                        2 , and f (0, 0) = e
                                                             mŽĄ
                                                                ŌłÆ 1.
Therefore, by Lemma 3.3, if m Ōēź K+1
                                 2 , setting ╬│(l) = 1, ŌłĆl Ōłł {0, . . . , K} ensures DaRRM╬│ is
mŽĄ-differentially private.

D.2.2    P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION UNDER S MALL P RIVACY A LLOWANCE
Roadmap. To show the privacy amplification under a small privacy allowance m Ōēż KŌłÆ1                  2    in
Lemma D.8, we first observe that the ╬│ function corresponding to natural subsampling as shown in
Lemma 3.1 falls into a special family of ╬│ functions, which we call the ŌĆ£symmetric form familyŌĆØ,
that are a combination of two functions of a specific form on support {0, . . . , K        K
                                                                                  2 } and { 2 , . . . , K}
                                                                       K

                                                        1 ŌłÆ 2h(l) l Ōēż 2
and are symmetric around K    2 ŌĆö that is, ╬│(l) =                          and h(l) + h(K ŌłÆ 1) = 1,
                                                        2h(l) ŌłÆ 1 l Ōēź K 2
where h(l) is monotonically increasing on the support. It is not hard to see these functions are
well-behaved, and so we can apply Lemma D.1 in such cases to limit the region to search for the
worst case probabilities. For a ╬│ function that falls under this ŌĆ£symmetric form familyŌĆØ, we show two
clean sufficient conditions for DaRRM╬│ to be mŽĄ-differentially private in terms of the expectation of
the ╬│ function applied to some Binomial random variables, as in Lemma D.5.
To show the privacy amplification results under a small privacy allowance m, we further need
two building blocks on recurrence relationships in expectation of Binomial random variables and
Hypergeometric random variables in Lemma D.6 and Lemma D.7.
Finally, based on Lemma D.6 and Lemma D.7, we show in Lemma D.8 that ╬│Double Subsampling , i.e.,
the ╬│ function that enables DaRRM to have the same distribution as outputting the majority of
2m ŌłÆ 1 subsampled mechanisms, belongs to the ŌĆ£symmetric form familyŌĆØ, and satisfies the sufficient
conditions as stated in Lemma D.5. Hence DaRRM╬│Double Subsampling is mŽĄ-differentially private.
Lemma D.5 (Privacy conditions of ŌĆ£symmetric form familyŌĆØ). Consider a ╬│ : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1]
function that is of the form
                                      1 ŌłÆ 2h(l) l Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , KŌłÆ1

                             ╬│(l) =                                  2 }                      (109)
                                      2h(l) ŌłÆ 1 l Ōłł { K+1
                                                       2   , . . . , K}
where h(l) is a monotonically increasing function on l Ōłł {0, . . . , K} and h(l) + h(K ŌłÆ l) = 1.
Let random variables X Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p) and Y Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, eŽĄ p). Let random variables
X╠é Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, 1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p)) and Y╠é Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p). If this ╬│ function further satisfies
the following two conditions:
                                                                                      1
           emŽĄ EX [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)] Ōēź eŽĄ EY [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )],            ŌłĆp Ōłł [0,        ]         (110)
                                                                                   1 + eŽĄ
                                                                                   1
        e(m+1)ŽĄ EX╠é [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)] Ōēź EY╠é [h(Y╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y╠é )],      ŌłĆp Ōłł [         , 1]         (111)
                                                                                1 + eŌłÆŽĄ
then Algorithm DaRRM╬│ is mŽĄ-differentially private.


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma D.5. Since h(l + 1) Ōēź h(l) on l Ōłł {0, . . . , K}, there is ╬│(l) Ōēź ╬│(l + 1), ŌłĆl Ōēż K         2
and ╬│(l + 1) Ōēź ╬│(l), ŌłĆl Ōēź K   2 . Furthermore, since h(l) + h(K ŌłÆ l) =   1, ╬│( KŌłÆ1
                                                                                2  ) =  1  ŌłÆ  2h( KŌłÆ1
                                                                                                    2  ) =
                                                                                                 ŌłŚ ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
1 ŌłÆ 2(1 ŌłÆ h( K+1              K+1
               2 )) = 2h( 2 ) ŌłÆ 1. And so by Lemma D.1, the worst case probabilities (p , p ) =
arg maxp,pŌĆ▓ f (p, pŌĆ▓ ; ╬│) satisfy one of the two following: p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆp Ōłł [0, 1+e1 ŌłÆŽĄ ], pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0, 1+e
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                         ŽĄ ],
        ŌĆ▓    ŽĄ                      1        ŌĆ▓     1
or 1 ŌłÆ p = e (1 ŌłÆ p), ŌłĆp Ōłł [ 1+eŌłÆŽĄ , 1], p Ōłł [ 1+eŽĄ , 1].
On the boundary p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ , where pŌĆ▓ Ōłł [0, 1+e
                                            1
                                               ŽĄ ], the privacy cost objective can be re-written as

                                    KŌłÆ1
                                     2
             ŌĆ▓            ŌĆ▓
                                    X       K ŌĆ▓l                        K
   f (p, p ) = f (p ) =                   (emŽĄ  p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ           (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) (112)
                                            l                           l
                                 l=0
                                   K
                                  X       K                                     K ŌĆ▓l
                               +       (      (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ         p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl ) ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                                   K+1
                                          l                                      l
                                    l=   2

as in Eq. 92, and as in Eq. 95, the gradient w.r.t. pŌĆ▓ is
                         KŌłÆ1
                  2 ŌłÆ1
ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ )

                  X      K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l                                       K ŌłÆ1   KŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1   K ŌłÆ1
            = emŽĄ              p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l) ŌłÆ 2emŽĄ KŌłÆ1 pŌĆ▓ 2 (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 ╬│(      )
   K                       l                                              2                      2
                              l=0
                                                                                                             (113)
             KŌłÆ1
             X          K ŌłÆ 1 ŌĆ▓l
+ emŽĄ                         p (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)
                          l
         l= K+1
             2
        KŌłÆ1
         2 ŌłÆ1
     X  K ŌłÆ 1
                                                                 ŽĄ K ŌłÆ1                                K ŌłÆ1
                                                                                  KŌłÆ1            KŌłÆ1
                  ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ l         ŽĄ ŌĆ▓ KŌłÆlŌłÆ1
+e  ŽĄ
               (e p ) (1 ŌłÆ e p )            ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1) + 2e    KŌłÆ1   (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ ) 2 ╬│(      )
           l                                                         2                                   2
     l=0
     KŌłÆ1
     X  K ŌłÆ 1
+e ŽĄ
               (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
      K+1
          l
        l=   2

With this family of ╬│ function,

        1. When l Ōēż K
                    2 , ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1) = (1 ŌłÆ 2h(l)) ŌłÆ (1 ŌłÆ 2h(l + 1)) = 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)

        2. When l Ōēź K
                    2 , ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l) = (2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ (2h(l) ŌłÆ 1) = 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)

        3. Since ╬│( KŌłÆ1      K+1
                     2 ) = ╬│( 2 ),
                                                   K ŌłÆ1       K ŌłÆ1          K +1
                                          2╬│(           ) = ╬│(       ) + ╬│(       )                          (114)
                                                     2            2           2
                                                                    K ŌłÆ1          K +1
                                                          = 1 ŌłÆ 2h(       ) + 2h(       )ŌłÆ1                  (115)
                                                                       2              2
                                                                K +1         K ŌłÆ1
                                                          = 2h(      ) ŌłÆ 2h(        )                        (116)
                                                                  2            2
and so the gradient is equivalent to
                                     KŌłÆ1
                 ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ )          X  K ŌłÆ 1
                             = ŌłÆemŽĄ                pŌĆ▓l (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆl 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)                        (117)
                    K                       l
                                      l=0
                                  KŌłÆ1
                                  X K ŌłÆ1
                             + eŽĄ             (eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )l (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ )KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)
                                          l
                                             l=0
                                 = ŌłÆ2emŽĄ EX [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)] + 2eŽĄ EY [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )]                    (118)
                                             ŌĆ▓                          ŽĄ ŌĆ▓
where X Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p ) and Y Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, e p ). Hence,
                   ŌłćpŌĆ▓ f (pŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 0 Ōćö eŽĄ EY [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )] Ōēż emŽĄ EX [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)]                     (119)


                                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


On the boundary 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ = eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p), where p Ōłł [ 1+e1 ŌłÆŽĄ , 1]. Let q = 1 ŌłÆ p and q ŌĆ▓ = 1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓ for
         1
q Ōłł [0, 1+e ŽĄ ], the privacy cost objective can be re-written as

                      KŌłÆ1
                       2
                      X        K                            K
            f (q) =             emŽĄ(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ŌłÆ      (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)              (120)
                               l                             l
                    l=0
                      K      K
                     X                                   K
                  +              (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆl ŌłÆ emŽĄ       (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆl ┬Ę ╬│(l)
                      K+1
                             l                           l
                      l=   2

as in Eq. 102, and as in Eq. 103, the gradient w.r.t. q is
                    KŌłÆ1
                     2 ŌłÆ1
       Ōłćq f (q)      X                K ŌłÆ1
                 =         e(m+1)ŽĄ             (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)           (121)
           K                              l
                     l=0
                    KŌłÆ1
                     X K ŌłÆ1
                +                     (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
                               l
                   l= K+1
                       2

                      (m+1)ŽĄ K ŌłÆ 1                  KŌłÆ1       KŌłÆ1     K ŌłÆ1
                + 2e            KŌłÆ1      (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q) 2 (eŽĄ q) 2 ┬Ę ╬│(          )
                                  2                                      2
                   KŌłÆ1
                     2 ŌłÆ1
                     X       K ŌłÆ1
                +                     (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l + 1) ŌłÆ ╬│(l)
                                l
                      l=0
                      KŌłÆ1
                      X
                 +             (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ╬│(l + 1)
                     l= K+1
                         2

                       K ŌłÆ1                 KŌłÆ1     KŌłÆ1          K ŌłÆ1
                 ŌłÆ2        KŌłÆ1        (1 ŌłÆ q) 2 q    2    ┬Ę ╬│(        )
                            2                                      2

With this family of ╬│ function, the gradient above is equivalent to
                           KŌłÆ1
                            X  K ŌłÆ 1
       Ōłćq f (q)
                = e(m+1)ŽĄ                     (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ q)l (eŽĄ q)KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)          (122)
          K                            l
                             l=0
                    K
                  X     K ŌłÆ1
                ŌłÆ                  (1 ŌłÆ q)l q KŌłÆlŌłÆ1 ┬Ę 2h(l + 1) ŌłÆ 2h(l)
                            l
                     l=0
                       (m+1)ŽĄ
                = 2e             EX╠é [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)] ŌłÆ 2EY╠é [h(Y╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y╠é )]               (123)
                                        ŽĄ
where X╠é Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, 1 ŌłÆ e (1 ŌłÆ p)) and Y╠é Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p).


             Ōłćq f (q) Ōēź 0 Ōćö e(m+1)ŽĄ EX╠é [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)] Ōēź EY╠é [h(Y╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y╠é )]             (124)
                   1                                                                              1
Recall q Ōłł [0, 1+e    ŽĄ ]. The above implies the maximum on this boundary is at point q = 1+eŽĄ ŌĆö

that is, at point (p, p ) = ( 1+eŌłÆŽĄ , 1+eŽĄ ). Notice this is the minimum on the first boundary p = eŽĄ pŌĆ▓ .
                        ŌĆ▓       1      1
                                                                   ŌĆ▓
Hence, the global maximum of the cost objective is at (p, p ) = (0, 0), and since the maximum
f (0, 0) = emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1, this further implies the algorithm is mŽĄ differentially private.
Lemma D.6 (Binomial Expectation Recurrence Relationship (Theorem 2.1 of Zhang et al. (2019))).
Let X(KŌłÆ1) Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p) and X(K) Ōł╝ Binom(K, p). Let g(x) be a function with ŌłÆŌł× <
E[g(X(KŌłÆ1) )] < Ōł× and ŌłÆŌł× < g(ŌłÆ1) < Ōł×, then
                           KpEX(KŌłÆ1) [g(X(KŌłÆ1) )] = EX(K) [X(K) g(X(K) ŌłÆ 1)]                       (125)
Lemma D.7. Given i, m, K Ōłł Z, K Ōēź 1, 0 Ōēż i Ōēż m Ōēż K, let X (K) Ōł╝ Binom(K, p) for some
p Ōłł [0, 1], there is

                     1           X   K ŌłÆX       m i
                     K
                         EX(K)               =     p (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆi                 (126)
                                       ŌłÆ

                     m
                                 i   m   i       i

                                                          31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma D.7. We show the above statement by induction on K and m.
Base Case: K = 1.

                                           EX(1) [ X0
                                      1
                                                          1ŌłÆX                              0 0
                                                                                                      0
      1. If m = 0, then i = 0.         1
                                      ()                   0      ] = EX(1) [1] = 1, and   0 p (1 ŌłÆ p) = 1.
                                       0


      2. If m = 1,
                               EX(1) [ X
                                             1ŌłÆX
                           1
                                            ] = EX(1) [1 ŌłÆ X] = 1 ŌłÆ p, and 10 p0 (1 ŌłÆ p)1 = 1 ŌłÆ p

            (a) i = 0,     1           0      1
                       ()  1

            (b) i = 1, 11 EX(1) [ X
                                      1ŌłÆX
                                            ] = EX(1) [X] = p, and 11 p1 (1 ŌłÆ p)0 = p.

                       (1)        1    0



Hence, the statement holds for the base case.
Induction Hypothesis: Suppose the statement holds for some K Ōēź 1 and 0 Ōēż i Ōēż m Ōēż K. Consider
1 Ōēż i Ōēż m Ōēż K + 1,

    1               X    K +1ŌłÆX
   K+1
         EX(K+1)                                                                       (127)
    m
                     i      mŌłÆi
        1                      X!              (K + 1 ŌłÆ X)!
  =   K+1
               EX(K+1) [                                             ]                                        (128)
       m
                           i!(X ŌłÆ i)! (m ŌłÆ i)!(K + 1 ŌłÆ X ŌłÆ (m ŌłÆ i))!
                 1                 (X ŌłÆ 1)!                 (K ŌłÆ (X ŌłÆ 1))!
  =   K+1
                           EX(K+1) [X                                                  ]
                             ((X ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1))! (K ŌłÆ (X ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ ((m ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1)))!

       m i!(m ŌłÆ i)!
                                                                                   (129)
         1                     X!                  (K ŌłÆ X)!
  = K+1           EX(K) [                                               ]          (130)
     m i!(m ŌłÆ i)!
                          (X ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1))! (K ŌłÆ X ŌłÆ ((m ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1)))!
 (By Lemma D.6)

    (i ŌłÆ 1)!(m ŌłÆ i)!            X          K ŌłÆX
  =  K+1
                     EX(K) [                           ]                                                      (131)
                              i ŌłÆ 1 (m ŌłÆ 1) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1)

       m i!(m ŌłÆ i)!

    (i ŌłÆ 1)!             K        m ŌłÆ 1 iŌłÆ1
  = K+1  (K + 1)p                         p (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆi                                                        (132)
       m   i!          m ŌłÆ   1     i ŌłÆ 1
 (By Induction Hypothesis)
    m!(K + 1 ŌłÆ m)!             K!              (m ŌłÆ 1)!
  =                                                         (K + 1)pi (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆi                              (133)
        (K + 1)!i     (m ŌłÆ 1)!(K ŌłÆ m + 1)! (i ŌłÆ 1)!(m ŌłÆ i)!

        m!      i        mŌłÆi    m i
  =            p (1 ŌłÆ p)     =     p (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆi                                                               (134)
    i!(m ŌłÆ i)!                  i
Now we consider the edge cases when 0 = i Ōēż m.
If i = 0 and m = 0,

            1           X   K +1ŌłÆX                              0 0
        K+1
              EX(K+1) [              ] = 1 ┬Ę EX(K+1) [1] = 1 =    p (1 ŌłÆ p)0                                  (135)
         0
                        0      0                                0

If i = 0 and m > 0,

    1              K +1ŌłÆX
  K+1
        EX(K+1) [          ]                                                                                  (136)
    m
                      m
           K+1
           X  K + 1 ŌłÆ x  K + 1
       1
 = K+1                           px (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx                                                              (137)
      m    x=0
                     m       x
           K+1
           X  K + 1 ŌłÆ x   K     K
       1
 = K+1                         +           I{x Ōēź 1} px (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx                                           (138)
      m    x=0
                     m       x     xŌłÆ1


                                                            32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        K                                                               K+1
                                                                        X
      1X   K +1ŌłÆx K x                                           1             K +1ŌłÆx         K
= K+1                p (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx +                       K+1
                                                                                                 px (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx
                                                                                            xŌłÆ1

   m   x=0
              m    x                                         m          x=1
                                                                                 m
                                                                                                  (139)

                                            K +1ŌłÆx
(Since when x = K + 1 and m > 0,                         = 0)
                                               m
             K                            K
      1     X   K ŌłÆx K x                 X    K ŌłÆx K x
=   K+1
                        p (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx +              p (1 ŌłÆ p)K+1ŌłÆx
                                              mŌłÆ1

     m      x=0
                 m    x                  x=0
                                                    x
                                                                                                   (140)
           K
      1    X K ŌłÆ x K x+1
 + K+1                    p  (1 ŌłÆ p)KŌłÆx
     m   x=0
              m        x

        K +1ŌłÆx         K ŌłÆx       K ŌłÆx
(Since           =           +            )
           m             m        mŌłÆ1

      1                 K ŌłÆX                       K ŌłÆX                         1             K ŌłÆX
 = K+1  (1 ŌłÆ p)EX(K) [         ] + (1 ŌłÆ p)EX(k) [       ] +                    K+1
                                                                                    pEX(K) [          ]
      m
                          m                        mŌłÆ1                          m
                                                                                                m
                                                                                                 (141)

      1            K ŌłÆX                        K ŌłÆX
= K+1
         EX (K)
                [         ] + (1 ŌłÆ p)EX (K)
                                            [          ]                                           (142)
                                               mŌłÆ1

   m
                     m

   1   K              m              K
= K+1          (1 ŌłÆ p) + (1 ŌłÆ p)            (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1                                             (143)
   m
           m                        mŌłÆ1
(By Induction Hypothesis)                                                                          (144)

      1     K +1
 = K+1             (1 ŌłÆ p)m                                                                        (145)
      m
              m
= (1 ŌłÆ p)m                                                                                         (146)


Based on Lemma D.6 and Lemma D.7 and using the sufficient conditions in Lemma D.5, we are now
ready to present the privacy amplification results under a small privacy allowance m as follows.
Lemma D.8 (Privacy amplification under small privacy allowance m Ōēż KŌłÆ1    2 ). Consider using
DaRRM to solve Problem 1.1 with pi = p, pŌĆ▓i = pŌĆ▓ , ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] and ╬┤ = Ōłå = 0. If the pri-
                                                       1 ŌłÆ 2h(l) ŌłĆlŌłł {0, 1, . . . , KŌłÆ1

                            KŌłÆ1
vacy allowance is m Ōēż 2 , one can set ╬│(l) =                                         2 } , where
                                                                        K+1
                                                       2h(l) ŌłÆ 1 ŌłĆlŌłł { 2 , . . . , K}
                                          P2mŌłÆ1 (il)(2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                                                       KŌłÆl
                                                            )
h : {0, 1, . . . , K} ŌåÆ [0, 1] and h(l) =  i=m         K      , and Algorithm DaRRM╬│ is mŽĄ-
                                                    (2mŌłÆ1)
differentially private.


Proof of Lemma D.8. Let X(KŌłÆ1) Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p) and Y(KŌłÆ1) Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, eŽĄ p).


                                 2mŌłÆ1
                         1        X            X +1 K ŌłÆX ŌłÆ1
EX(KŌłÆ1) [h(X + 1)] =      K
                                    EX(KŌłÆ1) [                          ]                 (147)
                                                          2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i

                        2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                                  i
                               2mŌłÆ1
                          1      X             X     K ŌłÆX ŌłÆ1             X    K ŌłÆX ŌłÆ1
                    =     K
                                    EX(KŌłÆ1)
                                            [                      +                       ]
                                                     2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i         iŌłÆ1   2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i

                        2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                                i
                                                                                         (148)

                            X +1       X            X
                   (Since           =         +          I{i Ōēź 1})
                               i        i         iŌłÆ1

                                                 33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    2mŌłÆ1
                           1         X           X    K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX                        X        K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX
                     =    K
                                      EX(KŌłÆ1) [                    ] + EX(KŌłÆ1) [                            ]
                                                      2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i                  i ŌłÆ 1 (2m ŌłÆ 2) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1)

                        2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                                 i
                                                                                          (149)
                               2mŌłÆ1
                          1     X       K ŌłÆ1       2m ŌłÆ 1 i
                     =    K
                                                           p (1 ŌłÆ p)2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi                (150)
                                           ŌłÆ

                        2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                        2m   1       i

                         K ŌłÆ1      2m ŌłÆ 2 iŌłÆ1
                     +                      p (1 ŌłÆ p)2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                         2m ŌłÆ 2     iŌłÆ1
                    (By Lemma D.7)


                               2mŌłÆ1
                       1        X              X       K ŌłÆX
EX(KŌłÆ1) [h(X)] =        K
                                  EX(KŌłÆ1)  [                     ]                         (151)
                                                    2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i

                      2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                               i

                            K ŌłÆX             K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX            K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX
                 (Since                 =                 +                 )
                          2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i         2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i        2m ŌłÆ 2 ŌłÆ i
                             2mŌłÆ1
                        1     X                 X     K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX                     X   K ŌłÆ1ŌłÆX
                  =     K
                                   E  X(KŌłÆ1)
                                             [                     ] + EX      [                 ]I{i Ōēż 2m ŌłÆ 2}
                                                      2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i         (KŌłÆ1)
                                                                                     2m ŌłÆ 2 ŌłÆ i

                      2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                                 i                               i
                                                                                           (152)
                             2mŌłÆ1
                              X   K ŌłÆ1
                        1                          2m ŌłÆ 1 i
                  =     K
                                                           p (1 ŌłÆ p)2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi                 (153)
                                          ŌłÆ

                      2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                      2m     1       i

                       K ŌłÆ1      2m ŌłÆ 2 i
                  +                        p (1 ŌłÆ p)2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi I{i Ōēż 2m ŌłÆ 2}
                      2m ŌłÆ 2        i
                 (By Lemma D.7)

Hence,
EX(KŌłÆ1) [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)]                                                              (154)
              2mŌłÆ1
               X K ŌłÆ1                                        2mŌłÆ2
      1                       2m ŌłÆ 2 iŌłÆ1           2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                                                              X K ŌłÆ1          2m ŌłÆ 2 i           2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi

=    K
                                       p   (1 ŌłÆ p)        ŌłÆ                            p (1 ŌłÆ p)
                     2m ŌłÆ 2     iŌłÆ1                                 2m ŌłÆ 2

    2mŌłÆ1       i=m                                            i=m
                                                                                 i
                                                                                       (155)
               2mŌłÆ2                                        2mŌłÆ2
      1         X     K ŌłÆ1      2m ŌłÆ 2 i         2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi
                                                            X      K ŌłÆ1     2m ŌłÆ 2 i           2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi

=    K
                                        p (1 ŌłÆ p)       ŌłÆ                            p  (1 ŌłÆ p)
                      2m ŌłÆ 2                                       2m ŌłÆ 2

    2mŌłÆ1      i=mŌłÆ1
                                  i                         i=m
                                                                               i
                                                                                         (156)

  2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2 mŌłÆ1
=                p  (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1                                                           (157)
    K    mŌłÆ1
Similarly,

                                          2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
             EY(KŌłÆ1) [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )] =                (eŽĄ p)mŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ p)mŌłÆ1         (158)
                                            K     mŌłÆ1

Since p(1 ŌłÆ p) Ōēź eŌłÆŽĄ eŽĄ p(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ p) for p Ōłł [0, 1+e
                                                 1
                                                    ŽĄ ],


   (mŌłÆ1)ŽĄ                                  2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2 (mŌłÆ1)ŽĄ mŌłÆ1
 e        EX(KŌłÆ1) [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)] =                        e       p     (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1     (159)
                                             K         mŌłÆ1

                                           2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2 (mŌłÆ1)ŽĄ ŌłÆŽĄ ŽĄ
                                        Ōēź                    e       (e e p(1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ p))mŌłÆ1 (160)
                                             K         mŌłÆ1

                                           2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
                                        =                    (eŽĄ p)mŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ p)mŌłÆ1      (161)
                                             K         mŌłÆ1

                                               34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        = EY(KŌłÆ1) [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )]                              (162)
and so
                   emŽĄ EX(KŌłÆ1) [h(X + 1) ŌłÆ h(X)] Ōēź eŽĄ EY(KŌłÆ1) [h(Y + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y )]                  (163)
                               1 ŌłÆ 2h(l) lŌłł {0, 1, . . . , KŌłÆ1

                                                            2 } , where h =
                                                                            P2mŌłÆ1 (il)(2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                                                                                         KŌłÆ1
                                                                                              )
The above shows ╬│(l) =                        K+1                            i=m        K       , satis-
                               2h(l) ŌłÆ 1 lŌłł { 2 , . . . , K}                          (2mŌłÆ1)
fies the first condition in Eq. 110 of Lemma D.5. To ensure the Algorithm is mŽĄ differentially private,
we next show this ╬│ also satisfies the second condition in Eq. 111 of Lemma D.5.
Let X╠é(KŌłÆ1) Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, 1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p)) and Y╠é(KŌłÆ1) Ōł╝ Binom(K ŌłÆ 1, p). By Eq. 149, we know
                              2mŌłÆ1
                         1     X                 X╠é    K ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ X╠é                       X╠é       K ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ X╠é
EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(X + 1)] =    K
                                     EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [                       ] + EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [                            ]
                                                        2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i                    i ŌłÆ 1 (2m ŌłÆ 2) ŌłÆ (i ŌłÆ 1)

                       2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                                  i
                                                                                              (164)
                              2mŌłÆ1
                               X   K ŌłÆ1
                         1                          2m ŌłÆ 1
                    =    K
                                                             (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                                           ŌłÆ

                       2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                       2m     1        i
                                                                                              (165)

                        K ŌłÆ1      2m ŌłÆ 2
                    +                       (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))iŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                        2m ŌłÆ 2     iŌłÆ1
                   By Lemma D.7
and by Eq. 152, we know
                               2mŌłÆ1
                       1        X             X╠é    K ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ X╠é                     X╠é    K ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ X╠é
EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(X╠é)] =    K
                                 E X╠é(KŌłÆ1) [                       ] + EX╠é(KŌłÆ1)  [                   ]I{i Ōēż 2m ŌłÆ 2}
                                                     2m ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ i                          2m ŌłÆ 2 ŌłÆ i

                    2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                               i                                    i
                                                                                               (166)
                          2mŌłÆ1
                      1    X        K ŌłÆ1         2m ŌłÆ 1
                =     K
                                                          (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi
                                        ŌłÆ

                    2mŌłÆ1 i=m
                                   2m      1        i
                                                                                               (167)

                     K ŌłÆ1     2m ŌłÆ 2
                +                        (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi I{i Ōēż 2m ŌłÆ 2}
                    2m ŌłÆ 2       i
                By Lemma D.7

Hence,
      EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)]                                                                (168)
                     2mŌłÆ1
               1   X K ŌłÆ1                 2m ŌłÆ 2
       =      K
                                                    (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))iŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ1ŌłÆi        (169)
                                  ŌłÆ          ŌłÆ

             2mŌłÆ1     i=m
                              2m    2      i    1
           2mŌłÆ2
            X   K ŌłÆ 1   2m ŌłÆ 2
       ŌłÆ                                 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi
            i=m
                  2m ŌłÆ 2          i
                      2mŌłÆ2
               1   X           K ŌłÆ1        2m ŌłÆ 2
       =      K
                                                     (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi         (170)
                                   ŌłÆ

             2mŌłÆ1    i=mŌłÆ1
                               2m    2         i
           2mŌłÆ2
            X K ŌłÆ 1   2m ŌłÆ 2

       ŌłÆ                                 (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))i (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))2mŌłÆ2ŌłÆi
            i=m
                  2m ŌłÆ 2          i

            2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
       =                        (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1                               (171)
              K       mŌłÆ1
Similarly,

                                                  2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2 mŌłÆ1
                EY╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(Y╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y╠é )] =                        p     (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1           (172)
                                                     K       mŌłÆ1

                                                  35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence,

                                               2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
e(m+1)ŽĄ EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)] = e(m+1)ŽĄ                   (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1 (eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1
                                                 K     mŌłÆ1
                                                                                            (173)

                                         2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
                                       Ōēź                (1 ŌłÆ eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1 e(mŌłÆ1)ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1
                                           K     mŌłÆ1
                                                                                            (174)

                                         2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2
                                       =                (eŽĄ ŌłÆ e2ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p))mŌłÆ1 (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1
                                           K     mŌłÆ1
                                                                                            (175)
Note that
                                eŽĄ ŌłÆ e2ŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ p) = eŽĄ ŌłÆ e2ŽĄ + e2ŽĄ p Ōēź p                    (176)
                                 Ōćö (eŽĄ + 1)(eŽĄ ŌłÆ 1)p Ōēź eŽĄ (eŽĄ ŌłÆ 1)                         (177)
                                            eŽĄ        1
                                 ŌćöpŌēź ŽĄ           =                                         (178)
                                         e +1      1 + eŌłÆŽĄ
and the second condition in Eq. 111 of Lemma D.5 is on p Ōłł [ 1+e1 ŌłÆŽĄ , 1].
Therefore, following Eq. 175,

                                                       2m ŌłÆ 1 2m ŌłÆ 2 mŌłÆ1
            e(m+1)ŽĄ EX╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(X╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(X╠é)] Ōēź                    p  (1 ŌłÆ p)mŌłÆ1        (179)
                                                         K     mŌłÆ1
                                                  = EY╠é(KŌłÆ1) [h(Y╠é + 1) ŌłÆ h(Y╠é )]          (180)

which means the second condition in Eq. 111 of Lemma D.5 is also satisfied.
Therefore, by Lemma D.5, DaRRM╬│ with this specific choice of ╬│ is mŽĄ-differentially private.

Now, Theorem 4.1 follows from combining Lemma D.4 and Lemma D.8.


                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     D ETAILS OF O PTIMIZING ╬│ IN DA RRM
E.1   D ERIVING THE O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE

For ╬│ that is symmetric around K
                               2 , we can write the objective as

Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T [E(DaRRM╬│ )]                                                                   (181)
= Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T [DT V (DaRRM╬│ (S) Ōłź f (S))]                                                  (182)
= Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T [| Pr[DaRRM╬│ (S) = 1] ŌłÆ Pr[f (S) = 1]|]                                      (183)
                                                                 KŌłÆ1
                      ’Ż«                                                              ’Ż╣
                           K                                      2
                          X                  1                  X        1
= Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░|          ╬▒l ┬Ę (╬│(l) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l))) ŌłÆ ╬▒l +     ╬▒l ┬Ę (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l))|’Ż╗            (184)
                           K+1
                                             2                           2
                        l=                                           l=0
                              2
                      ’Ż« KŌłÆ1                                  ’Ż╣
                         2                  K
                        X       1      1    X       1 1
 = Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░     ╬▒l ( ╬│(l) ŌłÆ ) +     ╬▒l ( ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ’Ż╗                                    (185)
                                2      2    K+1
                                                    2 2
                        l=0                    l=   2

The above follows by conditioning on L = {0, 1, . . . , K}, i.e. the sum of observed outcomes in S
                     ’Ż«                                   ’Ż╣
                         K
                       1 X
= Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░       (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l)) ’Ż╗                                        (186)
                       2 K+1
                         l=       2

The above follows by symmetry of ╬│

Furthermore, notice the objective is symmetric around 0, and can be written as
                    ’Ż«                                ’Ż╣
                          K
                      1  X
 Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░         (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) (1 ŌłÆ ╬│(l))’Ż╗                                        (187)
                      2 K+1
                        l= 2
                         ’Ż«                                            ’Ż╣
                             K
     1                      X
  = Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░           (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) ŌłÆ (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )╬│(l) ’Ż╗                          (188)
     2                       K+1
                          l= 2
                         ’Ż«                   ’Ż╣                      ’Ż«                       ’Ż╣
                             K                                          K
     1                      X                     1                    X
  = Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░         (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )’Ż╗ ŌłÆ Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░       (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )╬│(l)’Ż╗ (189)
     2                       K+1
                                                  2                     K+1
                         l=       2                                   l=   2


and this is the same as optimizing
                       ’Ż«                      ’Ż╣
                          K                           K
    1                    X                          1 X
  ŌłÆ Ep1 ,p2 ,...,pK Ōł╝T ’Ż░      (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )╬│(l)’Ż╗ = ŌłÆ      Ep ,p ,...,pK Ōł╝T [(╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )] ╬│(l)
    2                     K+1
                                                    2 K+1 1 2
                        l=    2                           l=   2
                                                                                                  (190)
which is linear in ╬│.

E.2   P RACTICAL A PPROXIMATION OF THE O BJECTIVE

Since the optimization objective in Eq. 190 requires taking an expectation over p1 , . . . , pK , and
this invovles integrating over K variables, which can be slow in practice, we propose the following
approximation to efficiently compute the objective. We start with a simple idea to compute the
objective, by sampling pi ŌĆÖs from [0, 1] and take an empirical average of the objective value over all
subsampled sets of p1 , . . . , pK as the approximation of the expectation in Section E.2.1. However, we
found this approach is less numerically stable. We then propose the second approach to approximate
the objective in Section E.2.2, which approximates the integration over pi ŌĆÖs instead of directly
approximating the objective value. We use the second approximation approach in our experiments
and empirically demonstrates its effectiveness. Note approximation the optimization objective has no
affect on the privacy guarantee.


                                                    37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.1     A PPROXIMATION VIA D IRECT S AMPLING OF pi ŌĆÖ S
We start with a straightforward way of approximating the objective:
        1. Step 1: Sample p1 , p2 , . . . , pK Ōł╝ T
                                                                PK
        2. Step 2: Compute the sampled objective value g = ŌłÆ 21 l= K+1 (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )╬│(l)) based on
                                                                       2
           the sampled pi ŌĆÖs.
        3. Repeat Step 1 and Step 2 for T = 10000 times. Let gt denotes the objective value in t-th
                        PT
           trial. Use T1 t=1 gt as an unbiased estimation of the true objective.
However, we found this approximation is less numerically stable in the experiments and so we
propose and adpot the second approach as follows.

E.2.2     A PPROXIMATING THE I NTEGRATION OVER pi ŌĆÖ S
Consider the following surrogate objective:
                         K   Z 1 Z 1      Z 1
                    1 X
                  ŌłÆ                   ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę      (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )dp1 dp2 . . . dpK ┬Ę ╬│(l)                        (191)
                    2 K+1 0.5 0.5          0.5
                            l=   2


where we approximate the integration instead of directly approximating the objective value. The
approximation of the integration is based on the rectangular rule and that the Poison Binomial (PB)
distribution is invariant to the order of its probability parameters.
First, we discretize the integration over pi ŌĆÖs: pick Žä = 50 points representing probabilities between
[0.5, 1) with equal distance ╬Ė. Denote this set of points as W. We pick only Žä = 50 samples to ensure
the distance between each sample, i.e., ╬Ė, is not too small; or this can cause numerical instability.
For each l Ōłł { K+1    K+1
                  2 , 2 + 1, . . . , K}, we want to compute an approximated coefficient for ╬│(l) as
follows:
       Z 1 Z 1      Z 1                                    X X           X
                ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę     (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )dp1 dp2 . . . dpK Ōēł              ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę      (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )        (192)
         0.5   0.5    0.5                                    p1 ŌłłW p2 ŌłłW      pK ŌłłW

which approximates integration over a K-dimensional grid W K .
The idea is then to sample points from this K-dimensional grid W K and compute an empirical mean
of the integration based on the sample probabilities for p1 , . . . , pK from W K as the approximation
of the integration in the objective.
Let (s1 , s2 , . . . , sK ) be randomly sampled probability values from W K and we want to compute
(╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) for all l based on (p1 , . . . , pK ) = (s1 , . . . , sK ). To apply the rectangular rule, since the
grid of probabilities is K-dimensional, the weight of (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) in the approximate integration
is ╬ĖK . Furthermore, observe that ╬▒l is the pmf at l from a Poison Binomial (PB) distribution in
our case, and PB(p1 , . . . , pK ) Ōł╝ PB(ŽĆ(p1 , . . . , pK )), where ŽĆ denotes a permutation of p1 , . . . , pK
and Ōł╝ denotes ŌĆ£the same distributionŌĆØ. Hence, with a single probability sample (s1 , . . . , sK ), we
can indeed compute ╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl for each l at K! points from the grid W K , since they all have the
same value. Therefore, we should set the weight of ╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl in the approximate integration as
w = ╬ĖK ┬Ę K!. Furthermore, since the order of (p1 , . . . ,  pK ) does not affect the objective value, there
is a total of (Žä choose K with replacement) = Žä +KŌłÆ1     K          := P different points in the grid W K .
In summary,  our approximation of the integration proceeds as follows: let w = ╬ĖK ┬Ę K! and
P = Žä +KŌłÆ1
       K     .
        1. Step 1: Generate a set W with 50 values of equal distance between 0.5 and 1.
        2. Step 2: Randomly sample (s1 , s2 , . . . , sK ) Ōł╝ W K . Compute w ┬Ę (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) based on
           (p1 , p2 , . . . , pK ) = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sK ).
        3. Step 3: repeat Step 2 for N = 10000 times.
                                   PK
        4. Step 4: Let gt = l= K+1 w ┬Ę (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl ) denotes the approximate integration value in
                                           2
           t-th trial.
                                                               P
                                                                  PN
           Form an unbiased estimation of the integration as N      t=1 gt .


                                                       38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3     R EDUCING # C ONSTRAINTS F ROM Ōł× TO A P OLYNOMIAL S ET

Lemma 5.1. Consider using DaRRM to solve Problem 1.1. Given an arbitrary ╬│, let the global worst
case probabilities be (pŌłŚ1 , . . . , pŌłŚK , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ           ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                            1 , . . . , pK ) = arg max{(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )}K
                                                                                  i=1
                                                                                      f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│),
where f is the privacy cost objective defined in Lemma 3.3. Each pair (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                                i ) satisfies
                                                                                       eŽĄ +Ōłå 1ŌłÆŌłå            1ŌłÆŌłå eŽĄ +Ōłå
(pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
        i ) Ōłł {(0, 0), (1, 1), (0, Ōłå), (Ōłå, 0), (1 ŌłÆ Ōłå, 1), (1, 1 ŌłÆ Ōłå), ( eŽĄ +1 , eŽĄ +1 ), ( eŽĄ +1 , eŽĄ +1 )},
ŌłĆi Ōłł [K]. Furthermore, there exists a set P of size O(K 7 ) such that (pŌłŚ1 , . . . , pŌłŚK , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                            ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                                                                                                           1 , . . . , pK ) =
                                                 ŌĆ▓           ŌĆ▓                                              3
arg max{(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )}K
                   i=1 ŌłłP
                          f (p1 , . . . , pK , p1 , . . . , pK ; ╬│) if ╬┤ > 0 and a set P of size O(K ) if ╬┤ = 0.


                                  Figure 6: An illustration of the feasible region Fi .

Proof. Part I: Reducing # privacy constraints from Ōł× to exponential. Consider (pi , pŌĆ▓i ) for an ar-
bitrary i Ōłł [K] and fixing (pj , pŌĆ▓j ), ŌłĆj ╠Ė= i. The privacy cost objective f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│),
as defined in Lemma 3.3, is then linear in (pi , pŌĆ▓i ). To ensure DaRRM╬│ is differentially private with a
target privacy loss mŽĄ, we need to consider the worst case probabilities (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ    i )= arg max(pi ,pŌĆ▓i ) f ,
given(pj , pŌĆ▓j ), ŌłĆj ╠Ė= i. Since mechanism Mi is (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private, by definition, the follow-
ing constraints on (pi , pŌĆ▓i ) apply simultaneously,
                               pi Ōēż eŽĄ pŌĆ▓i + Ōłå,           pŌĆ▓i Ōēż eŽĄ p + Ōłå
                               1 ŌłÆ pi Ōēż eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓i ) + Ōłå,             1 ŌłÆ pŌĆ▓i Ōēż eŽĄ (1 ŌłÆ pi ) + Ōłå


This implies (pi , pŌĆ▓i ) lies in a feasible region Fi (see Figure 6). Notice the constraints on (pi , pŌĆ▓i ), that
is, the boundaries of Fi , are linear in pi and pŌĆ▓i , max(pi ,pŌĆ▓i ) f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│) is hence
a Linear Programming (LP) problem in (pi , pŌĆ▓i ) for i Ōłł [K]. Hence, the (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ            i ) has to be on one
of the eight corners of Fi ŌĆö that is (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ    i ) Ōłł {(0, 0), (1, 1), (0,  Ōłå),   (Ōłå,  0),    (1 ŌłÆ Ōłå, 1), (1, 1 ŌłÆ
        ŽĄ
                        1ŌłÆŌłå eŽĄ +Ōłå
Ōłå), ( eeŽĄ+Ōłå , 1ŌłÆŌłå
          +1 eŽĄ +1 ), (       ,
                        eŽĄ +1 eŽĄ +1   )} :=  C. Therefore, the infinitely many      privacy     constraints      are now
                    K
reduced to only 8 in optimizing for the best ╬│ function in DaRRM.
Part II: Reducing # privacy constraints from exponential to polynomial. To further reduce the
number of privacy constraints in optimization, recall by Lemma 3.3 we need ╬│ such that
                                                KŌłÆ1
                                                X2                                K
                                                                                  X
f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│) =         (emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ ╬▒l ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) +            (╬▒l ŌłÆ emŽĄ ╬▒lŌĆ▓ ) ┬Ę ╬│(l) Ōēż emŽĄ ŌłÆ 1 + 2╬┤
                                                l=0                              l= K+1
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                          (193)
                              PK                                                  PK
where ╬▒l = Pr[L = i=1 Mi (D) = l] and ╬▒lŌĆ▓ = Pr[LŌĆ▓ = i=1 Mi (DŌĆ▓ ) = l]. Note L follows a
Poisson Binomial (PB) distribution parameterized by p1 , . . . , pK , and LŌĆ▓ follows a PB distribution


                                                                  39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


parameterized by pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K . Observe that PB distribution9 is invariant under the permutation
of parameters. That is, PB(p1 , . . . , pK ) has the same distribution as PB(ŽĆ(p1 , . . . , pK )), where ŽĆ
denotes permutation; and similarly, PB(pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ) has the same distribution as PB(ŽĆ(pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K )).
Consider a set P of privacy constraints as Eq. 193, where each constraint in P is constructed
by setting (p1 , pŌĆ▓1 ), (p2 , pŌĆ▓2 ), . . . , (pK , pŌĆ▓K ) = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vK ), where vi Ōłł C, ŌłĆi Ōłł [K], such
that constraints constructed by (p1 , pŌĆ▓1 ), (p2 , pŌĆ▓2 ), . . . , (pK , pŌĆ▓K ) =  ŽĆ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vK ) is not in P
ŌĆö that is, P has size (8 chooses K with replacement) = K+8ŌłÆ1                         K           = O(K 7 ). Then, the global
                                        ŌłŚ      ŌłŚ       ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ        ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
worst case probabilities (p1 , . . . , pK , p1 , . . . , pK ) must satisfy one of the constraints in P, i.e.
(pŌłŚ1 , . . . , pŌłŚK , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ           ŌĆ▓ŌłŚ
                      1 , . . . , pK ) = max{(pi ,pŌĆ▓i )}Ki=1 ŌłłP
                                                                f (p1 , . . . , pK , pŌĆ▓1 , . . . , pŌĆ▓K ; ╬│). This implies we only
                 7
need O(K ) privacy constraints in optimizing for the best noise function ╬│ in DaRRM.
Note when Ōłå = 0, i.e., under pure differential privacy setting, the feasible region Fi has only 4
                                                                     eŽĄ                         eŽĄ
corners instead of 8, that is, (pŌłŚi , pŌĆ▓ŌłŚ                                     1          1
                                       i ) Ōłł C = {(0, 0), (1, 1), ( eŽĄ +1 , eŽĄ +1 ), ( eŽĄ +1 , eŽĄ +1 )}. Hence,
when Ōłå = 0, P has size (4 choose K with replacement) = K+4ŌłÆ1

                                                                    K        = O(K 3 ), implying we only
          3
need O(K ) privacy constrants in optimizing for the best noise function ╬│.



F     F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

F.1     O PTIMAL ╬│ IN S IMULATIONS

F.1.1      C OMPARISON AGAINST A DVANCED C OMPOSITION

Advanced composition indiates less privacy loss than simple composition when the number of
compositions, m, is large, or when the failure probability ╬┤ is large. To enable meaningful comparison
against advanced composition, we consider a larger K and a larger failure probability.
Consider K = 35, ŽĄ = 0.1, Ōłå = 10ŌłÆ5 . By advanced composition, if one       p outputs the majority of M
subsampled mechanisms for some M < K, the majority output is ( 2M log(1/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ )ŽĄ + M ŽĄ(eŽĄ ŌłÆ
1), M Ōłå+╬┤ ŌĆ▓ )-differentially private for some ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ > 0. We set this as the privacy guarantee of all majority
         p algorithms. That is, if we want the majority output to be (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private, we
ensembling
set m = 2M log(1/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ )+M (eŽĄ ŌłÆ1) and ╬┤ = M Ōłå+╬┤ ŌĆ▓ accordingly. The           p parameters Žä and ╬╗ for   the
                                                                                          ŌĆ▓         ŽĄ
constant ╬│ in randomized response (see Lemma C.1) are set to be Žä = 2K log(1/╬┤ ) + K(e ŌłÆ 1)
and ╬╗ = KŌłå + ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ .
In the experiments, we consider M = {10, 13, 15, 20} and ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ = 0.1.
All values of the parameters of the private ensembling algorithms are computed and listed in the
table:


              # Subsampled mechanisms                M          10            13            15             20
                  Privacy allowance                  m       7.8378         9.1046        9.8888        11.7005
                Parameter of constant ╬│              Žä       16.3766       16.3767       16.3767        16.3767
                Parameter of constant ╬│              ╬╗       0.10035       0.10035       0.10035        0.10035
                  Overall privacy loss               mŽĄ      0.7837         0.9104        0.9889         1.1700
              Overall failure probability            ╬┤       0.10010       0.10013       0.10015         0.1002

Table 2: Parameters of all algorithms. Note all the private ensembling algorithms for comparison
in the experiment is required to be (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private. K = 35, ŽĄ = 0.1, ╬┤ = 10ŌłÆ5 and
╬┤ ŌĆ▓ = 0.1.



  9
    See, e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_binomial_distribution, for the
pmf of Poisson Binomial (PB) distribution.


                                                              40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           functions                                                Error
                 M = 10                M = 13                             M = 10               M = 13
         1                                                         0.10
     0.5                                                                            0.05
                                                                   0.05


                                                     TV Distance
values


         0                                                         0.00             0.00
                 M = 15                M = 20                             M = 15               M = 20
         1
                                                                                   0.050
                                                                   0.05
     0.5                                                                           0.025

         00                                                        0.00             0.000
                  17.5     35     0     17.5    35
                          Support                                                  functions


Figure 7: Plots of ╬│ functions corresponding to optimized, subsampling (whose privacy guarantee is
reasoned through advanced composition), the data-independent ╬│ in randomized response and the
error in TV distance of the majority ensembling output of DaRRM with different ╬│ functions, when
K = 35, the number of subsamples M Ōłł {10, 20, 30, 40}, Ōłå = 10ŌłÆ5 , and ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ = 0.1.



F.1.2         C OMPARISON U NDER P URE DP S ETTINGS

Consider the pure differential privacy setting, where Ōłå = ╬┤ = 0. Note in such pure differential
privacy case, simple composition is tight. The subsampling baseline here outputs the majority of
m out of K subsampeld mechansisms (without replacement). The majority output of different
ensembling algorithms for comparison is required to be mŽĄ-differentially private. Furthermore, since
the number of constraints in our optimization framework is O(K 3 ) under pure differential privacy
(see Lemma 5.1), we can optimize DaRRM╬│ for aggregating a larger number K of mechanisms. In
this section, we present the simulation results for K Ōłł {11, 101} and compare the utility of three
majority ensembling algorithms: optimized DaRRM, subsampling and randomizied response, under
the same privacy loss.
Setting 1. K = 11, m Ōłł {1, 3, 5, 7}.



                           functions                                                Error
                  m=1                  m=3                                m=1                  m=3
         1                                                    0.200                  0.15
     0.5                                                      0.175                 0.10
                                                              0.150
                                                     TV Distance


                                                                                    0.05
values


         0
                  m=5                  m=7                                m=5                  m=7
         1
                                                                   0.10
                                                                                    0.05
     0.5                                                           0.05

         00                                                        0.00              0.00
                  5.5      11     0     5.5     11
                          Support                                                  functions


Figure 8: Plots of ╬│ functions corresponding to optimized, subsampling, the data-independent ╬│ in
randomized response and the error in TV distance of the majority ensembling output of DaRRM with
different ╬│ functions, when K = 11, m Ōłł {1, 3, 5, 7}, Ōłå = ╬┤ = 0.



Setting 2. K = 101, m Ōłł {10, 20, 30, 40}.


                                                 41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                functions                                                  Error
                   m = 10                   m = 20                               m = 10               m = 20
         1
                                                                                           0.10
     0.5                                                                  0.10
                                                                                           0.05
                                                                          0.05


                                                            TV Distance
         0
values



                   m = 30                   m = 40                                         0.00
                                                                          0.10   m = 30               m = 40
         1

                                                                          0.05             0.05
     0.5

         00                                                               0.00              0.00
                    50.5       101 0         50.5     101
                               Support                                                    functions


Figure 9: Plots of ╬│ functions corresponding to optimized, subsampling, the data-independent ╬│ in
randomized response and the error in TV distance of the majority ensembling output of DaRRM with
different ╬│ functions, when K = 101, m Ōłł {10, 20, 30, 40}, Ōłå = ╬┤ = 0.



F.1.3          C OMPARISON U NDER D IFFERENT P RIOR D ISTRIBUTIONS OF pi ŌĆÖ S

Recall pi = Pr[Mi (D) = 1], ŌłĆi Ōłł [K]. We stress that our optimization procedure applies to any
prior distribution of pi ŌĆÖs. Let U denote the distribution Uniform([0, 1]). We present results when
pi Ōł╝ U, ŌłĆi Ōłł [K], in the previous sections to show the performance of optimized DaRRM╬│ in the
most general case when we do not have any prior knowledge of the mechanisms Mi ŌĆÖs output, i.e., pi .
It is possible to consider a different prior distribution T of pi ŌĆÖs. If the true distribution of pi ŌĆÖs is closer
to T than U, than we get improved utility with the same privacy guarantee by optimizing ╬│ under T
than under U; otherwise, if the true distribution of pi is very different from T , we suffer utility loss.
To illustrate this point, consider the following experiment setting. Suppose our prior belief is that
each mechanism Mi has a clear tendency towards voting 0 or 1, i.e., pi is far from 0.5. Let the new
distribution T be Uniform([0, 0.3] Ōł¬ [0.7, 1]).
To optimize ╬│ under T , we change the approximate objective in Eq. 191, which optimizes ╬│ assuming
pi Ōł╝ U, to be the following, which optimizes ╬│ assuming pi Ōł╝ T , ŌłĆi Ōłł [K],
                                K  Z 1 Z 1      Z 1
                              1 X
                            ŌłÆ               ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę      (╬▒l ŌłÆ ╬▒KŌłÆl )dp1 dp2 . . . dpK ┬Ę ╬│(l)                      (194)
                              2 K+1 0.7 0.7      0.7
                                l=   2



Setting. K = 11, m Ōłł {3, 5}, ╬┤ = Ōłå = 0.
We compute the error of the optimized DaRRM╬│ in three different settings with three different actual
pi distributions:

             1. ŌĆ£Actual: Uniform([0, 1])ŌĆØ, which means we take pi Ōł╝ U, ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] when computing the
                error
             2. ŌĆ£Actual: Uniform([0, 0.1])ŌĆØ, which means we take pi Ōł╝ Uniform([0, 0.1]), ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] when
                computing the error
                This setting implies the mechanisms have a clear majority (of 0)
             3. ŌĆ£Actual: pi = 0.5ŌĆØ, which means we take pi = 0.5, ŌłĆi Ōłł [K] when computing the error
                This setting implies the mechanisms have no clear majority

Note since T is closer to the distribution in the second setting, we would expect DaRRM╬│ has a
lower error when ╬│ is optimized under T than under U in this setting. Also, since T is very different
from the distribution in the third setting, we would expect DaRRM╬│ has a lower error when ╬│ is
optimized under U than under T .


                                                         42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          functions
                      1.0                                                            Actual: pi Uniform([0, 1])
                      0.8                                                     0.14
                                         Optimized DaRRM w/ prior

        values


                                                                    TV Distance
                      0.6                Optimized DaRRM w/ prior             0.12    Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                                         Subsampling
                                                                              0.10    Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                                         Randomized Response
                      0.4                                                     0.08
                                                                                      Subsampling
                                                                                      Randomized Response
                      0.2                                                     0.06
                            0      2     4      6     8 10                    0.04
                                (a) ╬│ function (m = 3)                               (b) Uniform pi ŌĆÖs (m = 3)

                            Actual: pi Uniform([0, 0.1])                                    Actual: pi = 0.5
                  0.35            Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior                   0.08       Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                  0.30            Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior                   0.07       Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                                                                                         Subsampling
                                  Subsampling


                                                                    TV Distance
        TV Distance


                  0.25            Randomized Response                         0.06       Randomized Response
                  0.20                                                        0.05
                  0.15                                                        0.04
                  0.10
                  0.05                                                        0.03
                  0.00                                                        0.02
                            (c) Clear majority (m = 3)                            (d) No clear majority (m = 3)

                                          functions
                      1.0                                                            Actual: pi Uniform([0, 1])
                      0.9                                                     0.10
                                                                                         Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                      0.8                                                                Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                      0.7                                                                Subsampling
        values


                                                                              0.08
                                                                    TV Distance


                                                                                         Randomized Response
                      0.6                                                     0.06
                      0.5         Optimized DaRRM w/ prior
                      0.4         Optimized DaRRM w/ prior                    0.04
                      0.3         Subsampling
                                  Randomized Response                         0.02
                      0.2
                            0      2     4      6     8 10                    0.00
                                (e) ╬│ function (m = 5)                               (f) Uniform pi ŌĆÖs (m = 5)

                            Actual: pi Uniform([0, 0.1])                      0.06          Actual: pi = 0.5
                  0.25            Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior                              Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                                  Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior                   0.05       Optimized DaRRM_ w/ prior
                  0.20            Subsampling                                            Subsampling
                                                                    TV Distance
        TV Distance


                                  Randomized Response                         0.04       Randomized Response
                  0.15                                                        0.03
                  0.10                                                        0.02
                  0.05                                                        0.01
                  0.00                                                        0.00
                            (g) Clear majority (m = 5)                            (h) No clear majority (m = 5)

Figure 10: Comparison of the error of DaRRM╬│ with optimized ╬│ under two different prior distri-
butions of pi , i.e., U and T , in the setting where m Ōłł {3, 5}, K = 11. Observe that if the prior
distribution of pi we use when optimizing ╬│ is closer to the actual distribution, we have additional
utility gain (i.e., decreased error); otherwise, we suffer utility loss (i.e., increased error), compared to
optimize ╬│ under the uniform distribution U of pi over [0, 1]. Furthermore, regardless of the choice of
the prior distribution of pi , optimized DaRRM╬│ achieves a lower error compared to the two baselines:
Subsampling and Randomized Response.


                                                                    43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2   P RIVATE D ISTRIBUED S IGN -SGD

Notation. w(t) denotes the parameter of the model at the t-th communication round.
Additional Experiment Details. In our experiments, each client computes its gradient based on the
entire local dataset at each communication around. Also for simplicity, all clients are participated in
training at each round.

Algorithm 2 ╬▓-Stochastic Sign SGD (Algorithm 2 of Xiang & Su (2023b)) without client subsampling
 1: Input: K clients, T communication rounds, batch size n, hyperparameters B, ╬▓,
 2: Output: w(T )
 3: Initialization: w(0) ŌåÉ ┬Ą for each i Ōłł [K]
 4: for communication round t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 5:   Client:
 6:   for Client i Ōłł [K] do
                                                                              (n)
 7:      Each client i Ōłł [K] computes n stochastic gradients gi1 (t), . . . , gi (t)
 8:      for coordinate j = 1, 2, . . . , d do
                                                        Pn       (i)
                                          B+╬▓+clip{ 1        g
                                                       i=1 m,j         (t)}
 9:        g╠éi,j (t) ŌåÉ 1 with probability         n
                                                 2B+2╬▓                ; g╠é(t)i,j ŌåÉ ŌłÆ1 otherwise
10:      end for
11:      Report g╠éi (t) to the server.
12:   end for
13:   Server:
14:   On receiving one-bit encoded gradients g╠é1 (t), . . . , g╠éK (t) from the clients, compute g╠ā(t) ŌåÉ
      Aggregate({g╠éi (t)}K  i=1 )
15:   Send g╠ā(t) to all clients
16:   Upon receiving g╠ā(t): w(t + 1) ŌåÉ w(t) ŌłÆ ╬Ęg╠ā(t)
17: end for



Coordinate wise pure DP guarantee:
Theorem F.1 (Theorem 4 of Xiang & Su (2023b)). 0-StoSign is not differentially private. When ╬▓ > 0,
╬▓-StoSign is coordinate-wise log( 2B+╬▓                                                        2B+╬▓
                                    ╬▓ )-differentially private. That is, ╬▓-StoSign is d ┬Ę log( ╬▓ )-
differentially private.

F.3   P RIVATE S EMI - SUPERVISED K NOLWEDGE T RANSFER


Figure 11: Semi supervised knowledge transfer setting. This figure is adapted from Figure 1 of
PATE Papernot et al. (2017). Unlike PATE, we consider an untrustworthy aggregator and aggregate
private teachers through private majority ensembling.


                                                  44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


More Details About the Baseline GNMax Papernot et al. (2018)
The GNMax aggregation mechanism proceeds as follows (Section 4.1 of Papernot et al. (2018)): on
input x,
                              MŽā (x) = arg max{ni (x) + N (0, Žā 2 )}                             (195)
                                             i

where ni (x) is # teachers who vote for class i.
Note GNMax works perfectly in aggregating non-private teachers, in our setting, it does not exploit
the fact that each teacher is (ŽĄ, Ōłå)-differentially private. Hence, GNMax can add more noise than
necessary to ensure the final aggregated output is (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private, especially when ŽĄ is
small.
The privacy analysis Papernot et al. (2018) mainly focuses on computing the overall privacy loss
of multiple private majority ensembling queries, while our analysis focuses on the privacy loss of a
single-step aggregation from ŌĆ£prviateŌĆØ teachers. Note the privacy composition analysis in Papernot
et al. (2018) also applies to our setting to reason about the privacy loss through multiple queries.
How to set Žā in GNMax?
Section 4.1 of Papernot et al. (2018) states the GNMax mechanism is (╬╗, ╬╗/Žā 2 )-Renyi differentially
private (RDP), for all ╬╗ Ōēź 1.
Although there is a data-dependent bound for GNMax that is tighter than the above mentioned
RDP bound in Section 4.1 and in Appendix A of Papernot et al. (2018), according to Corollary 11
of Papernot et al. (2018), this analysis applies to majority voting when the number of output classes
is Ōēź 3, which does not directly apply to our binary-output case. Hence, we use the data-independent
RDP bound for GNMax.
The following theorem shows the relationship between RDP and differential privacy (DP):
Theorem F.2 (RDP to DP (Theorem 5 of Papernot et al. (2018))). If a mechanism M guarantees
(╬╗, ŽĄ)-RDP, then M guarantees (ŽĄ + log 1/╬┤
                                     ╬╗ŌłÆ1 , ╬┤)-differential privacy for ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1).


Therefore, GNMax with parameter Žā 2 guarantees ( Žā╬╗2 + log    1/╬┤
                                                            ╬╗ŌłÆ1 , ╬┤)-differential privacy, ŌłĆ╬╗ Ōēź 1. Now,
if we want the aggregated output to be (mŽĄ, ╬┤)-differentially private, the Žā 2 in GNMax can be set as
follows: 1) Since the above holds for all ╬╗ Ōēź 1, we first pick a proper ╬╗ that does not cause numerical
instability and that ensures Žā 2 > 0 by setting ╬╗ = logŽĄ1/╬┤ + 5. 2) Now set Žā 2 = ╬╗/(ŽĄ ŌłÆ log    1/╬┤
                                                                                              ╬╗ŌłÆ1 ) by
the above theorem.


                                                   45
