Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OCATARI : O BJECT-C ENTRIC ATARI 2600
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING E NVIRONMENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Cognitive science and psychology suggest that object-centric representations of
         complex scenes are a promising step towards enabling efficient abstract reason-
         ing from low-level perceptual features. Yet, most deep reinforcement learn-
         ing approaches rely on only pixel-based representations that do not capture the
         compositional properties of natural scenes. For this, we need environments
         and datasets that allow us to work and evaluate object-centric approaches. We
         present OCAtari, a set of environment that provides object-centric state repre-
         sentations of Atari games, the most-used evaluation framework for deep RL ap-
         proaches. OCAtari also allows for RAM state manipulations of the games to
         change and create specific or even novel situations. Our source code is available at
         https://anonymous.4open.science/r/OCAtari-52B9 .


1    I NTRODUCTION

In order to solve complex tasks, humans first extract object-centred representations that enable them to
draw conclusions while simultaneously blocking out interfering factors (Grill-Spector & Kanwisher,
2005; Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Lake et al., 2017). Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents cannot
provide any object-centric intermediate representations, necessary to check if a suboptimal behavior
is caused by misdetections, wrong object identifications, or a reasoning failure. Such representations
also permit simpler knowledge transfer between humans and learning agents, or among different
tasks, reducing the number of needed samples (Dubey et al., 2018). Object-centricity also permits to
use logic to encode the policy, leading to interpretable agents with better generalization capability
(Delfosse et al., 2023). Numerous studies on RL research highlight the importance of object-centricity
(cf. Figure 1), notably in elucidating agent reasoning, prevent misalignment, and potentially correct
them (di Langosco et al., 2022). Notably, studies such as Wu et al. (2023); Zhong et al. leverage
Language Model-based Learning to realign agents, relying on natural language descriptions of
environment goals with great success. This underscores the need to enhance our understanding of
RL agents behavior and to ensure their proper alignment with the intended objectives. According to
these studies, the object-centric station extraction is a necessary step to achieve it.
Since the introduction of the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) by Bellemare et al. (2013), Atari
2600 games have become the most common set of environments to test and evaluate RL algorithms,
as depicted in Figure 1. As RL methods are challenging to evaluate, compare and reproduce,
benchmarks need to encompass a variety of different tasks and challenges to allow for balancing
advantages and drawbacks of the different approaches (Henderson et al., 2018; Pineau et al., 2021).
ALE games incorporate many RL challenges, such as difficult credit assignment (Skiing), sparse
reward (Montezuma’s Revenge, Pitfall), and allow for testing approaches with different focuses,
such as partial observability (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015), generalization (Farebrother et al., 2018),
sample efficiency (Espeholt et al., 2018), environment modeling (Hafner et al., 2021; Schrittwieser
et al., 2020), ...etc. Most of the existing object-centric RL frameworks (Kolve et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2021) are concerned with robots solving domestic tasks or navigation systems. Object-centric ALE
environments would bring all previously discussed benefits and facilitate future comparisons between
classic pixel-based approaches and object-centric ones.
Lake et al. (2017) illustrated that deep agents lack the ability to break down the world into multi-step
sub-goals, such as acquiring certain objects while avoiding others. In response, they introduced the
Frostbite challenge to assess that RL agents integrate such human-like capabilities. Badia et al. (2020)
showed that current ALE agents are suboptimal and suggested the use of enhanced representations.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Atari + RL     Object-Centric + RL    OC + Atari
                                                                      4500
                                    200                               4000
                                                                      3500
                                    150                               3000
                                                                      2500
                                    100                                400
                                                                       300
                                     50
                                                                       200
                                      0                                100
                                                                         0
                                           2014 2016 2018 2020 2022           2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
                                                    Year                                 Year


Figure 1: RL research needs Object-Centric Atari environments. The Atari Learning Environ-
ments (ALE) is, by far, the most used RL benchmark among the ones listed on paperswithcode.
com (left). Publications using ALE are increasing, together with the number of papers concerned on
object-centric RL. As no Object-centric ALE is available yet, the amount of papers on object-centric
approaches in Atari is however negligible. Data queried using dimensions.ai, based on keyword
occurrence in title and abstract (center) or in full text (left and right).

As no such benchmark to test object-centric methods exists yet, we introduce OCAtari, a set of
object-centric versions of the ALE games. OCAtari runs the ALE environments while maintaining
a list of the objects present in the games, together with their properties. It represents an adequate
benchmark for training and comparing upcoming object-centric RL algorithms.
Our framework can be used within object-centric RL algorithms, making it a ressource-efficient
replacement for object discovery methods. To train and evaluate these object discovery methods, we
also propose the Object-centric Dataset for Atari (ODA), that uses OCAtari to generate a set of Atari
frames, together with the properties of the objects present in each game.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
    • We introduce OCAtari, a RL framework to train and evaluate object-detection and object-centered
      RL methods on the widely-used Arcade Learning Environment.
    • To ease the comparison of object-discovery methods, we introduce ODA, an object-centric dataset,
      where frames from Atari games are collected using random and DQN agents, together with their
      object-centric states.
    • We evaluate OCAtari and demonstrate that allows to easily generate new challenges for existing
      Atari-trained method, changing, e.g. , object behavior within the games.
We start by introducing the Object-Centric Atari framework. We then experimentally evaluate its
detection and speed performances. Before concluding, we touch upon related work.

2      T HE O BJECT-C ENTRIC ATARI E NVIRONMENTS
We here discuss what objects are and how they can be used in RL, then introduce the OCAtari
benchmark. Finally, we show how OCAtari helps to generate new versions of the Atari games.

2.1     U SING O BJECT-C ENTRIC D ESCRIPTIONS TO L EARN

According to the scientific literature (Thiel, 2011), objects are defined as physical entities that possess
properties, attributes, and behaviors that can be observed, measured, and described. Reasoning relies
on objects as the fundamental building blocks for our understanding of the world (Rettler & Bailey,
2017). Breaking down the world into objects enables abstraction, generalization, cognitive efficiency,
understanding of cause and effect, clear communication, logical inference, and more (see Appendix A
for further details). Essentially, objects provide structure, order, and a shared reference point for
thinking and communication. They enable us to break down complex situations into manageable
components, analyze their interactions, and make informed decisions. The process of reasoning
with objects is considered fundamental to human cognition (Spelke et al., 1992; Grill-Spector &
Kanwisher, 2005; Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Lake et al., 2017).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, the concept of an object may vary depending on the situation. Object-centric learning often
involves bounding boxes that contain objects and distinguish them from the background (Lin et al.,
2020; Delfosse et al., 2022). Static objects, such as the maze in MsPacman or the limiting walls in
Pong, are typically considered as part of the background. In this approach, we consider objects to
be sufficiently small elements, relative to the agent, with which the agents can interact. Excluding
"background objects" when learning to play Pong with object-centric inputs is not problematic.
However, it can lead to problems when learning to play games like MsPacman. The learning
structure should automatically detect and encode game boundaries, but it may have difficulties
with the constraints of maze structures. In some settings, it is necessary to provide a background
representation. Thus, OCAtari provides both renderings and object-centric descriptions of the states.

                                                                VEM                     REM
2.2   T HE OCATARI FRAMEWORK
                                                                                          RAM
In OCAtari, every object is defined by its category
(e.g. “Pacman”), position (x and y), size (w and h),
and its rgb values. Objects may have additional
characteristics such as orientation (e.g. the Player
in Skiing, cf. Figure 4) or value (e.g. oxygen bars
                                                                                  -49
or scores) if required. Objects vital for gameplay
                                                                                         -14
are distinguished from those that are components of
the Head-up-Display (HUD) or User Interface (UI)
elements (e.g. score, number of lives). Generally           Player at (25, 76), (4, 15)
speaking, the role of HUD objects is to provide             Enemy at (145, 91), (4, 15)
additional information about the performance of the         Ball at (76, 78), (2, 4)
playing agent. Although learning agents are capable
of ignoring such elements, in our environments a            PlayerScore at (104, 1), (4, 20)
boolean parameter is available to filter out HUD            EnemyScore at (36, 1), (12, 20)
related elements. A list of the considered objects for
each game can be found in Appendix F.
                                                 Figure 2: OCAtari can extract object-centric
To extract objects, OCAtari uses either a Vision descriptions using two methods: the RAM
Extraction Method (VEM) or a RAM Extraction Extraction method (REM) and the Vision Ex-
Method (REM), that are depicted in Figure 2.     traction method (VEM).
VEM: the Vision Extraction Method. The most straightforward method for extracting objects
from Atari game frames involves using simple computer vision techniques. Considering the limited
accessible RAM available to Atari developers, most objects are defined by a restricted set of pre-
established colors (i.e., RGB values). At each stage, objects are extracted using color-based filtering
and an object position priority. Pong consists of three primary objects and two HUD objects, each
assigned a single RGB value (cf. Figure 2). The opponent always appears above the white threshold,
and their paddle is always within the red rectangle. Using this technique, it is possible to accurately
extract all present objects. Please note that the detection only detects what is visible in the frame, not
objects that are blinking, overlapping, etc.
REM: the RAM Extraction Method. ALE provides the state of the emulator’s RAM, which contains
information about the games’ objects. This has led Sygnowski & Michalewski (2016) to use the RAM
as states for RL agents. However, much of the non-relevant information is present in the RAM for
the policy (e.g. time counter, HUD element information). Several games, for example, use bitmaps or
encode various information quantities such as object orientation, offset from the anchor, and object
category together within one byte. These noisy inputs removes easy interpretation possibilities for
these agents behaviors. To address these problems, Anand et al. (2019) have proposed AtariARI, a
wrapper around some Atari environments, that provides some the RAM positions, describing where
some specific information is encoded. Nonetheless, raw RAM information is not enough. Take, for
instance, in Kangaroo, the player’s position corresponds to various RAM values, that also encode
its heights using categorical values. Simply providing some uninfluenced RAM positions does not
reflect the object-centric state. Similar to AtariARI, REM extracts the information from the RAM,
but processes it to directly provide an interpretable object-centric state, that matches the one of VEM
(cf. Figure 2). To determine how the game’s program processes the RAM information, we task human,
random, or DQN agents with playing the games while using VEM to track the depicted objects. We
then establish correlations between objects properties (e.g. positions) and each of the 128 bytes of the


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Games supported by AtariARI and OCAtari. ✓ describes that all necessary information
about the objects are given. ∼ denotes that some necessary information to play the game is lacking.
We provide detailed explanation for each of these games in Appendix I. All games missing in this
table are neither supported by AtariARI nor OCAtari yet.


 BattleZone


  FishingD.
  Asteroids


  Frostbite


  PrivateE.

  RiverRaid
 Montezum.
 Ms.Pacman
 Centipede
 ChopperC.


 IceHockey


 SpaceInv.
   Atlantis


   Breakout
   Carnival


  Seaquest
  Kangaroo
   Assault
   Asterix


   Berzerk


   Pitfall


   VideoP.


                                                                                                   Sum of G.
   DemonA.


   Venture
   Bowling
   Extraction


   CrazyC.


   Freeway
    Amidar


    RoadR.



    Tennis
    BeamR.


    YarsR.
    Boxing


    Gopher


    Skiing
    Q∗Bert
     Alien
    Method


     Hero


     Pong
 ARI           ✓        ✓✓ ✓✓              ∼    ✓ ✓    ∼      ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ∼ ∼      ∼   ∼ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 16 (22)
REM ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ∼   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ∼ 36 (38)
VEM ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 39


Atari RAM representation. We can also modify each RAM byte and track the resulting changes in
the rendered frames. All these scripts are documented and released along with this paper.
REM, being based on semantic information, is capable of tracking moving objects. Conversely, VEM
only furnishes consecutive object-centric descriptions where the lists of objects are independently
extracted for each state. REM thus enables tracking of blinking objects and moving instances, as
proven useful for RL approaches using tracklets (Agnew & Domingos, 2020; Liu et al., 2021).
The OCAtari package. We provide an easy-to-use documented1 ocatari package. OCAtari is
designed as a wrapper around the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013). ALE
supports is the primary, most-used framework for testing deep RL methods. To ease its use, ALE was
integrated in the OpenAI gymnasium package. To allow an easy swap between ALE and OCAtari
environments, we follow the design and naming of the ALE and have reimplemented methods from
the ALE framework for OCAtari (e.g. step, render, seed, . . . ). In addition, we added new
methods like get_ram and set_ram, to easily allow RAM manipulation. OCAtari also provide
a buffer that contains the last 4 transformed (i.e. black and white, 84×84) frames of the game, as
it has become a standard of state representations, notably used in, e.g. , DQN (Mnih et al., 2015),
DDQN (van Hasselt et al., 2016) and Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018) algorithms.
As shown in Table 1, our image processing method VEM covers 39 games, while REM covers 38
games at the time of writing. While these already constitute a diverse set of environments, we will
continue to add newly supported games in both REM and VEM and complete what we have started.
OCAtari is also openly accessible under the MIT license.
ODA, an Object-centric Dataset for Atari. OCAtari enables training policies using an object-
centric approach to describe RL states for various Atari games. It can serve as a fast and dependable
alternative to methods that discover objects. To compare object-centric agents to classic deep ones, it
is necessary to train an object detection method and integrate it into the object-centric playing agent,
e.g. , as shown by Delfosse et al. (2022). To train and compare the object detection methods, we
introduce the Object-centric Dataset for Atari (ODA), a preset selection of frames from the Atari
games covered by OCAtari. For each game, ODAs incorporates sequential states, where for each
state, the 210 × 160 RGB frame is stored with the list of objects found by both VEM and REM
procedure (otherwise the game sequence is discarded). The HUD elements are separated from the
game objects. Every additional object information contained from the RAM is also saved. As
trained agents with varying capabilities can expose different parts of the environment, especially in
progressive games where agents must achieve a certain level of mastery to reveal new parts of the
game, it is necessary to fix the agents that are used to capture these frames (Delfosse et al., 2021).
The frames are extracted using both a random and a trained DQN agent to cover numerous possible
states within each game, that should incorporate states encountered by learning agents. In many
games, e.g. , Montezuma’s Revenge or Kangaroo, such agents are not good enough to access every
level of the game. However, as the level part is also stored in RAM, we let the agent start in different
part of the game by manipulating the RAM. We choose to build our dataset out of 30% of games
from the random agent and 70% of the games based on the DQN agent. All needed information, as
well as the models used to generate ODA, are provided within the OCAtari repository.

   1
       https://anonymous.4open.science/r/OCAtari-52B9


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Manipulating the RAM can introduce novelty into known games such as Pong. Using
the information gathered by the RAM mode, OCAtari is able to manipulate the RAM representation
of a state and change game elements or behavior in real time, without recompiling the game. On the
left side, we introduce hard-fire Pong, a version where the player can “fire” the ball to increase its
velocity. On the right side, we introduce no-shield space invaders.
2.3      C REATING NEW C HALLENGES VIA RAM A LTERING .

Modified Atari games are ideal for testing continual reinforcement learning properties with less effort
than creating new environments. ALE also allow to alter the RAM values, enabling us to alter the
games inner workings. However, modifying game behavior requires a deep understanding of how
the RAM information values are processed. OCAtari’ REM module makes this process transparent,
showing e.g. how to derive the objects’ positions from anchors and offsets.
This allows us to easily modify games, to e.g. reenable multiplayer interfaces and train adversarial
policies in games like Pong or Tennis. We also created a modified Pong variant (cf. Figure 3, left), in
which players can increase the ball speed by pressing the fire button. Similar adaptations introduce
unique dynamics, introduce new goals or modify the objects colors. Another example is a more
difficult version of SpaceInvaders, without the shields (cf. Figure 3, right).
These adaptable environments aid the development and improvement of both pixel-based and OC
approaches, addressing challenges like interpretability and robustnes (Delfosse et al., 2023), or
generalization (Farebrother et al., 2018). They can also contribute to develop continual RL methods,
as done by Tomilin et al. (2023) on Doom.

3       E VALUATING OCATARI
In this section, we first present the evaluation of the detection and speed performance of our OCAtari
methods. We then explain how REM can be used to train all the parts of object-centric RL agents.
Finally, we compare OCAtari to AtariARI.
Setup. To evaluate the detection capabilities of REM, we use a random agent (that represents any
untrained RL agent), as well as a DQN and, if available, a C51 agent (Bellemare et al., 2017), both
obtained from Gogianu et al. (2022)2 . For reproducibility, every used agent is provided with our along
with our codebase. The RL experiments utilized the PPO implementation from stable-baselines3
(Raffin et al., 2021) on a 40 GB DGX A100 server. In each seeded run, 1 critic and 8 actors are utilized
per seed over 10M frames. The seeds used were 0, 8, and 16. Training all seeds simultaneously took
about 2 hours. Since these experiments do not involve visual representation learning, we utilize an
2 × 64 MLP architecture with the hyperbolic tangent as the activation function. This MLP policy
architecture is the default for PPO in stable-baselines3. As developing RL agents is not our focus, we
did not conduct any fine-tuning or hyperparameter search. Doing so improved the sample efficiency
of OC agents in Pong. Further details on these experiments can be found in Appendix D.

3.1      E VALUATING OCATARI FOR O BJECT E XTRACTION

Correctness and Completeness of the Object Extraction. Atari 2600 games were mainly produced
in the 1980s. Due to limitations in memory size, memory access speed, and CPU frequency. Thus, the
RAM status is quite different from the object-centric approach that may be used today. Furthermore,
certain games, like Riverraid, encode bitmaps over some objects with many information parts (i.e.,
    2
        https://github.com/floringogianu/atari-agents


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Qualitative evaluation of OCAtari’s REM. Frames from our OCAtari framework on 5
environments (Pong, Skiing, SpaceInvaders, MsPacman, FishingDerby). Bounding boxes surround
the detected objects. REM automatically detects blinking (MsPacman), occluded (FishingDerby)
objects, and ignore e.g. exploded objects (SpaceInvaders) that vision methods falsely can pick up.

Table 2: REM reliably detects the objects within the frames of each developed games. Measuring
precision, Recall, F1-Score and IOU of REM (using VEM as baseline) in a diverse set of Atari games.
Random and DQN agents were used to capture a large varivety of state spaces. High values being
displayed in blue going over green to red for low values. For a more detailed table, cf. Appendix F.


                 MontezumaR.
                 CrazyClimber
                 DemonAttack
                 FishingDerby


                 YarsRevenge
                 VideoPinball
                 RoadRunner
                 BattleZone


                 MsPacman
                 ChopperC.


                 PrivateEye
                 IceHockey
                 Centipede


                 Kangaroo


                                                                                                    Scale (%)
                 SpaceInv.
                 Asteroids


                 Riverraid
                 Breakout


                 Frostbite


                 Seaquest
                 Bowling


                 Freeway
                 Carnival
                 Atlantis
                 Berzerk


                 Venture
                 Amidar
                 Assault


                 Gopher
                 Asterix


                 Boxing


                 Tennis
                 Skiing
                 Pitfall


                 Qbert
                 Alien


                 Pong
                 Hero


         Prec.                                                                                     100
Random


         Rec.
         F1
         IOU
         Prec.
DQN


         Rec.
         F1
         IOU                                                                                           0


object class, positional offset from an anchor, orientation, staticity) contained within a single byte.
It is essential to evaluate whether REM can detect objects accurately and consistently if we aim
to use it to train RL agents. We apply the REM of the OCAtari on each supported game for
quantitative evaluations, using VEM as the “ground truth”, where we used human reviewers to
check the correctness and completeness of our output. Frames are sampled using the random and
DQN agents. We then compare the object-centric states of both extraction methods (VEM and
REM) to check for any differences. For each game, we let the agents play until 500 frames were
collected. A prevalent metric for evaluating detection performance is the intersection over union
(IOU) (Rezatofighi et al., 2019). However, this metric becomes irrelevant for small objects (such as
the ball in e.g. Pong, Tennis, or missiles in e.g. Atlantis, Space Invaders), as these objects have a
size below 4 pixels. Thus, we also calculate precision, recall, and F1-scores for each object category
in every game. For these metrics, an object is considered correctly detected if it is within 5 pixels of
the center for both detection methods.
In Table 2, we report these metrics, in percentage, averaged over every object category. A perfect
score here means that every object-centered state extrated using REM is identical to the VEM ones
(i.e. that every detected object is obtained with both method for every frame). A lower precision
means that some objects detected using REM are not detected by VEM. In MsPacman, the ghost
can blink and objects can overlap, which explains why the precision in this game is slightly lower.
This can be observed in the per-category tables (cf. Appendix F). The mean F1-score, however, is
an effective indicator of the overall performance, as it assesses both previously mentioned metrics,
using a harmonic mean to find a balance between minimizing false positives and false negatives. In
general, the table results indicate that the games included in REM have exceptionally high detection
performance. We opted to allow the RAM extraction method to monitor concealed objects, regardless
of its effects on the precision of our framework, as it can be used to train object tracking methods that
employ tracklets (e.g., Agnew & Domingos 2020) or Kalman filters (e.g., Welch et al. 1995). The


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


slight differences in ball position and size, which do not impact gameplay, cause the small IOU in
Pong and Tennis. Another reason for misdetection is typically due to object occlusion behind the
background or that, in many games, the game environment freezes after specific events, such as when
a point is scored or when the player dies. In some cases, objects are missing from a few frames, but
our RAM extraction approach keeps them listed as objects. Although this decreases the detection
scores, it does not affect RL agents since, for these frames, the environment is not interactive.
In Table 3, we compare the detection performances (F-scores) of REM (94%) to two object-centric
representation methods (OCR) used on Atari games: SPACE (31%) and SPOC (77%). REM
obtains better performances than both. As explained by Delfosse et al. (2022), the detection of such
small objects by neural networks remains a challenge, as Atari games entities are composed of few
pixels. OCAtari directly does not extract representation, but provides the object classes (from the
deterministic RAM information process), that can be used to train the such classifiers.
Comparing the RAM and Visual Extraction Method. As explained in the previous section, REM
has many advantages over VEM, but relies on an accurate understanding of the game mechanics
and their reproduction in the code. REM can track blinking or overlapping objects, and its most
significant advantage over VEM is the computational efficiency of the RAM extraction procedure.
This is because REM does not needs to process color filtering for each object category, enabling fast
and energy-efficient training of object-centric agents. Getting object-centric descriptions of the states
using REM is on average 50 times faster than visual object detection (cf. Figure 8 in Appendix J).
However, REM can also find elements that are not visually represented. This does not have to be a
disadvantage, but it is a clear difference to simple visually based approaches not using any tracking.
Overall, VEM can be the better choice, if the goal is to extract only visible objects. However, to track
objects, REM is a better choice, as it is necessary to distinguish e.g. two overlapping blinking objects
from a non-blinking entity. In cases where time or costs are important, like in training and using
object-centric RL methods, REM should be preferred over VEM.

3.2   U SING OCATARI AND ODA TO TRAIN O BJECT- CENTRIC RL AGENTS

To fully evaluate that OCAtari allows training object-centric RL agents, we directly trained RL agents
using our REM with 3 seeded Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) agents in 5 different environments.
We provide these agents only with the positional information of the objects. Specifically, these
correspond to the x and y positions of each object detected in the last two frames. Our trained models
are available in our public repository. As depicted in Figure 5, OCAtari allows simple PPO agents to
learn to master Atari games, showing that these environments can be used to train object-centric RL
agents. Our framework can be used for evaluating more adapted object-centric RL methods.
Overall, we have shown that OCAtari can be used to train or evaluate any part of an object-centric RL
agent. ODA can be used to train the object detection methods that extract objects (i.e. position and
internal representations or embeddings), but also to train classifiers that extract categories from the
extracted embeddings or be used in supervised learning directly. Since REM allows object tracking, it
can be used to train or evaluate Kalman filters or tracklets methods. Lastly, OCAtari allows (especially
with REM) to be used directly as part of object-centric methods.

3.3   OCATARI VS ATARI ARI

Before comparing the two frameworks in more detail, it should be noted that both approaches rely
on extracting information in RAM. Anand et al. (2019) used commented disassembled source code
of various Atari games for their AtariARI framework to find the corresponding RAM location of
objects and to annotate the RAM state. In doing so, AtariARI annotated every piece of information
found in the code. Unfortunately, providing only the RAM positions is often not enough to get a
directly human-interpretable, object-centric description of the state. As shown in Figure 2, even when
positions are encoded directly, offsets are applied to objects during the rendering phase. We also
found that for some games the information provided by AtariARI is incomplete or insufficient to play
the game (cf. Table 1 and Appendix I). OCAtari involves intricate computations, such as deriving
the x and y positions from anchors and offsets, looking up potential presence indicators (e.g. for
objects that have been destroyed), ensuring that our models genuinely acquire object-centric state
descriptions. This allows to directly apply human interpretable concepts (e.g. closeby, below,
. . . ) and thus use e.g. logical reasoning to play the game, as done by Delfosse et al. (2023). OCAtari is


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Game          SPACE      SPOC      REM
                                                               Boxing         24.5       70.5     90.1
                                                               Carnival       48.6       90.6     93.7
                                                               MsPacm.         0.4       90.5     87.4
                                                               Pong           10.7       87.4     94.3
                                                               Riverraid      45.0       76.6     95.7
                                                               SpaceInv.      87.5       85.2     96.9
                                                               Tennis          3.6       40.2     99.3
                                                               Average        31.5       77.3     93.9


Figure 5: OCAtari (REM) permits learning of                  Table 3: Object detection is still challeng-
object-centric (OC) RL agents. The OC PPO agents             ing in Atari. SPACE and SPOC (Delfosse
perform similar to the pixel-based PPO (Deep) agents’        et al., 2022), object detection SOTA, are
and humans on 5 Atari games.                                 inferior, in terms of F1 scores.

already covering (19) more games, and we are adapting the rest of the Atari 2600 game collection of
ALE. Finally, as explained in our methods section, OCAtari allows the user to easily create variations
of the existing games by manipulating the RAM state.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Using Atari as a test bed for deep reinforcement learning has a well-established history. Perhaps best-
known here is the work by Mnih et al. (2015), who introduced DQN by testing it on 7 different Atari
2600 games. In the following years, Atari was repeatedly used as a test bed for various approaches,
well-known ones being Rainbow DQN or Rainbow Hessel et al. (2018), Dreamer-V2 (Hafner et al.,
2020), MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020), Agent57 (Badia et al., 2020) or GDI (Fan et al., 2021).
Although RL has achieved fantastic performance in Atari, we still have a lot of challenges left, like
the exploration problem (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ecoffet et al., 2019; 2021), efficiency (Kapturowski
et al., 2022), planning with sparse or weak rewards (Hafner et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 2020).
Atari is still a challenging and important environment, not only for humans, but also for RL (Toro-
manoff et al., 2019). Besides classical benchmarks, that deal with the agents’ playing strength and
try to reach higher and higher scores, we need other benchmarks, e.g. , including the efficiency of
learning (Machado et al., 2018). In recent years, more benchmarks have been introduced. Toromanoff
et al. (2019) and Fan (2021) have both proposed benchmarks for DRL in Atari which add additional
metrics to measure performance. Atari 100k, introduced by Kaiser et al. (2020), limits the sample
number to test efficiency. Aitchison et al. (2023) have selected small but representative subsets of
5 ALE environments, that will soon be part of OCAtari. Shao et al. (2022) introduced a partial
observable Atari benchmark, called Mask Atari, designed to test specifically POMDPs. Anand et al.
(2019) introduced AtariARI, an environment for representation learning, which we used as inspiration
for this work. A detailed comparison with AtariARI can be found in section 3.3.
Object-centric (or centered) RL involves breaking down raw pixel states into distinct objects and
considering their interactions and relationships. This helps to deal with problems like sample
inefficiency or missgeneralization (Zambaldi et al., 2019; Mambelli et al., 2022; Stanić et al., 2022).
Following the idea of object-centricity, the usage of object-centered representations (OCR), e.g. ,
Eslami et al. (2016); Kosiorek et al. (2018); Jiang & Luo (2019); Greff et al. (2019); Engelcke et al.
(2020); Lin et al. (2020); Locatello et al. (2020); Kipf et al. (2022); Elsayed et al. (2022); Singh et al.
(2022a;b) instead of single-vector state representation, used by e.g. , Mnih et al. (2015); Hessel et al.
(2018) tackle some of the open challenges mentioned above and showing promising results. OCR
is diverse, and the evaluations are often specific to their domain and target, like reconstruction loss,
segmentation quality or object property prediction (Dittadi et al., 2022; Yoon et al., 2023). Existing
object-centric environments are VirtualHome (Puig et al., 2018), AI2-THOR (Kolve et al., 2017) or
iGibson 2.0 (Li et al., 2021). While these excel in providing realistic 3D environments conducive
to AI research, they introduce high-dimensional observations and emphasizes physical interactions,
particularly suitable for robotics-oriented studies. However, ALE’s prevalence, relatively low-


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dimensional state representation, and diverse task sets make it a preferred choice for benchmarking
and comparisons, facilitating the evaluation of both pixel-based and object-centric approaches. A few
methods regarding OCR, e.g. , AtariARI (Anand et al., 2019), SPACE (Lin et al., 2020) as well as
SPOC (Delfosse et al., 2022), have already used Atari games as benchmark.

5   D ISCUSSION
The main aim is to create an environment for object-centric learning. We primarily evaluate OCAtari’s
object detection accuracy, with a slight exploration of applications like training simple RL agents and
generating challenging environments. Results show how RAM-stored information can create new
challenges for existing agents. OCAtari is versatile, suitable for training object-tracking methods and
developing new object-centric RL approaches. The provided repository includes scripts for locating
and analyzing RAM representation information, offering an information bottleneck in the form of
object lists rather than exhaustive details per game. While evaluating performance using the ALE is
one of the most recognized benchmarks in RL, these evaluations are not without flaws, as explained
by Agarwal et al. (2021). The noisy scores do not linearly reflect the agents’ learning ability. These
games are also created to be played by humans and thus offer many shortcut learning possibilities.
Directly evaluating the representations performance helps to understand and measure the quality of
the learned internal representation and minimize other effects within the training, as proposed by
Stooke et al. (2021). The object-centricity offered by OCAtari also allows providing extra information
to the algorithms, such as an additional reward signal based on the distance between e.g. the ball
and the player’s paddle in Pong, or to add other performance measures (e.g. how high has the player
going in Kangaroo). This could be an interesting idea of how to use OCAtari for reward shaping.
Societal and environmental impact. This work introduces a set of RL environments. While OCAtari
can be used for training object-tracking algorithms, there’s a potential risk if misapplied. However, its
main impact lies in advancing transparent object-centric RL methods. This can enhance understanding
of agents’ decision-making and reduce misalignment issues, potentially uncovering existing biases
in learning algorithms with societal consequences. We do not incorporate and have not found any
personal or offensive content in our framework.
Limitations. In our work, we have highlighted some advantages of object-centricity and created a
framework with OCAtari that manages to extract the objects from a variety of Atari games. However,
we are limited in the amount of information we can extract. In most games, there are hardcoded
static elements. For instance, the x-position of the paddles in Pong or the maze in MsPacman, such
information is usually not found in the RAM representation because it is hard-coded within the game
program. As such, we cannot extract this information, or only partially. However, this information
being static, it could be learned, but the maze being displayed in MsPacman helps understand that
Pacman cannot move through it. An interesting consideration here would be whether a combination of
our two modes, object-centricity and vision, can be used to extract not only objects but also important
information from the backgrounds. Using this additional information like the position of objects in
MsPacman to run A* or similar path finding algorithms could also be an interesting way forward.

6   C ONCLUSION
Representing scenes in terms of objects and their relations is a crucial human ability that allows
one to focus on the essentials when reasoning. While object-centric reinforcement learning and
unsupervised detection algorithms are increasingly successful, we lack benchmarks and datasets to
evaluate and compare such methods. OCAtari fills this gap and provides an easy-to-use diverse set
of environments to test object-centric learning on many Atari games. Overall, we hope our work
inspires other researchers to look into object-centric approaches, allowing for more interpretable
algorithms that humans can interact with in the future. OCAtari will also permit scientists to create
novel challenges among existing Atari games, usable on object-centric, deep or hybrid approaches.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
William Agnew and Pedro M. Domingos. Relevance-guided modeling of object dynamics for
 reinforcement learning. arXiv: Learning, 2020.
Matthew Aitchison, Penny Sweetser, and Marcus Hutter. Atari-5: Distilling the arcade learning
 environment down to five games. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
 Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine
 Learning, ICML, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R. Devon
  Hjelm. Unsupervised state representation learning in atari. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
 Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, volume
 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 2013.
Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi
 Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle Guyon, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, 2016.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Confer-
 ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2017.
Quentin Delfosse, Patrick Schramowski, Martin Mundt, Alejandro Molina, and Kristian Kersting.
 Adaptive rational activations to boost deep reinforcement learning. 2021.
Quentin Delfosse, Wolfgang Stammer, Thomas Rothenbacher, Dwarak Vittal, and Kristian Kersting.
  Boosting object representation learning via motion and object continuity. CoRR, 2022.
Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and
  explainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. 2023.
Lauro Langosco di Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D. Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal
  misgeneralization in deep reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka,
  Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML, 2022.
Andrea Dittadi, Samuele S. Papa, Michele De Vita, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ole Winther, and Francesco
  Locatello. Generalization and robustness implications in object-centric learning. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland,
  USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2022.
Rachit Dubey, Pulkit Agrawal, Deepak Pathak, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Alexei A. Efros. Investigating
  human priors for playing video games. In ICML, 2018.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
  new approach for hard-exploration problems. 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nat., 2021.
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, Michael C. Mozer,
  and Thomas Kipf. Savi++: Towards end-to-end object-centric learning from real-world videos.
  2022.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R. Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. GENESIS: generative
 scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.
S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with
  generative models. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle Guyon,
  and Roman Garnett (eds.), Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jennifer G.
  Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
Jiajun Fan. A review for deep reinforcement learning in atari: Benchmarks, challenges, and solutions.
   2021.
Jiajun Fan, Changnan Xiao, and Yue Huang. GDI: rethinking what makes reinforcement learning
   different from supervised learning. 2021.
Jesse Farebrother, Marlos C. Machado, and Michael Bowling. Generalization and regularization in
  DQN. CoRR, 2018.
Florin Gogianu, Tudor Berariu, Lucian Bus, oniu, and Elena Burceanu. Atari agents, 2022. URL
  https://github.com/floringogianu/atari-agents.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Chris Burgess, Daniel Zoran,
  Loic Matthey, Matthew M. Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov
  (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Kalanit Grill-Spector and Nancy Kanwisher. Visual recognition: As soon as you know it is there, you
  know what it is. Psychological Science, 2005.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learn-
  ing behaviors by latent imagination. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2021.
Matthew J. Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps. In
 2015 AAAI Fall Symposia, Arlington, Virginia, USA. AAAI Press, 2015.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the
  30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium
  on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
  February 2-7, 2018, pp. 3207–3214, 2018.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengyao Jiang and Shan Luo. Neural logic reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and
  Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H. Campbell, Konrad
  Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, Afroz Mohiuddin,
  Ryan Sepassi, George Tucker, and Henryk Michalewski. Model based reinforcement learning for
  atari. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020, 2020.

Steven Kapturowski, Víctor Campos, Ray Jiang, Nemanja Rakicevic, Hado van Hasselt, Charles
  Blundell, and Adrià Puigdomènech Badia. Human-level atari 200x faster. 2022.

Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin Fathy Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D Environment
  for Visual AI. arXiv, 2017.

Adam R. Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.

Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and brain sciences, 2017.

Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Roberto Martín-Martín, Michael Lingelbach, Sanjana Srivastava, Bokui Shen,
  Kent Elliott Vainio, Cem Gokmen, Gokul Dharan, Tanish Jain, Andrey Kurenkov, C. Karen Liu,
  Hyowon Gweon, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson 2.0: Object-centric simulation
  for robot learning of everyday household tasks. In Aleksandra Faust, David Hsu, and Gerhard
  Neumann (eds.), Conference on Robot Learning, 8-11 November 2021, London, UK, volume 164
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 455–465. PMLR, 2021.

Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. SPACE: unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Iou-Jen Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Raymond A. Yeh, and Alexander G. Schwing. Semantic tracklets:
  An object-centric representation for visual multi-agent reinforcement learning. 2021 IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021.

Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien
  Lin (eds.), Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew J. Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents (extended abstract). In Jérôme Lang (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-
 Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, July 13-19, 2018,
 Stockholm, Sweden. ijcai.org, 2018.

Davide Mambelli, Frederik Träuble, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Francesco Locatello.
  Compositional multi-object reinforcement learning with linear relation networks. 2022.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nat.,
  2015.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina Beygelzimer,
  Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. Improving reproducibility in machine
  learning research(a report from the neurips 2019 reproducibility program). J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
  2021.
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba.
  Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268), 2021.
Bradley Rettler and Andrew M. Bailey. Object. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2017.
Hamid Rezatofighi, Nathan Tsoi, JunYoung Gwak, Amir Sadeghian, Ian D. Reid, and Silvio Savarese.
  Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding box regression. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA,
  June 16-20, 2019. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  and David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, 2017.
Yang Shao, Quan Kong, Tadayuki Matsumura, Taiki Fuji, Kiyoto Ito, and Hiroyuki Mizuno. Mask
  atari for deep reinforcement learning as POMDP benchmarks. 2022.
Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate DALL-E learns to compose. In The Tenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29,
  2022, 2022a.
Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple unsupervised object-centric learning for complex
  and naturalistic videos. 2022b.
Elizabeth S Spelke, Karen Breinlinger, Janet Macomber, and Kristen Jacobson. Origins of knowledge.
  Psychological review, 1992.
Aleksandar Stanić, Yujin Tang, David Ha, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. An investigation into the open
  world survival game crafter. In Decision Awareness in Reinforcement Learning Workshop at ICML
  2022, 2022.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2021.
Jakub Sygnowski and Henryk Michalewski.         Learning from the memory of atari 2600.        In
  CGW@IJCAI, 2016.
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Charles Kemp, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Noah D. Goodman. How to grow a
  mind: Statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science, 2011.
Udo Thiel. The early modern subject: Self-consciousness and personal identity from Descartes to
 Hume. Oxford University Press, 2011.
Tristan Tomilin, Meng Fang, Yudi Zhang, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. COOM: A game benchmark for
  continual reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.

Marin Toromanoff, Émilie Wirbel, and Fabien Moutarde. Is deep reinforcement learning really
 superhuman on atari? 2019.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Dale Schuurmans and Michael P. Wellman (eds.), AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2016.
Greg Welch, Gary Bishop, et al. An introduction to the kalman filter. 1995.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, Paul Pu Liang, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom M. Mitchell. Read and reap
  the rewards: Learning to play atari with the help of instruction manuals. 2023.
Jaesik Yoon, Yi-Fu Wu, Heechul Bae, and Sungjin Ahn. An investigation into pre-training object-
  centric representations for reinforcement learning. 2023.
Vinícius Flores Zambaldi, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin,
  Karl Tuyls, David P. Reichert, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, Murray Shanahan, Victoria
  Langston, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew M. Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, and Peter W. Battaglia. Deep
  reinforcement learning with relational inductive biases. In 7th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019, 2019.
Victor Zhong, Austin W. Hanjie, Sida I. Wang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Luke Zettlemoyer. SILG:
  the multi-domain symbolic interactive language grounding benchmark. In Marc’Aurelio Ran-
  zato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ETAILS ON OBJECT PERCEPTION AND ITS ADVANTAGES
As described in our manuscript, decomposing the world in terms of objects incorporates many
advantages, some of them are:
Abstraction and Generalization
Objects allow us to abstract and generalize information. By categorizing similar objects together,
we can create concepts and classifications that help us make sense of a wide variety of individual
instances.
Cognitive Efficiency
Our brains are more efficient at processing and remembering information when it’s organized into
meaningful chunks. Objects provide a natural way to group related information, making it easier for
us to reason about complex situations.
Predictive Reasoning
Objects have properties and behaviors that can be predicted based on their past interactions and
characteristics. This predictive reasoning is crucial for making informed decisions and anticipating
outcomes.
Cause and Effect
Objects play a key role in understanding cause-and-effect relationships. By observing how objects
interact and how changes in one object lead to changes in others, we can infer causal connections and
predict future outcomes.
Communication
Objects provide a shared vocabulary that facilitates communication and understanding. When we
refer to objects, we can convey complex ideas more efficiently than describing individual instances or
specific situations..
Logical Inference
Objects provide a basis for logical reasoning. By identifying relationships between objects, we can
deduce logical conclusions and make valid inferences.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    D ETAILS ON OCATARI


                                                         Bell at (93, 36), (6, 11),
                                                         Child at (121, 12), (8, 15),
                                                         Enemy at (152, 109), (6, 15),
                                                         Fruit at (119, 108), (7, 10),
                                                         Fruit at (39, 84), (7, 10),
                                                         Fruit at (59, 60), (7, 10),
                                                         Life at (16, 183), (4, 7),
                                                         Life at (24, 183), (4, 7),
                                                         Platform at (16, 124), (128, 4),
                                                         Platform at (16, 172), (128, 4),
                                                         Platform at (16, 76), (128, 4),
                                                         Player at (65, 141), (8, 24),
                                                         Projectile at (61, 65), (2, 3),
                                                         Scale at (132, 132), (8, 35),
                                                         Scale at (132, 37), (8, 35),
                                                         Scale at (20, 85), (8, 35),
                                                         Score at (129, 183), (15, 7),
                                                         Time at (80, 191), (15, 5)]


Figure 6: OCAtari: The object-centric Atari benchmark. OCAtari maintains a list of existing
objects via processing the information from the RAM. Our framework enables training and evaluating
object discovery methods and object-centric RL algorithms on the widely used Atari Learning
Environments benchmark.


C    R EPRODUCING OUR R ESULTS
To reproduce our results, we included the option to run the experiments deterministically. For this
purpose, a seed can be specified in the respective scripts. In our experiments, we used the seeds
0 and 42. All supported games can be found in Table 1. Since we are extending the environment
permanently, you can also find all supported games in the ReadMe of our repository. To test if a game
is supported, you can also use the scripts “test_game” or “test_game_both” depending on if you want
to test only one or both modes of OCAtari. Table 2 and all tables in section F are generated by the
script “get_metrics”. To reproduce and measure the time needed for evaluation, see Figure 8, the
script “test_speed” was used. For further information, we recommend checking the documentation of
OCAtari under https://anonymous.4open.science/r/OCAtari-52B9 .


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In our case, all experiments on object extraction and dataset      Actors N                               8
generation were run on a machine with an AMD Ryzen 7 pro-          Minibatch size                    32 ∗ 8
cessor, 64GB of RAM, and no dedicated GPU. The dataset             Horizon T                            128
generation script takes approximately 3 minutes for one game.      Num. epochs K                          3
We use the same hyperparameters as the Schulman et al.             Adam stepsize            2.5 ∗ 10−4 ∗ α
(2017) PPO agents that learned to master the games. Hyper-         Discount γ                          0.99
parameter values for Atari environments are derived from           GAE parameter λ                     0.95
the original PPO paper. The same applies to the definitions        Clipping parameter ϵ             0.1 ∗ α
and values of VF coefficient c1 and entropy coefficient c2 .       VF coefficient c1                      1
The PPO implementation used and respective MLP hyperpa-            Entropy coefficient c2              0.01
rameters are based on stable-baselines3 Raffin et al. (2021).      MLP architecture                 2 × 64
Deep agents have the same hyperparameter values as OCAtari         MLP activation fn.                 Tanh
agents but use ’CnnPolicy’ in stable-baselines3 for the policy
architecture and frame stacking of 4. The Atari environment Table 4: PPO Hyperparameter Values. α
version used in gymnasium is v4 & v5. This version defines linearly increases from 0 to 1 over the
a deterministic skipping of 5 frames per action taken and sets course of training.
the probability to repeat the last action taken to 0.25. This is
aligned with recommended best practices by Machado et al.
(2018). We also used the Deterministic and NoFrameskip features of gymnasium when necessary to make our
experiments easier to reproduce. A list of all hyperparameter values used is provided in Table 4.


E    G ENERATING DATASETS
With OCAtari it is possible to create object-centric datasets for all supported games. The dataset consists
primarily of a csv file. In addition to a sequential index, based on the game number and state number, this file
contains the respective image as a list of pixels, called OBS. An image in the form of a png file is also stored
separately. Furthermore, the csv file contains a list of all HUD elements that could be extracted from the RAM,
called HUD, as well as a list of all objects that were read from the RAM, called RAM. Finally, we provide a list
of all elements that could be generated using the vision mode, called VIS. An example is given in Table 5.
The generation of the dataset can also be made reproducible by setting a seed. For our tests, we used the seeds 0
and 42. More information at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/OCAtari-52B9 .

      Table 5: An example how an object-centric dataset for Atari looks like after generation.

    Index                OBS                            HUD                                RAM                                  VIS
 00001_00001   [[0,0,0]...[255,255,255]]   score at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),....
 00001_00002   [[0,0,0]...[255,255,255]]   score at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),....
 00001_00003   [[0,0,0]...[255,255,255]]   score at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),....
      ...
 00008_00678   [[0,0,0]...[255,255,255]]   score at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),...   ball at (x,y)(width, height),....


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F       D ETAILED P ER O BJECT C ATEGORY RESULTS ON EACH GAME .

In this section, we provide descriptions of each covered game (obtained from https://gymnasium.
farama.org/environments/atari/) with example frames. For a more detailed documentation, see the
game’s respective AtariAge manual page3 . We also share detailed statistics on the object detection capacities of
OCAtari for every class of objects detected in each game.

Table 6: A more detailed version of Table 2. Precision, Recall, F1-scores of REM, and intersection
over union (IOU) metrics. Frames are obtained using random, DQN and C51 (if available) agents.

                               Random                           DQN                             C51
                      Prec    Rec    F1      IOU     Prec    Rec     F1     IOU     Prec    Rec      F1     IOU
 Alien                51.5    97.5 67.4      97.8    50.9    97.0   66.8    97.1    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Amidar               75.8    99.9 86.2      97.4    85.6    99.9   92.2    92.6    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Assault              95.4    94.2 94.8      95.3    97.1    93.6   95.3    93.8    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Asterix              93.1    99.8 96.3      96.0    95.0    99.6   97.2    96.1    94.8    99.8    97.2    96.2
 Asteroids            56.6    91.6 69.9      95.4    55.4    93.3   69.5    94.4    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Atlantis             96.3    94.6 95.5      95.8    96.6    94.7   95.7    95.0    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 BattleZone           79.9    56.2 66.0      94.7    78.7    54.7   64.5    93.7    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Berzerk              94.1    95.2 94.6      78.4    94.3    96.5   95.4    77.4    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Bowling              99.5    99.2 99.3      99.6    99.2    98.8   99.0    99.4    99.4    99.1    99.3    99.5
 Boxing               96.5    84.5 90.1      93.5    96.1    84.5   89.9    93.4    96.8    85.6    90.9    94.1
 Breakout             99.5   100.0 99.7     100.0    99.5   100.0   99.7   100.0   100.0   100.0 100.0     100.0
 Carnival             93.2    94.2 93.7      90.7    94.6    96.4   95.5    91.5    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Centipede            95.7    97.0 96.3      95.1    95.9    97.2   96.6    96.0    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 ChopperCommand       92.2    91.4 91.8      77.2    80.3    80.2   80.2    87.3    77.9    78.5    78.2    92.0
 CrazyClimber         97.6    95.5 96.6      97.4    97.6    94.8   96.2    96.1    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 DemonAttack          78.4    98.1 87.2      84.6    71.9    97.7   82.8    86.5    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 FishingDerby         89.2    85.6 87.3      75.2    88.8    84.6   86.6    73.6    83.2    77.9    80.5    75.7
 Freeway              98.7    87.3 92.6      90.2    98.6    87.3   92.6    90.2    96.5    87.2    91.6    87.9
 Frostbite            97.6    99.5 98.6      92.7    87.5    97.5   92.2    87.1    85.5    97.1    90.9    85.4
 Gopher               98.4    47.5 64.1      79.3    96.5    42.5   59.0    79.8    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Hero                 89.8    93.6 91.7      89.4    73.7    89.8   81.0    85.9    80.2    93.3    86.2    87.3
 IceHockey            93.2    99.6 96.3      65.9    87.7    99.4   93.2    66.0    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Kangaroo             96.7    93.1 94.9      95.6    98.3    93.2   95.7    94.8    96.1    93.1    94.6    95.2
 MontezumaRevenge     99.5    99.4 99.5      95.2   100.0   100.0 100.0     97.9   100.0   100.0 100.0      98.2
 MsPacman             77.9    99.4 87.4      84.2    72.1    99.3   83.6    83.1    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Pitfall              98.6    99.1 98.9      95.6    99.8   100.0   99.9    90.6    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Pong                 90.0    99.1 94.3      81.7    94.3    98.8   96.5    83.2    93.8    97.4    95.6    84.7
 PrivateEye           97.0    95.1 96.0      97.1    99.7    97.6   98.6    95.6    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Qbert                94.4    99.0 96.6      99.6    74.7    98.3   84.9    98.4    77.3    98.4    86.6    98.5
 Riverraid            93.5    98.0 95.7      93.6    89.3    98.0   93.5    91.0    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 RoadRunner           95.5    97.2 96.3      92.7    86.0    93.1   89.4    88.8    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Seaquest             94.1    87.9 90.9      90.3    91.5    81.3   86.1    91.4    92.1    82.6    87.1    90.6
 Skiing               95.8    96.5 96.2      90.4    94.1    94.2   94.2    89.3    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 SpaceInvaders        95.2    98.7 96.9      97.1    90.6    95.9   93.1    97.3    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Tennis               98.7    99.9 99.3      85.7    93.9    98.7   96.2    83.9    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Venture              65.4    99.8 79.0      92.1    54.0    99.4   70.0    96.1    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 VideoPinball         97.1    93.9 95.5      92.9    99.5    95.7   97.5    91.8    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 YarsRevenge          47.0    93.6 62.6      87.2    23.5    98.5   37.9    88.9    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
 Mean                 89.4    93.5 90.4      90.9    86.4    92.7   87.8    90.4    91.0    92.1    91.3    91.8


F.1      A LIEN DETAILS


You are stuck in a maze-like space ship with three aliens. You goal
is to destroy their eggs that are scattered all over the ship while
simultaneously avoiding the aliens (they are trying to kill you). You
have a flamethrower that can help you turn them away in tricky
situations. Moreover, you can occasionally collect a power-up
(pulsar) that gives you the temporary ability to kill aliens.


    3
        https://atariage.com/system_items.php?SystemID=2600&itemTypeID=MANUAL


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Table 7: Per class IOU on Alien

                       Random                                      DQN                                 C51
               Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU           Pr         Rec F-sc        IOU      Pr     Rec     F-sc    IOU
 Score       100      93.8     96.8     97.6     98.0         85.4     91.2      94.7     nan    nan     nan     nan
 Egg         49.6     97.9     65.8     98.9     48.8         97.7     65.1      98.6     nan    nan     nan     nan
 Life        99.8     99.6     99.7      100      100          100     100        100     nan    nan     nan     nan
 Pulsar      67.2     82.0     73.8     80.6     66.4         82.4     73.5      79.1     nan    nan     nan     nan
 Player      83.2     99.8     90.7     58.1     80.8         99.8     89.3      58.8     nan    nan     nan     nan
 Alien       73.0     92.1     81.5     94.2     68.6         92.5     78.8      94.3     nan    nan     nan     nan



F.2    A MIDAR DETAILS


This game is similar to Pac-Man: You are trying to visit all places on
a 2-dimensional grid while simultaneously avoiding your enemies.
You can turn the tables at one point in the game: Your enemies turn
into chickens and you can catch them.


                                      Table 8: Per class IOU on Amidar

                               Random                                  DQN                              C51
                       Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU          Pr       Rec F-sc      IOU     Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Life                100      100     100       100         100     100   100       100    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Monster_green       60.9    99.9     75.7     95.4        75.7    99.8   86.1     87.4    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Score               100      100     100       100         100     100   100      95.4    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Player              97.4     100     98.7     95.5        95.6     100   97.8     92.9    nan    nan     nan    nan



F.3    A SSAULT DETAILS


You control a vehicle that can move sideways. A big mother ship
circles overhead and continually deploys smaller drones. You must
destroy these enemies and dodge their attacks.


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Table 9: Per class statistics on Assault

                                        Random                              DQN                               C51
                               Pr      Rec F-sc        IOU          Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU     Pr      Rec     F-sc   IOU
 PlayerScore                 100       100      100     100         100    100   100    99.9    nan     nan     nan    nan
 MotherShip                  99.8     99.8     99.8    88.7         100    100   100    88.6    nan     nan     nan    nan
 Lives                       100       100      100     100         100    100   100     100    nan     nan     nan    nan
 Health                      99.6     99.6     99.6    99.5         100    100   100    99.6    nan     nan     nan    nan
 Player                      91.8      100     95.7    88.6        95.8    100   97.9   81.6    nan     nan     nan    nan
 Enemy                       98.4     87.6     92.7    87.1        89.0   70.5   78.7   78.5    nan     nan     nan    nan
 PlayerMissileHorizontal     29.0     29.1     29.1    28.5        26.7   25.5   26.1   30.2    nan     nan     nan    nan
 PlayerMissileVertical       95.7     95.2     95.5    86.7        91.4   88.0   89.7   83.0    nan     nan     nan    nan
 EnemyMissile                20.0     21.7     20.8    69.6        44.4   38.1   41.0   67.9    nan     nan     nan    nan


F.4    A STERIX DETAILS


You are Asterix and can move horizontally (continuously) and
vertically (discretely). Objects move horizontally across the screen:
lyres and other (more useful) objects. Your goal is to guide Asterix
in such a way as to avoid lyres and collect as many other objects
as possible. You score points by collecting objects and lose a life
whenever you collect a lyre. You have three lives available at
the beginning. If you score sufficiently many points, you will be
awarded additional points.


                                     Table 10: Per class statistics on Asterix

                            Random                               DQN                                   C51
                  Pr       Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr      Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr        Rec F-sc          IOU
 Lives           100     100         100     91.7     100       100       100    91.7     100         100      100     91.7
 Player         98.4    98.4        98.4     97.6     99.6     99.6       99.6   98.8    98.6        98.6     98.6     98.5
 Score           100     100         100     100      100      96.3       98.1   99.0     100        99.2     99.6     99.8
 Cauldron       93.9     100        96.8     99.9     96.6      100       98.3    100    98.5         100     99.2      100
 Reward50       90.7     100        95.1     100      98.2      100       99.1    100    90.6         100     95.1     99.6
 Enemy          85.8     100        92.3     88.0     85.4      100       92.1   89.2    89.7         100     94.6     89.6


                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.5    A STEROIDS DETAILS


This is a well-known arcade game: You control a spaceship in an
asteroid field and must break up asteroids by shooting them. Once
all asteroids are destroyed, you enter a new level and new asteroids
will appear. You will occasionally be attacked by a flying saucer.


                                   Table 11: Per class IOU on Asteroids

                             Random                             DQN                               C51
                      Pr    Rec F-sc         IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Asteroid          42.5     86.7    57.1     90.5    39.5     88.8      54.7   89.3   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player            44.3      100    61.4     75.1    50.5     97.3      66.5   73.1   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Lives              100      100    100       100     100     100        100   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 PlayerScore       96.0     92.5    94.2     98.5    97.8     96.1      96.9   99.1   nan   nan     nan    nan
 PlayerMissile     44.7     97.8    61.4     98.7    52.7     92.8      67.2   100    nan   nan     nan    nan


F.6    ATLANTIS DETAILS


Your job is to defend the submerged city of Atlantis. Your enemies
slowly descend towards the city and you must destroy them before
they reach striking distance. To this end, you control three defense
posts. You lose if your enemies manage to destroy all seven of
Atlantis’ installations. You may rebuild installations after you have
fought of a wave of enemies and scored a sufficient number of
points.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Table 12: Per class statistics on Atlantis

                                     Random                             DQN                                C51
                              Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU          Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU     Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 BridgedBazaar               100    99.7   99.9   99.9         100    99.7     99.8   99.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 AcropolisCommandPost        100    96.2   98.0   99.9         100    97.8     98.9   99.8    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Sentry                      100     100   100    99.4         100    100       100   99.6    nan    nan     nan    nan
 AquaPlane                   100    97.8   98.9    100         100    99.0     99.5   99.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Generator                   100    99.7   99.9   87.9        99.8    99.5     99.7   85.7    nan    nan     nan    nan
 DomedPalace                 100    99.5   99.8    100         100    99.8     99.9   99.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Projectile                 85.1    77.4   81.1   99.9        86.7    76.2     81.1   99.2    nan    nan     nan    nan
 GorgonShip                 88.6    83.0   85.7   93.1        85.7    76.0     80.6   89.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Score                       100     100   100    99.8         100    100       100   100     nan    nan     nan    nan
 BanditBomber               81.0    78.2   79.5   88.2        76.3    85.3     80.6   79.4    nan    nan     nan    nan



F.7   BATTLE Z ONE DETAILS


You control a tank and must destroy enemy vehicles. This game
is played in a first-person perspective and creates a 3D illusion. A
radar screen shows enemies around you. You start with 5 lives and
gain up to 2 extra lives if you reach a sufficient score.


                                   Table 13: Per class IOU on BattleZone

                           Random                                DQN                                      C51
                   Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU       Pr        Rec F-sc           IOU    Pr         Rec     F-sc    IOU
 Radar           92.0    100       95.8     100    92.8        94.5     93.6      99.6   nan        nan     nan     nan
 Player          92.0    100       95.8     100    92.8        100      96.3      100    nan        nan     nan     nan
 Crosshair       92.0    68.0      78.2    97.5    88.6        70.5     78.5      97.3   nan        nan     nan     nan
 Blue_Tank       27.1    50.8      35.4    57.6    27.3        47.6     34.7      54.9   nan        nan     nan     nan


F.8   B ERZERK DETAILS


You are stuck in a maze with evil robots. You must destroy them
and avoid touching the walls of the maze, as this will kill you. You
may be awarded extra lives after scoring a sufficient number of
points, depending on the game mode. You may also be chased by
an undefeatable enemy, Evil Otto, that you must avoid. Evil Otto
does not appear in the default mode.


                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Table 14: Per class statistics on Berzerk

                              Random                            DQN                                   C51
                      Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU      Pr    Rec      F-sc   IOU
 Logo               100     99.3     99.6     100     100     100      100       100     nan   nan      nan    nan
 PlayerMissile      75.0    98.4     85.1    74.5    79.2    88.1      83.4     81.1     nan   nan      nan    nan
 Enemy              97.3    98.7     98.0    77.0    98.4     100      99.2     77.3     nan   nan      nan    nan
 Player             90.4    98.7     94.4    66.1    97.4    99.2      98.3     54.5     nan   nan      nan    nan
 PlayerScore        95.0    73.2     82.7    85.1    98.8    91.9      95.2     96.6     nan   nan      nan    nan
 EnemyMissile       77.4    90.0     83.2    78.8    73.8    85.7      79.3     79.2     nan   nan      nan    nan
 RoomCleared        96.3     100     98.1     100    98.4     100      99.2      100     nan   nan      nan    nan



F.9    B OWLING DETAILS


Your goal is to score as many points as possible in the game of
Bowling. A game consists of 10 frames and you have two tries
per frame. Knocking down all pins on the first try is called a
“strike”. Knocking down all pins on the second roll is called a
“spar”. Otherwise, the frame is called “open”.


                                   Table 15: Per class statistics on Bowling

                             Random                           DQN                                C51
                     Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU      Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU
 Pin               99.4     100     99.7     100    98.7     100    99.3       100     99.4    100      99.7   100
 Player            98.6    97.6     98.1    98.3    99.6    99.2    99.4      99.2     98.2    96.8     97.5   98.0
 PlayerScore       100      100     100      100     100     100     100       100      100    100       100   100
 Player2Round      100      100     100      100     100     100     100       100      100    100       100   100
 Ball              99.0    98.8     98.9    99.6    98.4    96.9    97.6      99.1     99.0    98.6     98.8   99.3
 PlayerRound       100     92.4     96.1    96.7     100    89.6    94.5      95.4      100    92.1     95.9   96.6


F.10    B OXING DETAILS


You fight an opponent in a boxing ring. You score points for hitting
the opponent. If you score 100 points, your opponent is knocked
out.


                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Table 16: Per class statistics on Boxing

                            Random                               DQN                         C51
                    Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU      Pr         Rec F-sc      IOU     Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU
 Enemy            83.4     81.1    82.2    78.4    79.8        74.6   77.1   73.3   88.6   85.5   87.0   79.5
 PlayerScore      100      82.5    90.4    87.9     100        92.8   96.2   95.5    100   93.3   96.5   95.9
 Player           81.6     81.6    81.6    79.3    80.8        80.8   80.8   78.4   79.6   79.1   79.4   76.7
 EnemyScore       100      45.9    62.9    89.8     100        44.9   62.0   87.1    100   45.5   62.5   88.7
 Logo             100       100     100     100     100         100   100     100    100   100     100   100
 Clock            100       100     100     100     100         100   100     100    100   100     100   100



F.11    B REAKOUT DETAILS


Another famous Atari game. The dynamics are similar to pong:
You move a paddle and hit the ball in a brick wall at the top of the
screen. Your goal is to destroy the brick wall. You can try to break
through the wall and let the ball wreak havoc on the other side, all
on its own! You have five lives.


                                  Table 17: Per class statistics on Breakout

                             Random                               DQN                         C51
                      Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU       Pr        Rec F-sc     IOU      Pr   Rec F-sc      IOU
 Player             98.8    100     99.4     100    97.4        100   98.7   100    99.8   100    99.9   100
 BlockRow            100    100     100      100     100        100    100   100    100    100     100   100
 Live                100    100     100     99.9     100        100    100   99.9   100    100     100   100
 PlayerScore         100    100     100      100     100        100    100   100    100    100     100   100
 PlayerNumber        100    100     100      100     100        100    100   100    100    100     100   100
 Ball               93.1    100     96.4     100    93.3        100   96.5   100    90.5   100    95.0   100


F.12    C ARNIVAL DETAILS


This is a “shoot ‘em up” game. Targets move horizontally across
the screen and you must shoot them. You are in control of a gun that
can be moved horizontally. The supply of ammunition is limited
and chickens may steal some bullets from you if you don’t hit them
in time.


                                                          24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Table 18: Per class statistics on Carnival

                                Random                                   DQN                                 C51
                     Pr        Rec F-sc           IOU       Pr         Rec F-sc         IOU     Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Duck              98.8    93.7         96.2      95.5     98.3        93.4     95.8    94.4    nan    nan     nan    nan
 PlayerScore       86.6    76.4         81.2       100     98.4        96.9     97.6    100     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Wheel              100     100         100       89.8      100        98.9     99.5    88.5    nan    nan     nan    nan
 FlyingDuck        40.4    91.3         56.0      82.2     42.9        82.9     56.5    82.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Owl               99.0    97.7         98.3      97.6     98.9        96.2     97.5    95.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 ExtraBullets      98.1    84.9         91.0      97.8     98.1        90.2     94.0    96.6    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Player             100     100         100        100      100        100       100    100     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Rabbit            97.0    95.8         96.4      98.0     95.3        97.3     96.3    97.4    nan    nan     nan    nan
 AmmoBar           90.0     100         94.7       100     98.4        99.8     99.1    99.8    nan    nan     nan    nan
 PlayerMissile     95.3    97.5         96.4      10.2     93.9        98.9     96.3    10.4    nan    nan     nan    nan
 BonusValue        95.0     100         97.5      88.1     97.4        100      98.7    82.1    nan    nan     nan    nan
 BonusSign         66.3     100         79.7      65.6     53.1        100      69.4    100     nan    nan     nan    nan


F.13    C ENTIPEDE DETAILS


You are an elf and must use your magic wands to fend off spiders,
fleas and centipedes. Your goal is to protect mushrooms in an
enchanted forest. If you are bitten by a spider, flea or centipede,
you will be temporally paralyzed and you will lose a magic wand.
The game ends once you have lost all wands. You may receive
additional wands after scoring a sufficient number of points.


                                  Table 19: Per class statistics on Centipede

                                  Random                                   DQN                               C51
                          Pr     Rec F-sc           IOU           Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU     Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Score                 99.6       100      99.8     97.0     98.8        100     99.4    97.7    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Projectile            84.9      99.7      91.7     88.9     84.8        97.5    90.7    88.6    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Life                   100       100      100       100      100        100      100    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 Ground                 100      97.8      98.9      100      100        98.4    99.2    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 Mushroom              99.6      99.7      99.6     99.8     99.3        99.7    99.5    99.6    nan   nan     nan    nan
 CentipedeSegment      72.2      78.8      75.4     57.1     69.0        75.2    72.0    55.3    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player                96.4      91.8      94.1     87.4     94.4        90.8    92.6    84.8    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Spider                92.4       100      96.1     99.6     87.1        99.0    92.7    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 Flea                  50.0       100      66.7      100     50.0        100     66.7    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 Scorpion               nan       nan       nan      nan      100        100      100    100     nan   nan     nan    nan


                                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.14    C HOPPER C OMMAND DETAILS


You control a helicopter and must protect truck convoys. To that end,
you need to shoot down enemy aircraft.A mini-map is displayed at
the bottom of the screen.


                             Table 20: Per class statistics on ChopperCommand

                                Random                          DQN                            C51
                        Pr     Rec F-sc      IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU     Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU
 Score                100      100    100     100     100     100       100     100    100   100     100   100
 Life                 100      100    100     100     100     100       100     100    100   100     100   100
 MiniEnemy            88.9    78.0    83.1   48.5    66.8    62.3       64.5   51.1   47.4   39.4   43.0   56.2
 MiniTruck            86.0    93.1    89.4    100    68.5    70.6       69.6   99.9   49.4   58.5   53.6   100
 Truck                88.8    99.6    93.9   79.6    95.9    98.6       97.2   80.4   92.9   96.4   94.6   74.7
 MiniPlayer           90.8     100    95.2   84.8    99.2     100       99.6   84.5   99.8   100    99.9   93.7
 Player               95.2    98.8    96.9   79.0    91.4    89.4       90.4   75.8   99.0   98.8   98.9   86.5
 Shot                 76.9    74.9    75.9   88.0    58.8    58.8       58.8   87.3   81.8   81.8   81.8   90.2
 EnemyHelicopter      79.9    94.3    86.5   71.4    45.6    85.4       59.5   73.7   61.8   95.5   75.0   71.1
 Bomb                 51.3    93.2    66.2   37.7    54.7    80.3       65.0   55.9   50.0   82.1   62.2   72.5
 EnemyPlane           92.0    98.3    95.0   66.6    94.0    96.2       95.1   71.4   94.4   94.4   94.4   74.4


F.15    C RAZY C LIMBER DETAILS


You are a climber trying to reach the top of four buildings, while
avoiding obstacles like closing windows and falling objects. When
you receive damage (windows closing or objects) you will fall and
lose one life; you have a total of 5 lives before the end games. At
the top of each building, there’s a helicopter which you need to
catch to get to the next building. The goal is to climb as fast as
possible while receiving the least amount of damage.


                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table 21: Per class IOU on CrazyClimber

                               Random                           DQN                             C51
                        Pr    Rec F-sc       IOU        Pr    Rec F-sc       IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Player               96.0    97.6    96.8    91.1   90.8    95.0     92.8   90.4   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Window               97.6    95.2    96.4    97.4   98.3    94.6     96.4   96.5   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Score                 100    100      100     100    100     100      100   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Life                  100    100      100     100    100     100      100   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy_Red            75.0    81.8    78.3    55.3   19.1    78.8     30.8   57.2   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Purple_Projectile    66.7    66.7    66.7    45.0   56.2    69.2     62.1   52.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Yellow_Projectile    33.3    50.0    40.0    70.9   44.4    57.1     50.0   79.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Yellow_Ball          84.0    91.3    87.5    67.8   70.5    79.5     74.7   64.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy_Bird           69.7    92.0    79.3    76.1   58.5    79.2     67.3   65.0   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Helicopter            nan     nan     nan     nan   14.3    14.3     14.3   42.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Blue_Projectile       nan     nan     nan     nan    100     100      100   53.6   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.16    D EMONATTACK DETAILS


You are facing waves of demons in the ice planet of Krybor. Points
are accumulated by destroying demons. You begin with 3 reserve
bunkers, and can increase its number (up to 6) by avoiding enemy
attacks. Each attack wave you survive without any hits, grants you
a new bunker. Every time an enemy hits you, a bunker is destroyed.
When the last bunker falls, the next enemy hit will destroy you and
the game ends.


                                Table 22: Per class IOU on DemonAttack

                                Random                          DQN                             C51
                        Pr     Rec F-sc       IOU       Pr    Rec F-sc       IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 ProjectileFriendly   94.8     100    97.3    83.8    97.2   99.4     98.3   85.1   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Score                 100    98.6    99.3    97.8    98.6   91.1     94.7   95.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player               92.6     100    96.2    100     97.2    100     98.6    100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Live                 99.1     100    99.5    100     97.5    100     98.8    100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy                99.3    97.9    98.6    73.7    75.1   56.6     64.5   66.3   nan   nan     nan    nan
 ProjectileHostile    80.2    98.7    88.5    55.4    59.9   98.3     74.4   37.2   nan   nan     nan    nan


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.17    F ISHING D ERBY DETAILS


Your objective is to catch more sunfish than your opponent.


                               Table 23: Per class statistics on FishingDerby

                               Random                                 DQN                               C51
                        Pr    Rec F-sc           IOU         Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU
 ScorePlayerTwo       100     53.1     69.4       100     100       52.5     68.9      100     100    52.5   68.9   100
 Fish                 94.5    98.2     96.3      68.7    90.6       98.5     94.4     69.2    87.1    99.3   92.8   68.8
 PlayerTwoHook        62.6    66.2     64.3      29.4    62.8       67.7     65.1     26.5    62.0    65.1   63.5   30.9
 ScorePlayerOne       100     96.3     98.1       100     100       73.5     84.7      100     100    52.5   68.8   100
 PlayerOneHook        69.0    69.0     69.0      22.6    87.4       87.6     87.5     22.5    53.8    56.9   55.3   22.4
 Shark                82.4    99.8     90.2      92.1    82.8       99.5     90.4     91.5    77.0    99.7   86.9   92.7


F.18    F REEWAY DETAILS


Your objective is to guide your chicken across lane after lane of busy
rush hour traffic. You receive a point for every chicken that makes
it to the top of the screen after crossing all the lanes of traffic.


                                     Table 24: Per class statistics on Freeway

                        Random                                      DQN                                C51
                 Pr    Rec F-sc           IOU           Pr        Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc       IOU
 Chicken       100      100      100      97.1      99.8      99.9         99.8     96.9     97.0    98.5    97.7   96.4
 Car          99.1     99.9     99.5      87.0      99.3      99.9         99.6     87.0     99.4    99.8    99.6   87.0
 Score        95.0     48.8     64.5      100       93.4      48.4         63.7      100     85.0    52.3    64.8   86.1


                                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.19    F ROSTBITE DETAILS


In Frostbite, the player controls “Frostbite Bailey” who hops back
and forth across across an Arctic river, changing the color of the ice
blocks from white to blue. Each time he does so, a block is added
to his igloo.


                                  Table 25: Per class statistics on Frostbite

                                Random                           DQN                            C51
                        Pr     Rec F-sc       IOU       Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU     Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU
 WhitePlate           99.5    99.7    99.6    92.0    93.2    99.8       96.4   88.5   92.0   98.8   95.3   87.1
 Degree               100      100    100     98.0     100     100        100   97.2    100   100     100   97.7
 PlayerScore          100      100    100     96.0     100     100        100   89.7    100   100     100   89.8
 Player               63.8     100    77.9    71.4    66.8     100       80.1   72.1   75.8   100    86.2   70.9
 LifeCount            100      100    100     89.0     100     100        100   87.2    100   100     100   87.9
 House                100      100    100     99.6    99.7     100       99.9   97.1    100   100     100   94.6
 BluePlate            98.8    99.5    99.1    91.6    78.0     100       87.6   84.7   74.0   98.2   84.4   82.8
 Bird                 98.2    95.3    96.7    99.1    90.1    79.7       84.6   95.6   91.4   84.4   87.7   94.7
 CompletedHouse        nan     nan     nan     nan     100     100        100   99.6    100   100     100   99.8
 GreenFish             nan     nan     nan     nan    82.2    77.8       79.9   67.2   84.2   87.8   86.0   70.1
 Crab                  nan     nan     nan     nan    96.4    78.4       86.5   66.3   96.6   81.1   88.2   63.5
 Bear                  nan     nan     nan     nan    90.0    90.0       90.0   77.3    100   91.4   95.5   80.6
 Clam                  nan     nan     nan     nan    59.5    97.8       73.9   75.1   66.7   100    80.0   58.3


F.20    G OPHER DETAILS


The player controls a shovel-wielding farmer who protects a crop
of three carrots from a gopher.


                                                        29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Table 26: Per class IOU on Gopher

                                 Random                                   DQN                                   C51
                         Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU           Pr      Rec F-sc         IOU       Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Gopher             74.8        97.7     84.7     84.7     71.8        96.0     82.2     83.3      nan    nan      nan   nan
 Score               100        100       100     98.4     100         96.9     98.4     93.1      nan    nan      nan   nan
 Player             99.8        99.8     99.8     81.7     100          100     100      80.3      nan    nan      nan   nan
 Empty_Block         100        35.0     51.8     65.6     100         24.6     39.5     62.5      nan    nan      nan   nan
 Carrot              100        100       100     100      99.9         100     100       100      nan    nan      nan   nan
 Bird                nan         nan      nan      nan     33.8        98.0     50.3     84.8      nan    nan      nan   nan


F.21    H ERO DETAILS


You need to rescue miners that are stuck in a mine shaft. You have
access to various tools: A propeller backpack that allows you to
fly wherever you want, sticks of dynamite that can be used to blast
through walls, a laser beam to kill vermin, and a raft to float across
stretches of lava.You have a limited amount of power. Once you
run out, you lose a live.


                                          Table 27: Per class IOU on Hero

                               Random                                  DQN                                     C51
                    Pr        Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr         Rec F-sc          IOU    Pr         Rec      F-sc   IOU
 Life            65.0          100     78.8     71.1     84.8         100     91.8     75.6     81.4     100      89.7   78.7
 Score           65.8         70.6     68.1     48.7     54.4        62.0     57.9     57.6     76.8     82.9     79.8   59.3
 Player          96.0         99.8     97.9     96.7     91.0        99.8     95.2     99.4     94.0     100      96.9   99.5
 PowerBar        100           100      100     99.8     100          100     100      99.8     100      100      100    99.9
 BombStock       81.8          100     90.0     81.0     98.8         100     99.4     90.1     99.4     100      99.7   80.9
 Wall            100          93.6     96.7     98.5     73.2        91.4     81.3     91.8     83.9     96.4     89.7   95.0
 LaserBeam       36.8         84.2     51.2     35.9     19.8        81.4     31.8     34.2     15.0     81.8     25.3   33.0
 Bomb            42.3         81.1     55.6     83.3     45.9        28.3     35.0     83.3     41.3     18.7     25.7   75.3
 Enemy           94.1          100     97.0     33.2     37.0        71.8     48.8     43.0     39.9     64.9     49.4   39.0
 EndNPC          100           100      100     69.2     100         83.8     91.2     69.2     100      77.5     87.3   69.2
 Lamp             nan          nan      nan      nan     46.6         100     63.6     62.5     82.0     100      90.1   62.5
 LavaWall         nan          nan      nan      nan     45.3        77.4     57.1     92.3     54.4     82.8     65.7   99.2


                                                                30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.22    I CE H OCKEY DETAILS


Your goal is to score as many points as possible in a standard game
of Ice Hockey over a 3-minute time period. The ball is usually called
“the puck”.There are 32 shot angles ranging from the extreme left to
the extreme right. The angles can only aim towards the opponent’s
goal.Just as in real hockey, you can pass the puck by shooting it off
the sides of the rink. This can be really key when you’re in position
to score a goal.


                                   Table 28: Per class IOU on IceHockey

                             Random                             DQN                               C51
                     Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU        Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 EnemyScore        71.6    100      83.4    76.4     57.1    100        72.7   76.4   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player            99.1    99.1     99.1    47.8     98.2    98.2       98.2   47.9   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy             99.0    99.5     99.2    52.4     99.6    99.6       99.6   52.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 PlayerScore       83.8    100      91.2    67.7     65.3    100        79.0   67.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Ball              85.2    98.6     91.4    80.2     83.4    98.8       90.5   84.1   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Timer              100    100       100    80.5      100    100         100   79.7   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.23    K ANGAROO DETAILS


The object of the game is to score as many points as you can while
controlling Mother Kangaroo to rescue her precious baby. You
start the game with three lives.During this rescue mission, Mother
Kangaroo encounters many obstacles. You need to help her climb
ladders, pick bonus fruit, and throw punches at monkeys.


                                                        31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 29: Per class statistics on Kangaroo

                             Random                                 DQN                              C51
                       Pr   Rec F-sc         IOU          Pr      Rec F-sc      IOU          Pr    Rec F-sc      IOU
  Bell               99.8   99.8    99.8     100         100     100    100      100    99.8       99.8   99.8    100
  Platform            100   75.0    85.7     100         100    75.0   85.7      100     100       75.0   85.7    100
  Scale               100   100      100     100         100     100    100      100     100        100   100     100
  Fruit              99.8   99.9    99.9     90.7        99.2    100   99.6     90.9    97.4       99.8   98.6   90.7
  Child              99.6   99.8    99.7     95.0        100     100    100     95.6    99.8        100   99.9   96.4
  Life               99.7   100     99.8     100         100     100    100      100    99.6        100   99.8    100
  Score              99.8   100     99.9     100         100     100    100     99.6    99.8        100   99.9   99.3
  Time               99.8   100     99.9     100         100     100    100     89.7    99.8        100   99.9   96.5
  Player             79.8   89.3    84.3     79.4        88.0   91.7   89.8     78.6    81.2       88.3   84.6   79.3
  Projectile_top     81.6   84.7    83.1     81.0        98.9   99.5   99.2     87.6    92.9       88.3   90.5   85.5
  Enemy              87.2   95.5    91.2     91.1        94.5   95.2   94.8     86.8    85.8       96.4   90.8   86.8
  Projectile_enemy   66.7   93.3    77.8     33.3        50.0    100   66.7     33.3    14.1       86.7   24.2   33.3


F.24    M ONTEZUMA R EVENGE DETAILS


Your goal is to acquire Montezuma’s treasure by making your way
through a maze of chambers within the emperor’s fortress. You
must avoid deadly creatures while collecting valuables and tools
which can help you escape with the treasure.


                         Table 30: Per class statistics on MontezumaRevenge

                      Random                                  DQN                                    C51
               Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU            Pr      Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr        Rec F-sc       IOU
 Skull      99.6     99.6    99.6     79.0      100         100     100       79.1     100        100     100    80.4
 Life       100       100    100       100      100         100     100        100     100        100     100    100
 Player     99.0     98.6    98.8     77.9      100         100     100       97.3     100        100     100    100
 Rope       97.6      100    98.8      100      100         100     100        100     100        100     100    100
 Barrier    100       100    100       100      100         100     100        100     100        100     100    100
 Key        99.0     96.7    97.8      100      100         100     100        100     100        100     100    100
 Score      100       100    100       100      100         100     100        100     100        100     100    100


                                                          32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.25    M S PACMAN DETAILS


Your goal is to collect all of the pellets on the screen while avoiding
the ghosts.


                                 Table 31: Per class statistics on MsPacman

                        Random                                DQN                              C51
                Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU         Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Life        100       100      100      93.3     54.4       100     70.5   90.3   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Score       100       100      100      98.2      100       100     100    99.2   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player      99.8     99.8      99.8     71.7     94.8      99.0     96.8   72.5   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Ghost       55.6     98.4      71.1     79.5     61.3      98.3     75.5   77.2   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Fruit       100       100      100      88.9     97.9       100     98.9   85.5   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.26    P ITFALL DETAILS


You control Pitfall Harry and are tasked with collecting all the
treasures in a jungle within 20 minutes. You have three lives. The
game is over if you collect all the treasures or if you die or if the
time runs out.


                                                          33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table 32: Per class IOU on Pitfall

                            Random                               DQN                                C51
                    Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU        Pr       Rec F-sc        IOU     Pr    Rec      F-sc   IOU
 Player           91.8    97.0     94.3    68.7     100        100      100    61.2    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Wall              100    100       100    99.8     100        100      100    76.5    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Logs             99.1    99.8     99.5    99.6     100        100      100    98.9    nan   nan      nan    nan
 LifeCount         100    100       100    100      100        100      100     100    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Timer             100    100       100    99.7     100        100      100    98.2    nan   nan      nan    nan
 StairPit          100    100       100    100      100        100      100     100    nan   nan      nan    nan
 PlayerScore       100    100       100    97.0     100        100      100    96.7    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Scorpion          100    100       100    94.7     100        100      100     100    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Waterhole        96.7    100      98.3    100      73.3       100     84.6    99.6    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Crocodile         100    100       100    100       nan       nan      nan     nan    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Rope             87.7    69.4     77.5    100       nan       nan      nan     nan    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Snake             100    100       100    97.6     100        100      100    96.9    nan   nan      nan    nan
 Tarpit           80.0    100      88.9    100       nan       nan      nan     nan    nan   nan      nan    nan


F.27    P ONG DETAILS


You control the right paddle, you compete against the left paddle
controlled by the computer. You each try to keep deflecting the ball
away from your goal and into your opponent’s goal.


                                   Table 33: Per class statistics on Pong

                           Random                               DQN                            C51
                    Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU       Pr        Rec F-sc        IOU      Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU
 Ball             60.2     100    75.2    74.8    76.0         100   86.4     75.2    74.0   100      85.1   74.9
 Player           100      100     100    91.7     100         100   100      89.0     100   100       100   94.7
 EnemyScore       100     96.9    98.4    78.0     100        95.9   97.9     79.0     100   94.7     97.3   79.2
 Enemy            85.2     100    92.0    94.4    92.8         100   96.3     94.2    92.2   100      95.9   94.1
 PlayerScore      100      100     100    74.3     100         100   100      84.1     100   95.1     97.5   86.5


                                                         34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.28    P RIVATE E YE DETAILS


You control the French Private Eye Pierre Touche. Navigate the city
streets, parks, secret passages, dead-ends and one-ways in search of
the ringleader, Henri Le Fiend and his gang. You also need to find
evidence and stolen goods that are scattered about. There are five
cases, complete each case before its statute of limitations expires.


                                  Table 34: Per class IOU on PrivateEye

                       Random                               DQN                             C51
               Pr     Rec F-sc         IOU        Pr      Rec F-sc       IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Car        96.8      100     98.4     97.3      100      100     100    94.4   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Clock      100       100     100      98.5      100      100     100    98.6   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player     95.8     97.0     96.4     95.6     99.2     99.2     99.2   92.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Score      100       100     100      97.5      100      100     100    96.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Clue       57.5      100     73.0     77.6     50.0      100     66.7   78.6   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Mud        91.2      100     95.4      100      nan      nan      nan    nan   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Dove       100       100     100       100      nan      nan      nan    nan   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.29    Q BERT DETAILS


You are Q*bert. Your goal is to change the color of all the cubes
on the pyramid to the pyramid’s ‘destination’ color. To do this, you
must hop on each cube on the pyramid one at a time while avoiding
nasty creatures that lurk there.


                                                       35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Table 35: Per class statistics on Qbert

                              Random                                   DQN                                   C51
                   Pr        Rec F-sc           IOU       Pr         Rec F-sc            IOU        Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU
 Cube             100        99.6      99.8     100      74.6        99.5      85.3      99.9      77.6    99.5     87.2   99.9
 Score           66.0         100      79.5     100      34.8         100      51.6      98.8      31.8     100     48.3   98.9
 Lives           60.1         100      75.0     100      38.9         100      56.0       100      40.5     100     57.7    100
 Disk            99.8         100      99.9     100      99.6         100      99.8       100       100     100      100    100
 Player          47.3        81.9      60.0     79.2     93.7        82.1      87.5      78.2      98.3    84.1     90.6   79.9
 Sam             34.5        82.9      48.7     93.8     100         80.0      88.9      94.7       100    93.8     96.8   95.1
 PurpleBall      20.9        52.7      29.9     90.5     71.3        69.0      70.2      91.3      76.1    66.4     70.9   90.9
 Coily           91.3         100      95.5     93.4     91.3         100      95.5      89.4      87.1     100     93.1   90.7
 GreenBall        nan         nan       nan      nan     83.3        90.9      87.0      87.7      79.3    88.5     83.6   87.1


F.30    R IVERRAID DETAILS


You control a jet that flies over a river: you can move it sideways and
fire missiles to destroy enemy objects. Each time an enemy object
is destroyed you score points (i.e. rewards). You lose a jet when
you run out of fuel: fly over a fuel depot when you begin to run
low.You lose a jet even when it collides with the river bank or one
of the enemy objects (except fuel depots). The game begins with a
squadron of three jets in reserve and you’re given an additional jet
(up to 9) for each 10,000 points you score.


                                       Table 36: Per class statistics on Riverraid

                                 Random                                   DQN                                     C51
                        Pr      Rec F-sc          IOU           Pr      Rec F-sc            IOU      Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 PlayerScore         100         2.4      4.7      100       100         1.0       2.0      100      nan    nan     nan    nan
 FuelDepot          97.7       98.3      98.0      100      94.7        96.5      95.6      100      nan    nan     nan    nan
 Tanker             97.0       98.2      97.6     96.9      94.1        95.8      95.0      94.3     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Lives              89.3       99.8      94.3     89.8      59.6        100       74.7      92.0     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Player              100       99.3      99.6     76.7      99.8        99.6      99.7      74.8     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Helicopter         96.4       97.0      96.7     97.6      97.4        96.8      97.1      96.5     nan    nan     nan    nan
 PlayerMissile      87.3       92.8      90.0     88.1      82.8        95.5      88.7      89.6     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Bridge             95.2        100      97.6     82.7      97.6        97.6      97.6      84.9     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Jet                 nan        nan       nan      nan      95.9        100       97.9      83.6     nan    nan     nan    nan


                                                                36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.31    ROAD RUNNER DETAILS


You control the Road Runner(TM) in a race; you can control the
direction to run in and times to jumps.The goal is to outrun Wile
E. Coyote(TM) while avoiding the hazards of the desert.The game
begins with three lives. You lose a life when the coyote catches you,
picks you up in a rocket, or shoots you with a cannon. You also
lose a life when a truck hits you, you hit a land mine, you fall off a
cliff,or you get hit by a falling rock.You score points (i.e. rewards)
by eating seeds along the road, eating steel shot, and destroying the
coyote.


                                 Table 37: Per class statistics on RoadRunner

                            Random                              DQN                                C51
                    Pr     Rec F-sc        IOU         Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Enemy           99.3     88.6     93.7    77.1     83.3     85.3        84.3   71.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Sign            94.4      100     97.1    97.8     54.3     100         70.4   90.9   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Cactus          99.5     99.0     99.2    98.4     91.3     93.8        92.6   89.5   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Bird             100      100     100      100     97.4     97.2        97.3   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player          95.4     96.8     96.1    79.4     93.4     98.7        96.0   91.4   nan   nan     nan    nan
 BirdSeeds       55.2     90.6     68.6    78.3     62.3     89.1        73.3   63.0   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Truck            nan      nan      nan     nan     77.4     100         87.3   72.0   nan   nan     nan    nan
 RoadCrack        nan      nan      nan     nan     87.5      8.2        15.1   72.5   nan   nan     nan    nan
 AcmeMine         nan      nan      nan     nan     16.7     41.7        23.8   69.0   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.32    S EAQUEST DETAILS



You control a sub able to move in all directions and fire torpedoes.
The goal is to retrieve as many divers as you can, while dodging
and blasting enemy subs and killer sharks; points will be awarded
accordingly. The game begins with one sub and three waiting on
the horizon. Each time you increase your score by 10,000 points,
an extra sub will be delivered to your base. You can only have six
reserve subs on the screen at one time.Your sub will explode if it
collides with anything except your own divers.The sub has a limited
amount of oxygen that decreases at a constant rate during the game.
When the oxygen tank is almost empty, you need to surface and if
you don’t do it in time, your sub will blow up and you’ll lose one
diver. Each time you’re forced to surface, with less than six divers,
you lose one diver as well.



                                                        37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Table 38: Per class statistics on Seaquest

                                 Random                            DQN                              C51
                          Pr    Rec F-sc       IOU       Pr      Rec F-sc       IOU         Pr    Rec F-sc       IOU
 OxygenBarDepleted      92.1    100     95.9   99.8     98.6    100     99.3    100     98.4       100    99.2   99.9
 Player                 75.8    98.7    85.7   75.0     95.8   98.6     97.2    80.4    95.4      99.2    97.2   80.6
 Logo                    100    100      100    100      100    100      100    100     100        100    100     100
 Lives                   100    100      100    100      100    100      100    100     100        100    100     100
 OxygenBarLogo          99.0    97.2    98.1    100     91.4   84.0     87.5    100     92.4      85.4    88.8    100
 PlayerScore             100    84.0    91.3   92.9     94.0   79.4     86.1    93.6    84.8      60.1    70.4   79.9
 OxygenBar              98.9    100     99.4    100     91.2    100     95.4    100     92.1       100    95.9    100
 Diver                  90.6    98.2    94.3   76.9     93.8    100     96.8    77.4    94.1      99.4    96.7   79.0
 PlayerMissile          70.0    100     82.4    100     67.8    100     80.8    100     69.1       100    81.7    100
 Enemy                  97.8    98.9    98.3   55.8     57.8   90.6     70.6    51.5    75.6      87.5    81.1   52.7
 EnemyMissile           94.3    44.0    60.0   71.7     88.9   85.1     87.0    70.9    93.2      71.4    80.9   70.9
 CollectedDiver          100    100      100    100      100    100      100    100     91.8       100    95.7    100
 EnemySubmarine         95.9    100     97.9   77.6     98.1    100     99.0    75.1    94.3      96.1    95.2   70.7


F.33    S KIING DETAILS


You control a skier who can move sideways. The goal is to run
through all gates (between the poles) in the fastest time. You are
penalized five seconds for each gate you miss. If you hit a gate or a
tree, your skier will jump back up and keep going.


                                   Table 39: Per class statistics on Skiing

                       Random                                  DQN                                     C51
               Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU        Pr        Rec F-sc          IOU     Pr        Rec     F-sc    IOU
 Score       100       100      100      100     100       100        100       100    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Mogul       97.2     99.2     98.2     84.0     100       100        100      85.7    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Tree        81.0     83.5     82.2     75.0     51.1     51.3        51.2     48.3    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Logo        100       100      100      100     100       100        100       100    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Clock       100       100      100      100     100       100        100       100    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Player      99.2     96.7     97.9     64.0     100       100        100      63.9    nan       nan     nan     nan
 Flag        95.8     97.4     96.6     86.0     100       100        100      86.7    nan       nan     nan     nan


                                                        38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.34    S PACE I NVADERS DETAILS


Your objective is to destroy the space invaders by shooting your
laser cannon at them before they reach the Earth. The game ends
when all your lives are lost after taking enemy fire, or when they
reach the earth.


                               Table 40: Per class statistics on SpaceInvaders

                            Random                                  DQN                                C51
                 Pr        Rec F-sc          IOU       Pr         Rec F-sc        IOU     Pr     Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Shield        98.9     98.8        98.8     90.7      100        88.3    93.8    97.6    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Score         79.0     100         88.3      100     65.3         100    79.0    100     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Lives         76.8     79.1        77.9      100     73.3        70.2    71.7    100     nan    nan     nan    nan
 Player        93.4     100         96.6     91.6     94.4         100    97.1    91.9    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Alien          100     99.6        99.8     98.3      100        98.4    99.2    99.1    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Bullet        33.5     66.1        44.5     79.2     31.9        64.1    42.6    76.8    nan    nan     nan    nan
 Satellite     97.3     100         98.6     93.4      100         100     100    92.2    nan    nan     nan    nan


F.35    T ENNIS DETAILS


You control the orange player playing against a computer-controlled
blue player. The game follows the rules of tennis. The first player
to win at least 6 games with a margin of at least two games wins
the match. If the score is tied at 6-6, the first player to go 2 games
up wins the match.


                                      Table 41: Per class statistics on Tennis

                              Random                                  DQN                              C51
                      Pr     Rec F-sc          IOU           Pr     Rec F-sc       IOU     Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Logo               100      100       100      100      100       100      100    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 EnemyScore         100      100       100     98.7      100       100      100    100     nan   nan     nan    nan
 BallShadow        95.5      98.3     96.9     65.3     96.1       97.1    96.6    50.5    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Ball              95.2      100      97.6     70.9     95.0       100     97.4    70.3    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy             99.0      100      99.5     73.1     87.6       100     93.4    72.1    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player            97.8      100      98.9     71.7     83.0       100     90.7    69.9    nan   nan     nan    nan
 PlayerScore        100      100       100      100     97.0       94.2    95.6    97.4    nan   nan     nan    nan



                                                             39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.36    V ENTURE DETAILS


Your goal is to capture the treasure in every chamber of the dungeon
while eliminating the monsters.


                                     Table 42: Per class IOU on Venture

                                  Random                            DQN                            C51
                           Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU         Pr   Rec F-sc      IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Life                     100    100      100     100     100      100    100   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Hallmonsters            46.2    99.6    63.2    84.1    26.7     98.3   42.0   84.6   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Player                  93.0    99.6    96.2    99.3    54.0     99.6   70.0   98.4   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Score                    100    100      100     100     100      100    100   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Goblin                  50.0    100     66.7     100     nan      nan    nan    nan   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Shot                    50.0    100     66.7    50.0    66.7      100   80.0   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Yellow_Collectable      50.0    100     66.7     100     nan      nan    nan    nan   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Skeleton                 nan     nan     nan     nan    44.4      100   61.5   100    nan   nan     nan    nan
 Purple_Collectable       nan     nan     nan     nan    66.7      100   80.0   100    nan   nan     nan    nan


F.37    V IDEO P INBALL DETAILS


Your goal is to keep the ball in play as long as possible and to score
as many points as possible.


                                                        40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table 43: Per class IOU on VideoPinball

                              Random                           DQN                               C51
                      Pr     Rec F-sc       IOU        Pr    Rec F-sc         IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Score              84.8    75.8    80.1    91.1    97.2     95.3     96.2    99.0   nan   nan     nan    nan
 DropTarget         97.8    86.5    91.8    94.2    99.6     88.6     93.8    88.3   nan   nan     nan    nan
 LifeUsed           98.0     100    99.0     100    99.6     100      99.8     100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 DifficultyLevel    98.0     100    99.0     100    99.6     100      99.8     100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Spinner            98.0    99.7    98.8    76.1    99.6     100      99.8    76.5   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Flipper            98.5    99.4    98.9    74.2    99.6     100      99.8    72.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Ball               90.0     100    94.7    99.9    98.6     100      99.3     100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Bumper             98.0     100    99.0    99.6    99.6     100      99.8    99.9   nan   nan     nan    nan


F.38    YARS R EVENGE DETAILS


The objective is to break a path through the shield and destroy the
Qotile with a blast from the Zorlon Cannon.


                                Table 44: Per class IOU on YarsRevenge

                              Random                           DQN                               C51
                       Pr    Rec F-sc        IOU       Pr    Rec F-sc         IOU    Pr    Rec     F-sc   IOU
 Player              89.1    96.5    92.7    88.2    50.0    100      66.7    46.7   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Barrier             40.9    94.1    57.1     100    50.0    100      66.7     100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Shield_Block        45.5    94.3    61.4    82.0    21.8    100      35.8    77.8   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy               98.2    88.7    93.2    98.6     100    100       100     100   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Enemy_Missile       34.8    99.4    51.5    93.3      0.0   nan        0.0    nan   nan   nan     nan    nan
 Swirl               65.0    92.9    76.5    63.7     nan    nan       nan     nan   nan   nan     nan    nan


                                                      41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     C OMMON M ISTAKES IN E XTRACTING AND D ETECTING O BJECTS


Figure 7: Animation and errors in the game of DemonAttack and YarsRevenge. We can see multiple
particle effects and invisible objects. In the left we see the spawn animation of an enemy, i n the
second image we see the death animation of the player and in the last we see the invisible shields in
YarsRevenge. In all cases the objects are already detected even if it is not yet or not anymore visible
to the player.

In this section, we will briefly discuss 2 common errors that can occur during detection and extraction based on
the games DemonAttack and YarsRevenge.
Case 1: Particle effects. As described in Section 2, we primarily use positional information and the change
of colors to identify objects in the visual detection of objects (VEM). It can happen that particle effects are
incorrectly identified as objects, see Figure 7. In our RAM extraction we have defined the number and types
of objects before extraction and concentrate on all game elements that are relevant for the game. Since these
particle effects have no effect on the game, we deliberately do not detect them, which leads to a higher errors in
F1 and IOU.

Case 2: Invisible objects. If objects disappear or appear in a game, there are various ways to realize this.
The most common and simplest method, which is also used in most games, is to initialize objects only when
they appear and to clear the memory when objects disappear. However, some games, such as DemonAttack or
YarsRevenge (Fig. 7) use a different method. Here the objects are only set to invisible when they disappear or
already exist before the objects appear. As such, these objects are also found and tracked by our REM method
at an early stage, even though they have not yet appeared, which leads to an increased error. In many games
we have therefore tried to find binary information about which objects are active so that those that are not, are
not detected. This helps to minimize the error and increase the scores, as you can see in the updates scores in
DemonAttack.


                                                       42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     D IFFERENCE BETWEEN ATARI ARI AND OCATARI

    Game               Objects (AtariARI)                         Objects (OCAtari)
    Asterix            Enemies, Player, Lives, Score, Mis-        Enemies, Player, Lives, Score, Mis-
                       siles                                      siles
    Berzerk            Player, Missiles, Lives, Killcount,        Logo, Player, Missiles, Enemies,
                       Level, Evil Otto, Enemies                  Score, RoomCleared
    Bowling            Ball, Player, FrameNumber, Pins,           Pins, Player, PlayerScore, Player-
                       Score                                      Round, Player2Round, Ball
    Boxing             Player, Enemy, Scores, Clock               Enemy, Player, Scores, Clock, Logo
    Breakout           Ball, Player, Blocks, Score                Player, Blocks, Live, Score, Ball
    Freeway            Player, Score, Cars                        Player, Score, Cars, Chicken
    Frostbite          Ice blocks, Lives, Igloo, Enemies,         Ice blocks Blue, Ice blocks White,
                       Player, Score                              Score, Player Lives, Igloo, Enemies
    Montezumas R.      RoomNr, Player, Skull, Monster,            Player, Lives, Skull, Barrier, Key,
                       Level, Lives, ItemsInInventory,            Score, Rope
                       RoomState, Score
    MsPacman           Enemies,     Player,    Fruits,            Lives, Score, Player, Enemies,
                       GhostsCount, DotsEaten, Score,             Fruits
                       Lives
    Pong               Player, Enemy, Ball, Scores                Player, Enemy, Ball, Scores
    PrivateEye         Player, RoomNr, Clock, Score,
                       Dove
    Q*Bert             Player, PlayerColumn, Red Enemy,           Cubes/Tiles, Score, Lives, Disks,
                       Green Enemy, Score, TileColors             Player, Sam, PurpleBall, Coily,
                                                                  GreenBall
    Riverraid          Player, Missile, FuelMeter                 Score, FuelMeter, Tanker, Lives,
                                                                  Player, Helicopter, Missile, Bridge,
                                                                  Jet
    Seaquest           Enemy, Player, EnemyMissile, Play-         Player, Lives, OxygenBar, Score,
                       erMissile, Score, Lives, Diver-            Divers, PlayerMissile, Enemy, Ene-
                       sCount                                     myMissile, DiverCount
    SpaceInvaders      InvadersCount, Score,             Lives,   Score, Lives, Player, Enemies, Mis-
                       Player, Enemies, Missiles                  siles, Satellite, Shield
    Tennis             Enemy, Scores, Ball, Player                Enemy, Scores, Ball, BallShadow,
                                                                  Player, Logo

Table 45: All games, supported by both AtariARI and OCAtari with their respective object lists. Note
that OCAtari returns a list of (x,y,w,h) per object and AtariARI provides the value written at a specific
RAM position (x and y positions or the direct value, e.g. , scores and so on)


                                                    43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   I NSUFFICENT I NFORMATION IN ATARI ARI

     Game               Reason
                 1
     Battlezone         Unfinished
     DemonAttack        Not all Demons are spotted
     Hero               Missing Enemies
     Q*Bert             Some Enemies, like Coily (Snake) are missing
     Skiing1            Unfinished
     RiverRaid          Important Elements (see above) are missing
     Seaquest           Oxygenbar, Divers are missing
     SpaceInvaders      Shields are missing

Table 46: In Table 1 some games are marked with a ∼ to show that the RAM information provided
by AtariARI are insufficient. This table gives a short reason while we marked each game.


J   REM VS VEM: S PEED PERFORMANCE
The following graph shows that we the RAM Extraction Method of OCAtari is, in average, 50× computationally
more efficient than the Vision Extraction method.


Figure 8: Using the RAM extraction procedures leads to 50× faster environments. The average
time needed to perform 104 steps in each OCAtari game, using RAM extraction (REM), and our
vision extraction (VEM).


   1
     The games appear in the Github for AtariARI, but not in the associated publication (Anand et al., 2019).
Also, the information does not seem sufficient to play with them alone so we did not indicate these games in
Table 1 at all.


                                                    44
