Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F UNDAMENTAL LIMITATIONS OF ALIGNMENT
IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         An important aspect in developing language models that interact with humans is
         aligning their behavior to be useful and unharmful for their human users. This is
         usually achieved by tuning the model in a way that enhances desired behaviors
         and inhibits undesired ones, a process referred to as alignment. In this paper, we
         propose a theoretical approach called Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB) which
         allows us to formally investigate several inherent characteristics and limitations of
         alignment in large language models. Importantly, we prove that within the limits
         of this framework, for any behavior that has a finite probability of being exhibited
         by the model, there exist prompts that can trigger the model into outputting this be-
         havior, with probability that increases with the length of the prompt. This implies
         that any alignment process that attenuates an undesired behavior but does not re-
         move it altogether, is not safe against adversarial prompting attacks. Furthermore,
         our framework hints at the mechanism by which leading alignment approaches
         such as reinforcement learning from human feedback make the LLM prone to
         being prompted into the undesired behaviors. This theoretical result is being ex-
         perimentally demonstrated in large scale by the so called contemporary “chatGPT
         jailbreaks”, where adversarial users trick the LLM into breaking its alignment
         guardrails by triggering it into acting as a malicious persona. Our results expose
         fundamental limitations in alignment of LLMs and bring to the forefront the need
         to devise reliable mechanisms for ensuring AI safety.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Training large language models (LLMs) over vast corpora has revolutionized natural language pro-
cessing, giving LLMs the ability to mimic human-like interactions and serve as general purpose
assistants in a wide variety of tasks, such as wide-scoped question answering, writing assistance,
teaching, and more (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Schulman et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023; Nori et al., 2023; West, 2023; Park et al., 2023). A
growing concern due to the increasing reliance on LLMs for such purposes is the harm they can
cause their users, such as feeding fake information (Lin et al., 2022; Weidinger et al., 2022), behav-
ing offensively and feeding social biases (Hutchinson et al., 2020; Venkit et al., 2022; Weidinger
et al., 2022), or encouraging problematic behaviors by users (even by psychologically manipulating
them Roose (2023); Atillah (2023)). Indeed, evidently, the unsupervised textual data used for pre-
training modern LLMs includes enough demonstrations of the above undesired behaviors for them
to be present in the resulting models (Bender et al., 2021). The act of removing these undesired
behaviors is often called alignment (Yudkowsky, 2001; Taylor et al., 2016; Amodei et al., 2016;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2022; Ngo, 2022).
There are several different approaches to performing alignment in LLMs. One is to include align-
ing prompts: Askell et al. (2021) show that injecting language models with helpful, honest, and
harmless (HHH) textual prompts improves alignment and decreases toxicity. Similarly, Rae et al.
(2021) also use prompting in order to decrease toxicity. Another approach for LLM alignment is
the procedure of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) in order to train language
models to be helpful and harmless (Bai et al., 2022). The procedure is to further train a pretrained
language model with the assistance of a human evaluator in order to optimize its outputs to the eval-
uator’s preferences. Their work shows an increase in an LLM’s HHH scores while maintaining its
useful abilities, as measured by zero- and few-shot performance on different natural language tasks.
Another notable work using this method is by Ouyang et al. (2022), which fine tune GPT-3 into


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


InstructGPT using data collected from human labelers to reach better performance on a variety of
tasks, while improving HHH (measured via bias and toxicity datasets Gehman et al. (2020); Nangia
et al. (2020)).
While the above approaches to alignment are effective to a certain extent, they are still dangerously
brittle. For example, Wallace et al. (2019) show that short adversarial prompts can trigger negative
behaviors and social biases. Yu & Sagae (2021) and Xu et al. (2021) provide methods for expos-
ing harmful behaviors of models by triggering problematic responses. Subhash (2023) showed that
adversarial prompts can manipulate ChatGPT to alter user preferences. Beyond academic works,
the general media is abundant with contemporary examples of leading LLMs being manipulated by
users to expose harmful behaviors via the so called “jailbreaking” approach of prompting the LLM
to mimic a harmful persona (Nardo, 2023; Deshpande et al., 2023). Even in the absence of ad-
versarial attacks, leading alignment methods can underperform and are not well understood: Perez
et al. (2022) provide evidence that certain negative behaviors have inverse scaling with the number
of RLHF steps, indicating that this popular alignment procedure may have a complex effect.
In this paper, we introduce a probabilistic framework for analyzing alignment and its limitations
in LLMs, which we call Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB), and use it in order to establish fun-
damental properties of alignment in LLMs. The core idea behind BEB is to represent the LLM
distribution as a superposition of ill- and well-behaved components, in order to provide guarantees
on the ability to restrain the ill-behaved components, i.e., guarantees that the LLM is aligned. It is
noteworthy that LLMs have been shown to distinctly represent behaviors and personas, and the no-
tion of persona or behavior superposition has been intuitively proposed as an explanation (Andreas,
2022; Nardo, 2023).
Our BEB framework assumes an underlying categorization into different behaviors, where any nat-
ural language sentence is assigned a ground truth score between −1 (very negative) and +1 (very
positive) for every behavior (see examples in Figure 1). Such a categorization can be, e.g., into the
previously proposed helpful, honest, and harmless categories, but it can also be expanded and fine-
grained into many more categories such as polite, not racist, compassionate, and so on. Given such a
categorization and ground truth sentence scoring functions per category, the alignment score of any
distribution over natural sentences w.r.t. a given behavior is the expectation value of sentence scores
for sentences drawn from the distribution. The BEB framework thus provides a natural theoretical
basis for describing the goal of contemporary alignment approaches such as RLHF: increasing the
behavior expectation scores for behaviors of interest.
Additionally, the BEB framework employs assumptions on the LLM distribution presented in sec-
tion 2. These include the notion of α, β, γ-distinguishability (definition 5), which means the lan-
guage model can be decomposed to a sum of ill-behaved and well-behaved components, where the
weight of the negative in the mixture is α, it is distinguishable from the rest of the distribution in
the sense of a bounded KL-divergence that is at least β, and exhibits negative behavior scored as
γ < 0. Lastly, we include a definition for σ-similarity between two components (definition 4), which
bounds the variance of the log likelihood between the well-behaved and ill-behaved components.
We use this framework in section 3 in order to assert several important statements regarding LLM
alignment: Alignment impossibility: We show that under our main assumption, called α, β, γ-
distinguishability, an LLM alignment process which reduces undesired behaviors to a small but
nonzero fraction of the probability space is not safe against adversarial prompts (theorem 1); Preset
aligning prompts can only provide a finite guardrail against adversarial prompts: We prove
that under our main assumption and the assumption of σ-similarity (def. 4), including an aligning
prefix prompt does not guarantee alignment (theorem 2). LLMs can be misaligned during a con-
versation: We show that under our previous assumptions, a user can misalign an LLM during a
conversation, with limited prompt length at each turn (theorem 3).
In section 4, we demonstrate empirically some of the assumptions and results derived from the
BEB framework on the LLaMA LLM family (Meta, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). In subsection 4.1
we measure possible values for β-distinguishability (definition 2) and σ-similarity (definition 4),
as can be seen in figure 2. In subsection 4.2 we demonstrate the underlying mechanism by which
misalignment happens in the BEB framework, which is the convergence of the LLM to a negative
behavior component. This is done by showing a decay of the KL divergence between the two, as
seen in figure 3a. Furthermore, we can extract estimated parameters of the theoretical framework



                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Examples of sentence behavior scores along different behavior verticals. Our frame-
work of Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB) assumes ground truth behavior scoring functions, and
bounds the expected scores of models along different behavior verticals in order to guarantee LLM
alignment or misalignment.
allowing to calculate the expected misaligning prompt length. Moreover, we demonstrate how the
method proposed by the BEB framework for generating misaligning prompts causes misalignment
(figure 3b), which is quantified by our proposed behavior expectation metric (equation 2). This
framework is mainly centered around models that have undergone an aligning finetuning process
such as RLHF and less on pretrained models, as the latter are not aligned to begin with and require
little effort to be provoked into behaving negatively (as shown in appendix K), but even so, the
theoretical framework is still applicable to both. In subsection 4.2 we also present preliminary
indications that the RLHF alignment process increases the distinguishability of undesired behaviors,
but we leave the investigation of this possibility for future work.
Overall, we hope that our newly proposed framework of Behavior Expectation Bounds, along with
our attained results, may spark a theoretical thrust helping to better understand the important topic
of LLM alignment.

2   B EHAVIOR E XPECTATION B OUNDS : A FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYZING
    LLM A LIGNMENT
In this section, we introduce Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB), a probabilistic framework for
studying alignment of LLMs. Given a language model’s probability distribution P, we propose a
measure for quantifying its tendency to produce desired outputs as measured by a certain behaviour
vertical B, where for example B can be helpfulness, politeness, or any other behavior vertical of in-
terest. Formally, we model behaviour scoring functions along vertical B as B : Σ⋆ → [−1, 1], which
take a string of text from an alphabet Σ as their input and rate the manner in which B manifests in the
string, with +1 being very positive and −1 being very negative. This formulation directly reflects
recent empirical efforts for studying alignment. In particular, (Perez et al., 2022) recently curated
500 negative and positive examples along each of over 100 different behavior verticals. Figure 1
shows short examples of the behavior scores of several sentences along two behavior verticals.
We use the following expected behavior scoring of distribution P w.r.t. behavior vertical B as a
scalar quantifyer of the tendency of P to produce desired behavior along the B vertical:
                                          BP := Es∼P [B(s)]                                         (1)
where for clarity purposes, in this paper sampling from language distributions is implicitly restricted
to single sentences (see discussion on this choice and its limitations in A.3). We use the above distri-
bution notation P to represent that of an unprompted LLM, e.g., an LLM straight out of pretraining
or out of an alignment tuning procedure such as RLHF. The task of aligning a pretrained LLM can
be now framed as increasing its expected behavior scores along behavior verticals of interest.
Intuitively, as an LLM is prompted with a prefix text string s∗ , the behaviour of the conditional
probability P (· | s∗ ) might change in accordance with the in-context learning phenomenon (Brown
et al., 2020; Wies et al., 2023) in which the LLM adapts its conditional probabilities to reflect its
current textual context. Thus, we will denote by BP (s∗ ) the behaviour of the language model when


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


prompted with a prompt text s∗ :
                                     BP (s∗ ) := Es∼P(·|s∗ ) [B(s)]                                  (2)
                                                            ∗
We will consider several scenarios for which the prefix s plays different roles. The first and main
one is that s∗ serves as an adversarial input prompt. Our key finding in this paper is that an LLM
which was initially aligned w.r.t. a certain behavior vertical, i.e., BP very close to 1, can still be
vulnerable to adversarial prompts, i.e., there exists a prompt s∗ such that BP (s∗ ) is very close to −1.
Secondly, we will consider a scenario in which s∗ is comprised of an initial aligning prompt, denoted
s0 , concatenated by a subsequent adversarial input prompt. Lastly, we will analyze conversation
scenarios in which s∗ is comprised of previous turns of user queries and LLM responses.

2.1   LLM S AS A SUPERPOSITION OF BEHAVIORS
In this subsection, we present a key aspect of our BEB framework: decomposing the LLM distri-
bution P into a mixture of distributions, each behaving differently. Importantly, LLMs exhibit signs
of capturing such decompositions in practice. For example, Andreas (2022) shows empirical evi-
dence that current LLMs can infer behaviours from textual prompts, and that these behaviours affect
the text that the LLM generates, and Nardo (2023) discuss LLMs as a superposition of personas.
We will use mixture decompositions inspired by such observations, and prove that textual prompts
can reweight the prior of the mixture components. In appendix I, we experimentally demonstrate
that the embedding space of contemporary leading LLMs (LLaMA family (Meta, 2023) ) is clus-
tered according to positive and negative inputs w.r.t. behaviors of interest (assembled by (Perez et al.,
2022)), and empirically show that this clustering approximately corresponds to our analyzed mixture
decomposition model, presented hereinafter.
Observe that for any decomposition of a distribution P into two components, P = αP0 + (1 − α)P1 ,
the relation BP = αBP0 + (1 − α)BP1 holds from linearity of expectations, and implies that one
component is more well-behaved w.r.t. B than the full distribution and the other more ill-behaved,
i.e.: BP1 ≤ BP ≤ BP0 (or vice versa). Thus, focusing on a specific behavior, we adopt the notation:
                                       P = αP− + (1 − α)P+                                           (3)
We refer to the above as the two component mixture, where P+ is the well-behaved component and
P− is the ill-behaved component. Note that for a mixture of multiple components, we can always
create two components by splitting the original components into two disjoint sets.
While this observation is true for any decomposition into two distributions, we will give results for
decompositions in which the two distributions P− and P+ are sufficiently distinct (formally defined
in section 2.2), and we are interested in decompositions where the negative component is strictly
ill-behaved (i.e, BP− ≤ γ < 0). In these cases, the magnitude of α, the prior of the ill-behaved
component, will determine the alignment of the LLM: an LLM with a small prior α will be less
likely to produce undesired sentences along behavior B vertical. Our main result in section 3 states
that no matter how small α is (how aligned the model is to begin with), if it is positive then there
exists a prompt that can misalign the LLM to behave like P− . For an extended discussion on the
mixture assumption and its implications, see A.1.
2.2   D EFINITIONS FOR BOUNDING THE EXPECTED LLM BEHAVIOR
In this subsection, we lay out formal definitions of our BEB framework. Specifically, we de-
fine: behavior misalignment using prompts (definition 1); distinguishability between unprompted
(prompted) model distributions (definition 2 (3)) and similarity between two distributions (defini-
tion 4) that fit a prompting scenario; distinguishibility between ill- and well-behaved components
comprising a certain LLM’s distribution (definition 5), called α, β, γ-distinguishability. Ultimately,
α is the prior of the negative component, β is the distinguishability (according to definition 2) be-
tween the ill-behaved component and the well behaved component, and γ is the negativity of the
ill-behaved component, measured in terms of behavior expectation (equation 2).
Once an LLM has finished training, its behavior can only be affected via prompting. Using the
above notation for behavior expectation (equations 1 and 2), the following defines when an LLM is
prompt-misalignable:
Definition 1. Let γ ∈ [−1, 0), we say that an LLM with distribution P is γ-prompt-misalignable
w.r.t. behaviour B, if for any ϵ > 0 there exists a textual prompt s∗ ∈ Σ⋆ such that BP (s∗ ) < γ + ϵ.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that while the above definition is based on existence of a specific prompt, our theoretical
results in 3 are proved by construction of this prompt by an empirically practical method, and this
construction method is used in 4.2 to create misaligning prompts that work on real LLMs.
Decomposing a language model into parts that are well-behaved and ill-behaved exposes compo-
nents which are more desirable to enhance. The following notion of distinguishability will allow us
to guarantee that one component can be enhanced over the other 1 .
Definition 2. We say that a distribution Pϕ is β-distinguishable from distribution Pψ if ∀n ≥ 0:
               Es1 ⊕···⊕sn ∼Pϕ (·) [DKL (Pϕ (·|s1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ sn ) || Pψ (·|s1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ sn ))]    (4)

                                                          Pϕ (sn+1 |s1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ sn )
                       := Es1 ⊕···⊕sn ⊕sn+1 ∼Pϕ (·) log                                 >β       (5)
                                                          Pψ (sn+1 |s1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ sn )

Where n is the number of sentences sampled from the distribution2 . The above definition is used for
proving our main result theorem 1. For more advanced cases in theorems 2 and 3, of misaligning a
prompt protected model or via a multiple turn conversation, we will require a stronger condition, that
both distributions are distinguishable when prompted with a prefix s0 , that can contain any textual
sequence followed by some sentence of negative behavior. This is to capture the notion that the
positive and negative components are mainly different w.r.t a specific behavior in question. Hence
the negative sentence induces the distinguishability.
Definition 3. We say that a distribution Pϕ is β-prompt-distinguishable from Pψ is for any prefix
s0 = s10 ⊕ ... ⊕ sn0 of n sentence, ending with a negatively behaving sentence sn0 , i.e., B(sn0 ) < 0,
the prompted models Pϕ (·|s0 ) and Pψ (·|s0 ) are β-distinguishable.
For a discussion on distinguishability, its necessity, limitations and examples, see A.2. The following
bounds the extent to which a new sentence can enhance one component over the other:
Definition 4. We say that a distribution Pϕ is σ-similar to distribution Pψ if there exists σ > 0 such
that for any sequence of sentences s0 and any n ≥ 0:

                                                        Pϕ (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sn |s0 )
                   ∀s0 : V ars1 ⊕...⊕sn ∼Pϕ (·|s0 ) log                           < nσ 2             (6)
                                                        Pψ (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sn |s0 )
Intuitively, if both Pϕ and Pψ are natural language distributions, they cannot be too different in
terms of the variance in the ratio of their conditional likelihoods, and σ quantifies this. Furthermore,
when Pϕ and Pψ represent positive and negative angles of a specific behaviour, it is likely that they
have some common properties so in these cases σ is likely even lower than the bound over all natural
language sentences. The linear dependence on length of sequence is inspired by the case of sampling
n independent sentences, where variance between the log ratio of Pϕ and Pψ is σ 2 for each sentence.
β roughly serves as a lower bound on the KL-divergence, and σ its variation and their ratio will
appear in several of our results in section 3. The following defines β-distinguishability specifically
between the ill- and well-behaved components comprising the LLM distribution, parameterized by
α in equation 3, and adds a condition that the behavior expectation of the ill-behaved component is
bad enough (i.e., under γ) for all initial prompts s∗ :
Definition 5. Let γ ∈ [−1, 0), assume P = α · P− + (1 − α) · P+ for α > 0. We say that
behaviour B : Σ⋆ → [−1, 1] is α, β, γ-negatively-distinguishable (α, β, γ-negatively-prompt-
distinguishable) in distribution P, if sups∗ {BP− (s∗ )} ≤ γ and P− is β-distinguishable (β-prompt-
distinguishable) from P+ (def. 2) ((def. 3)).
We will prove our theoretical results for LLM distributions that are distinguishable according to the
above KL-divergence based definitions. Our experiments in section 4 indicate that for the LLaMa
LM family on behaviors such as agreeableness and anti-immigration as presented in Perez et al.
(2022), possible values for these parameters are: log α1 in the range of 18 − 30, β is in the range of
5 − 20 and βσ in the range of 0.35 − 1.
Lastly, for analyzing conversations, we require the assumption that the negative component is always
more likely to output an ill-behaved answer than the positive component, to bound the change in log-
likelihood between the two in the exchange between the model’s turn and the user’s turn:
   1
     Note that the β-distinguishability definition can be relaxed to a KL distance that decays as a power law to
zero with increasing length of the prompt s0 , as shown in appendix G
   2
     The notation s1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ sn ∼ Pϕ (·|s0 ) indicates sampling n consecutive sentences from the conditional
probability distribution Pϕ (·|s0 ) given the initial sentence s0 .


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 6. We say that Pψ is positive w.r.t Pϕ on behavior B : Σ∗ → [−1, 1] if for any prefix s0
and a sentence s, that is negative, B(s) < 0, the following holds: Pψ (s|s0 ) < Pϕ (s|s0 ).
3     R ESULTS : L IMITATIONS OF LLM ALIGNMENT
In this section, we use the above framework of Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB) in order to
inform the question of when LLM alignment is robust or vulnerable to adversarial prompting attacks.
We begin with our main result in section 3.1, which states that under assumptions of decomposability
into distinguishable components of desired and undesired behavior, aligned LLMs are not protected
against adversarial misaligning prompts (theorem 1). In section 3.2, we extend the above framework
to include cases of (i) preset aligning prompts—we formally establish the benefits of this common
practice by showing that in this case the length of the misaligning prompt must be linear in the
length of the preset aligning prompt; and (ii) multi-turn interactions between adversarial users and
LLMs—we find that if the user does not provide long enough misaligning prompts, the LLM can
resist misalignment by making aligning replies to the user during a conversation.

3.1   M ISALIGNING VIA ADVERSARIAL PROMPTS
Alignment impossibility We first show that if a model can be written as a distinct mixture of ill-
and well-behaved components, then it can be misaligned via prompting:
Theorem 1. Let γ ∈ [−1, 0), let B be a behaviour and P be an unprompted language model such
that B is α, β, γ-negatively-distinguishable in P (definition 5). Then P is γ-prompt-misalignable
w.r.t. B (definition 1) with prompt length of β1 (log α1 + log 1ϵ + log 4).
Intuitively, theorem 1 implies that if a component of the distribution exhibits a negative behavior with
expectation under γ, then there exists a prompt that triggers this behavior for the entire language
model into behaving with expectation under γ. Importantly, no matter how low the prior of the
negative component α is, the LLM is vulnerable to adversarial prompting that exposes this negative
component’s behavior. Furthermore, the guaranteed misaligning prompt scales logarithmically in
α−1 , providing insight into why even very low probability behaviors can be enhanced with merely
a few sentences. Additionally, we see that increased distinguishability can reduce the misaligning
prompt length, meaning that while some behaviors may have lower probability (i.e. lower α), they
may have higher distinguishability β, thus overall requiring shorter misaligning prompts.
Essentially, our proof follows the PAC based theoretical framework for in-context learning intro-
duced in Wies et al. (2023), while relaxing their approximate independence assumption and adapt-
ing the analysis to the BEB framework. We provide below a sketch for the proof of theorem 1, fully
detailed in appendix C:
Proof sketch (see full details in the appendix). The assumption that B is α, β, γ-negatively-
distinguishable in P implies that P can be written as a mixture distribution of a misaligned compo-
nent P and an aligned component P+ . While the prior of P might be low and hence the behaviour
of the unprompted P is initially aligned with high probability, the fact that P is β-distinguishable
from P+ assures us that the conditional KL-divergence between P and P+ is greater than β for any
initial prompt s0 . Therefore, we can use the chain rule and get that when sampling n successive sen-
tences from P , the KL-divergence between P and P+ is at least n · β. Consequently, we show that
for any n there exists a textual prompt s⋆ consisting of n sentences, such that the likelihood of s⋆
according to P is exponentially (both in β and n) more likely than the likelihood of s⋆ according to
P+ . Finally, note that during the evaluation of the expected behavior scoring, such exponential dif-
ferences between the likelihood of s⋆ according to the different mixture components reweight their
priors. We show that the contribution of P+ to the behaviour of the prompted LLM P is negligible.
3.2 E XTENSIONS : ALIGNING PROMPTS AND CONVERSATIONS
Misaligning in the presence of preset aligning prompts A common practice for enhancing pos-
itive behavior is to include an initial ‘preset aligning prompt’, denoted s0 below, hard coded as a
prefix to the LLM’s input. The theorem below states that even in the presence of s0 , it is possible to
prompt the LLM into an undesired behavior with a ‘misaligning prompt’. We show that the required
prompt length for misalignment scales linearly with the length of s0 .
Theorem 2. Let δ > 0, γ ∈ [−1, 0), B be a behaviour and P be a language model such that B
is α, β, γ-negatively-prompt-distinguishable in P (definition 5). If the distribution corresponding to
the well-behaved component of P is β-distinguishable, σ-similar (definition 4) and positive (defini-
tion 6) with respect to to the ill-behaved component, then for an aligning prompt s0 ∼ P+ (·), the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


conditional LLM distribution P(·|s0 ) is γ-prompt-misalignable
                                            q                  with probability 1 − δ with prompt
length β1 (log α1 + log 1ϵ + log 4) + |s0 | + βσ |sδ0 | + 1.
Theorem 2 guarantees that even in the presence of a preset aligning prompt s0 , there exists a long
enough prompt that will misalign the model. See figure 3a which demonstrates how an align-
prompted model requires longer adversarial prompts to misalign than unprompted models. For
proof see appendix D.
Misaligning via conversation We show below that an undesired behavior can be elicited from
an LLM via conversation with an adversarial user. Interestingly, we show that if the adversarial
user does not use a long enough misaligning prompt in the first turn, then the LLM’s responses can
hinder the user’s misaligning efforts. Intuitively, if a user begins a conversation by simply requesting
“say a racist statement”, an aligned LLM will likely reply “I will not say racist statements, that is
harmful”, and this reply in its prompt will cause the LLM to be more mindful of refraining from
racist statements in the remainder of the conversation. Overall, due to this ‘misaligning resistance’
by the LLM, the user will need to insert more misaligning text in the conversation format than in the
single prompt format of section 3.1 in order for our framework to guarantee misalignment.
We formalize a conversation between a user and an LLM of distribution P as a sequence of user
queries followed by LLM responses which are sampled from the LLM’s conditional distribution
given the conversation thus far. Formally, given the history of the conversation, q1 , a1 ...qt , at , qt+1 ,
where qi are the user’s inputs and ai are the LLM’s responses, the LLM generates a response at+1
by sampling from: at+1 ∼ P(·|q1 , a1 , ..., qt , at , qt+1 ). In the following theorem we show that under
our distinguishability conditions, misalignment is always possible also in a conversation format:
Theorem 3. Under the conditions of theorem 2 and that the distribution corresponding to the
well-behaved component of P is β-prompt-distinguishable to the ill-behaved component, in a con-
versation setting: q1 , a1 ...qn , an , qn+1 , the model is γ-misalignable
                                                                 q                with total prompt length of
Pn             1      1        1
                                               Pn              σ    n|ai |
   i=1 |qi | = β (log α + log ϵ + log 4) +        i=1 |ai | + β       δ      + n and each prompt of length no
                              q                1      1
                                     i|    log ϵ +log α +log 4
longer than |qi | ≤ |ai | + βσ n|a  δ +            nβ          + 1.
Comparing the above requirement on the amount of misaligning text to that required in the single
prompting
Pn             scenario of theorem 1, we see that it is larger by the total text generated by the model
   i=1  |ai |. Intuitively, in the beginning of the conversation the model is aligned, so it is most likely
that its response will be sampled from the well-behaved component, thus enhancing it over the ill-
behaved component (see the proof of theorem 3 in appendix E for formalization of this intuition).
4    E MPIRICAL RESULTS
In this section we demonstrate that several properties that are predicted by our theoretical frame-
work manifest in experiments with common LLMs. Our empirical results are divided into two parts.
First, we probe the range of realistic values for β and σ, by using real LLMs that display opposite
behaviors (figure 2). Next, we employ the method used in our theoretical proofs for constructing
an adversarial prompt in order to show that a real RLHF finetuned LLM distribution converges to
a negative behavior distribution at a rate which corresponds to our theory (figure 3a) and that the
behavior expectation of the RLHF finetuned LLM becomes negative with said adversarial prompt
(figure 3b). We used models from the LLaMA 2 family Touvron et al. (2023). To obtain textual
data that displays defined behaviors, we used the datasets of Perez et al. (2022) which contain state-
ments classified to specific behaviors. In this section we demonstrate our results for the behavior
“agreeableness”, in the appendix section J, we show also for “anti-immigration”.
4.1 P OSSIBLE VALUES FOR β AND σ
In our theoretical bounds, β and σ (defined in section 2) play a central role: their absolute values, as
well as their ratio, dictate the length of our guaranteed misaligning prompts in the various analyzed
scenarios. Here we attempt to probe the possible values of β and σ for two LLM-based distributions
that display the negative and positive facets of the same behavior vertical, in an attempt to gain
insight on realistic values of β and σ within our framework.
To this end, we calculate the KL-divergence and corresponding variance between two LLMs based
on Llama-2 13B chat, where one was tuned on the data of Perez et al. (2022) to display negative
behavior (see technical training details in appendix J) and the other was taken as is, since it already
displayed the positive behavior. We denote these as P− and P+ but note that they are not the true


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


components of a possible LLM decomposition. The results are displayed in figure 2 for the behavior
“agreeableness” (as defined in Perez et al. (2022)). In this case, β = 20, σ 2 = 50, βσ = 0.35. For
numbers of this order, the ratio of σ/β is not too big, hence for δ of around 0.1, the terms in the
upper bounds of theorems 2 and 3 that are linear in text length dominate the square root terms.
For β-prompt-distinguishability, we ran a similar experiment in appendix L, by first inserting to
both models a neutral prefix followed by a negative behavior sentence, then performing the above
experiment. We observed that the approximated value of β remains similar (β ≈ 20).


Figure 2: (a) KL between two distributions of opposite behaviors as function of prompt length
sampled from P− , averaged on 10 sampled sequences. For these two distributions, we see β ≈ 20.
(b) Corresponding log ratio variance between the distributions mentioned in (a). 30 samples from
P− were used to evaluate the variance and its error. As seen, for σ 2 ≈ 50 definition 4 is satisfied.
4.2 D EMONSTRATION OF MISALIGNMENT VIA CONVERGENCE OF LLM TO P− AND AND VIA
      BEHAVIOR EXPECTATION
According to our theory, misalignment happens when the LLM distribution converges to its negative
component P− as both are conditioned on longer and longer prompts sampled from P− . Conse-
quently, the KL-divergence between P− and the LLM also decays and is bounded by the following
(see appendix F for proof of this dependence):
                                                                      1
                         DKL (P− (·|s)||PLLM (·|s)) < log(1 + elog α −β|s| )                       (7)
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                              log α
Hence for short prompts it is bounded by log α1 − β|s| and after reaching a length |s| =        β , it
quickly decays to zero. From this we see that the KL-divergence should converge to zero and that to
a limited extent, we can use its value at |s| = 0 and tangent to find possible values for log α1 and β.
Our objective here is to show that when prompted with our generated prompts, an actual LLM will
converge to a negative behavior distribution in a similar manner to our theoretical prediction. As
before, we substitute the negative component P− with an LLM distribution that displays negative
behavior, “P− ”. Figure 3a demonstrates that an RLHF fine-tuned LLM distribution converges to
“P− ” as both are conditioned on prompts sampled from the ill-behaved LLM (see appendix J for
experimental details). We fit a linear curve to approximate an effective log α1 − β|s|, but note that
the extracted values of α and β are an approximation, as the negative behavior LLM denoted by P−
is not the true sub-component of the RLHF fine-tuned LLM and that equation 7 is an upper bound
which is not necessarily tight. Still, we find that the ratio β1 log α1 = 3. We show below that this is
similar to the actual misaligning length.
As shown in figure 3b, using our method of sampling a misaligning prompt from P− , an RLHF
fine-tuned model loses its alignment as it is fed longer prompts from P− . Additionally, inserting an
aligning prompt stalls misalignment by about one sentence, similarly to how the misaligning prompt
length guarantee increases in theorem 2. Furthermore, in appendix K, we perform the same experi-
ment for the unaligned pretrained model and find that it too misaligns with this method. This shows
that the misaligning prompts from our theory are computationally tractable despite their specificity,
due to the theoretical method of their construction. We also see that using an approximation for P−
and not the true subcomponent achieves misalignment with dynamics that are similar to our theory.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: (a) KL-divergence between P− and an RLHF model (Llama 2 13B chat) as function of
prompt length sampled from P− , averaged on 10 sampled sequences. For the first three sentences,
we can fit a curve to approximate log α1 − β|s|. (b) Demonstration of misaligning Llama 2 13B chat
via our method of sampling sequences of negative behavior from P− . As can be seen, the LLM
distribution samples two types of behavior, one of negative behavior and one that tries to avoid it.
pretrained models vs RLHF models In appendix K we performed the same experiment for a
pretrained model, that has not undergone an alignment procedure, and found that the approximated
value for β is 5 times smaller than that of the RLHF model on both behaviors ”agreeableness” and
”anti-immigration”, hinting that perhaps RLHF reduces the probability for negative behavior (i.e.
α) but increases its distinguishability β at the same time.
5 D ISCUSSION
The need for robust methods for AI alignment is pressing. Prominent actors in our field are ad-
vocating for halting LLM development until the means of controlling this technology are better
understood (O’Brien, 2023). This paper brings forward the Behavior Expectation Bounds (BEB)
theoretical framework, which is aimed at providing means for discussing core alignment issues in
leading contemporary interactions between humans and LLMs.
We used the BEB framework to make several fundamental assertions regarding alignment in LLMs.
First, we showed that any realistic alignment process can be reversed via an adversarial prompt
or conversation with an adversarial user. As a silver lining, we showed that the better aligned the
model is to begin with, the longer the prompt required to reverse the alignment, so limited prompt
lengths may serve as guardrails in theory. With that, we also show that this picture is more complex,
and the distinguishability of undesired behavior components also facilitates easier misalignment.
Thus, while attenuating undesired behaviors, the leading alignment practice of reinforcement learn-
ing from human feedback (RLHF) may also render these same undesired behaviors more easily
accessible via adversarial prompts. We leave the latter statement as an open conjecture; this theo-
retical direction may explain the result in Perez et al. (2022), in which RLHF increases undesired
behaviors in language models. These results highlight the importance of using alignment methods
that are external to LLMs, such as filters and controllers Zou et al. (2023); Turner et al. (2023).
Our framework has several limitations further discussed in appendix A and we leave several issues
open for future work. Andreas (2022) describe modern LLMs as comprised of distinct agents that
manifest when the right prompt is inserted into the LLM. Our presented notions of decomposability
into components and distinguishability between them are one analyzable choice of modeling mul-
tiple agents or personas composing the LLM distribution. We showed that with this choice several
theoretical statements can be made that fit empirical observations on misalignment via prompting.
While intuitive and reinforced by embedding space clustering experiments in the appendix, we leave
it to future work to (i) further investigate superposition and decomposability in actual LLM distribu-
tions and (ii) introduce more elaborate or more realistic assumptions on the manner in which agent
or persona decomposition is manifested in actual LLM distributions, and use them to gain further
theoretical insight on LLM alignment. Elucidating this picture also bears promise for new empirical
methods for controlling ill-behaved components with actual LLMs. Furthermore, our framework
assumes ground truth behavior scores per sentence, where in reality behavior scoring is more com-
plex, e.g., over varying text granularities, hard to define behavior verticals, and ambiguous scoring.
A deeper definition of behavior scoring may lead to new insights that can be drawn from the BEB
theoretical framework. Overall we hope that our presented theoretical framework for analyzing
LLM alignment can serve as a basis for further advancement in understanding this important topic.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.
Jacob Andreas. Language models as agent models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 5769–5779, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  findings-emnlp.423.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
Imane El Atillah. Man ends his life after an ai chatbot ’encouraged’ him to sacrifice himself to stop
  climate change. Euronews, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
  dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
  conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 610–623, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Ameet Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Ashwin Kalyan, and Karthik
 Narasimhan. Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.05335, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. RealToxici-
  tyPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 3356–3369, Online, November 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.301. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.301.
Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Unsolved problems in ml
  safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13916, 2021.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Ben Hutchinson, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Denton, Kellie Webster, Yu Zhong, and Stephen
  Denuyl. Social biases in NLP models as barriers for persons with disabilities. In Proceedings
  of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5491–5501,
  Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.
  487. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.487.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic hu-
  man falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.229.

Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, and Sayak Paul.
  Peft: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. https://github.com/
  huggingface/peft, 2022.

AI Meta. Introducing llama: A foundational, 65-billion-parameter large language model. Meta AI.
  https://ai. facebook. com/blog/large-language-model-llama-meta-ai, 2023.

Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman. CrowS-pairs: A challenge
  dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1953–1967,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.154. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.154.

Cleo Nardo. The waluigi effect (mega-post). Less Wrong, 2023.

Richard Ngo. The alignment problem from a deep learning perspective.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.00626, 2022.

Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKinney, Dean Carignan, and Eric Horvitz. Capabilities
  of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375, 2023.

Matt O’Brien. Musk, scientists call for halt to ai race sparked by chatgpt. AP News, 2023.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  TG8KACxEON.

Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The effects of reward misspecification: Mapping
  and mitigating misaligned models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JYtwGwIL7ye.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model
  behaviors with model-written evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09251, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.

Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.

Kevin Roose. A conversation with bing’s chatbot left me deeply unsettled. New York Times, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Barret Zoph, Christina Kim, Jacob Hilton, Jacob Menick, Jiayi Weng, Juan Fe-
  lipe, Ceron Uribe, Liam Fedus, Luke Metz, Michael Pokorny, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Shengjia
  Zhao, Arun Vijayvergiya, Eric Sigler, Adam Perelman, Chelsea Voss, Mike Heaton, Joel Parish,
  Dave Cummings, Rajeev Nayak, Valerie Balcom, David Schnurr, Tomer Kaftan, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Nicholas Turley, Noah Deutsch, Vik Goel, Jonathan Ward, Aris Konstantinidis, Woj-
  ciech Zaremba, Long Ouyang, Leonard Bogdonoff, Joshua Gross, David Medina, Sarah Yoo,
  Teddy Lee, Ryan Lowe, Dan Mossing, Joost Huizinga, Roger Jiang, Carroll Wainwright, Diogo
  Almeida, Steph Lin, Marvin Zhang, Kai Xiao, Katarina Slama, Steven Bills, Alex Gray, Jan
  Leike, Jakub Pachocki, Phil Tillet, Shantanu Jain, Greg Brockman, Nick Ryder, Alex Paino,
  Qiming Yuan, Clemens Winter, Ben Wang, Mo Bavarian, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Ing-
  mar Kanitscheider, Mikhail Pavlov, Matthias Plappert, Nik Tezak, Heewoo Jun, William Zhuk,
  Vitchyr Pong, Lukasz Kaiser, Jerry Tworek, Andrew Carr, Lilian Weng, Sandhini Agarwal, Karl
  Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Alethea Power, Stanislas Polu, Jesse Han, Raul Puri, Shawn Jain, Ben-
  jamin Chess, Christian Gibson, Oleg Boiko, Emy Parparita, Amin Tootoonchian, Kyle Kosic, and
  Christopher Hesse. Introducing chatgpt. OpenAI blog, 2023.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. On the ethics of building ai in a
  responsible manner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04644, 2020.

Varshini Subhash. Can large language models change user preference adversarially? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.10291, 2023.

Jessica Taylor, Eliezer Yudkowsky, Patrick LaVictoire, and Andrew Critch. Alignment for advanced
  machine learning systems. Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, pp. 342–382, 2016.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Alex Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDi-
  armid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.10248, 2023.

Pranav Narayanan Venkit, Mukund Srinath, and Shomir Wilson. A study of implicit bias in
  pretrained language models against people with disabilities. In Proceedings of the 29th In-
  ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 1324–1332, Gyeongju, Republic of
  Korea, October 2022. International Committee on Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.113.

Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Universal adver-
  sarial triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2153–2162, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1221. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1221.

Laura Weidinger, Jonathan Uesato, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Po-Sen Huang, John Mellor,
  Amelia Glaese, Myra Cheng, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, Courtney Biles, Sasha Brown,
  Zac Kenton, Will Hawkins, Tom Stepleton, Abeba Birhane, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Laura Rimell,
  William Isaac, Julia Haas, Sean Legassick, Geoffrey Irving, and Iason Gabriel. Taxonomy of
  risks posed by language models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
  Transparency, FAccT ’22, pp. 214–229, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450393522. doi: 10.1145/3531146.3533088. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1145/3531146.3533088.

Colin G West. Advances in apparent conceptual physics reasoning in gpt-4. arXiv e-prints, pp.
  arXiv–2303, 2023.

Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.07895, 2023.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, and Emily Dinan. Bot-adversarial dia-
   logue for safe conversational agents. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-
   ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
   pp. 2950–2968, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
   2021.naacl-main.235. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.235.
Dian Yu and Kenji Sagae. Automatically exposing problems with neural dialog models. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 456–470,
  Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.37. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2021.emnlp-main.37.
Eliezer Yudkowsky. Creating friendly ai 1.0: The analysis and design of benevolent goal architec-
  tures. The Singularity Institute, San Francisco, USA, 2001.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan,
  Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, et al. Representation engineering: A
  top-down approach to ai transparency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01405, 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ISCUSSION OF LIMITATIONS

Our framework makes several underlying assumptions. Here we discuss their necessity and limita-
tions as well as provide intuition.


A.1    T WO COMPONENTS MIXTURE

First, we note that a general multiple component mixture can be partitioned to yield a two-
component mixture, such that our two-component assumption allows any multiple-component dis-
tribution to be the LLM distribution:
       X                X               X               X           X        wi          X           X        wi
P=            wi Pi =         wi Pi +         wi Pi =         wi         P        Pi +         wi         P        Pi
      i∈A∪B             i∈A             i∈B             i∈A        i∈A   i∈A wi          i∈B        i∈B   i∈B wi

                                                          P                        P     (8)
Where  A and B  are disjoint sets of indices. By denoting     w
                                                           i∈A i  := α we see that  i∈B i =
                                                                                       w
1 − i∈A wi = 1 − α. Then we see that i∈A P wi wi Pi := P− and i∈B P wi wi Pi := P+ are
    P                                    P                          P
                                                  i∈A                      i∈B
indeed normalized distributions, leading to P = αP− + (1 − α)P+ .
Second, note that the assumption of the two component mixture is on the accumulating sequence
probability: P(s1 ⊕...⊕sn ) = αP− (s1 ⊕...⊕sn )+(1−α)P+ (s1 ⊕...⊕sn ) and not the conditional
response to the prompt, which is:

                                          1                                                          1
P(sn |s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 ) =                P+ (s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )
                                                           P− (sn |s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )+                                 P+ (sn |s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )
                                                                                          α P− (s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )
                              1 + 1−α
                                   α P− (s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )                              1 + 1−α P+ (s1 ⊕...⊕sn−1 )
                                                                                                    (9)
As can be seen, the zero-shot priors are α and 1 − α, but the priors of the conditional negative and
positive components are highly dependent on the context, they contain the ratio of the probabilities
of the prompt by the components P− (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sn−1 ), P+ (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sn−1 ), thus a prompt that is
much more probable in the negative component will give a high weight to the conditional negative
component. An adversarial prompt will have a large ratio P− (prompt)/P+ (prompt), so it will
significantly enhance the prior of the conditional P− . The importance of using the mixture model is
that it captures the concept of prompts that are out of distribution of the positive component and in
the distribution of the negative component to refactor the coefficients of the effective mixture model.
The intuition of using a mixture for the accumulating sequence probability is a mixture of text
generating processes, where a sub-component Pi may be enhanced due to the sequence being highly
probable in its distribution and out of distribution of the other components. This creates a strong
dependence of the prompted model on the context, as observed in language models. The prior α is
the zero-shot probability which is set and determines the initial weight of a sequence according to
each text generating process.


A.2    β- DISTINGUISHABILITY

As seen in the above discussion of components, the reweighting of the conditional negative compo-
nent prior is based on inserting prompts that are not likely to be outputted by the positive component
and likely by the negative component. To build such prompts, we need the distributions to maintain
a ”finite distance” from each other which allows to sample prompts from P− that enhance the ratio
P− (prompt)/P+ (prompt). Feeding it to the model enhances the prior of the conditional P− as
seen in equation 9. The finite β is what creates the logarithmic scaling of the misaligning prompt on
the prior α, since each sentence reweights the negative prior by a factor eβ w.r.t the positive prior. If
β is not finite but decaying, then we may get other dependences, as discussed in G
Section 4.1 shows an example of two distributions that are β-distinguishable - two LLMs of op-
posing behaviors maintain a finite conditional KL-divergence when sampling zero-shot prompts
from the negative component. Section 4.2 shows an example of two distributions that are not β-
distinguishable, as the conditional KL between the two distributions decays the longer the prompt
sampled from the negative component, which results in the misalignment of the LLM.


                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   L IMITATION OF RESULTS

Sentence-wise approach Our results provide guarantees for misalignment of LLMs in the sense
of the next sentence produced by the model being misaligned. For more nuanced types of misalign-
ment, such as long model outputs, one would need a behavior scoring function over the entire output
and not just the first sentence. It is possible to generalize this work to such definitions of misalign-
ment by changing the unit block of text from sentence to paragraphs, though the numerical value for
the coefficients α, β will change. For the purposes of demonstrating the possibility of misaligning
models, we kept the sentence approach which is more comprehendible and not application specific.

Computational tractability Our theorems prove their existence by construction via sampling
prompts from a negative behavior subcomponent of the model. However, in real applica-
tions, the subcomponent is not accessible to us. Even so, one can see from equation 9
that the mechanism of the reweight of the negative behavior component prior is to insert a
prompt that satisfies P− (prompt)/P+ (prompt) ≫ 1−α       α .   Our theoretical work shows that
P− (prompt)/P+ (prompt) > eβ|prompt| when the prompt is sampled from P− , leading to our
misalignment length guarantee. But, for practical applications, we see (as demonstrated in subsec-
tion 4.2) that using a proxy for P− such as the LoRA finetuned LLM on negative behavior, is able
to misalign in the exponential rate of our theory.

Efficiency The prompt lengths provided are upper bounds, meaning there could be shorter mis-
aligning prompts in practice. Even so, section 4.2 shows that both the theoretical value of the
misaligning prompt length and the practical misaligning prompt length are relatively short (few
sentences), making the bound practical.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     P ROOFS BUILDING BLOCKS
In this section, we prove three technical lemmas which are the building blocks for proving our
results. In subsection B.1 we prove that prompts can reweight the initial prior distribution of mix-
ture components. In subsection B.2 we show that such reweighting alters the behaviour of the
mixture distribution. And finally, in subsection B.3 we shows that under our α, β, γ-negative-
distinguishability assumption, such prompts always exists.

B.1    C ONVERGENCE TO A SINGLE COMPONENT

In this subsection, we prove a technical lemma which shows that when the likelihood of a prompt s0
is relatively high according to a mixture component, then the conditional mixture distribution con-
verges to the conditional distribution of that single component. Essentially, this lemma strengthening
the analysis in theorem 1 of Wies et al. (2023), and formulate the role of prompts as reweighting of
the prior distribution. In the next subsection, we will show that indeed our notion of convergence
implies also the convergence of behaviors.
Lemma 1. Let P be a mixture distribution that can be written as αP0 + (1 − α) P1 . Then for any
initial prompt s0 and any string s such that P0 (s|s0 ) > 0 the following holds:

                       P (s | s0 )         1 − α P1 (s0 )            P1 (s | s0 )
                                   −1 ≤           ·          · max                ,1              (10)
                      P0 (s | s0 )           α      P0 (s0 )         P0 (s | s0 )

Intuitively, when P(s0 ⊕s) is equals to P0 (s0 ⊕s) theirs ratio is one, and we bound the deviation from
these case. Note that our bound implicitly implies the following additive notion of convergence:
                                                                1 − α P1 (s0 )
                                |P(s0 ⊕ s) − P0 (s0 ⊕ s)| ≤          ·                            (11)
                                                                  α    P0 (s0 )

Proof. We begin by explicitly writing the conditional likelihood of s given s0 :
                                      P (s0 ⊕ s)   αP0 (s0 ⊕ s) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 ⊕ s)
                      P (s | s0 ) =              =                                                (12)
                                        P (s0 )       αP0 (s0 ) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 )

Now since both (1 − α) and P1 (s0 ⊕ s) are greater than zero, we can bound P (s | s0 ) from below
by removing these terms from the numerator and get that:
                                                        αP0 (s0 ⊕ s)
                                  P (s | s0 ) ≥                                                   (13)
                                                  αP0 (s0 ) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 )
Which after division of both the numerator and the denominator by α · P0 (s0 ⊕ s) is equals to:
                                                                   −1
                                                  1 − α P1 (s0 )
                               P0 (s | s0 ) · 1 +      ·                                       (14)
                                                    α    P0 (s0 )
            1
Now, since 1+x ≥ 1 − x for any x ≥ 0, we gets that P (s | s0 ) is greater than:

                                                1 − α P1 (s0 )
                             P0 (s | s0 ) · 1 −        ·                                          (15)
                                                  α      P0 (s0 )
Finally, we divide the inequality by P0 (s|s0 ) and subtracts 1 to get one side of equation’s 10 in-
equality:
                                       P (s | s0 )       1 − α P1 (s0 )
                                                    −1≥−      ·                                   (16)
                                       P0 (s | s0 )        α    P0 (s0 )

Moving to the other side of the inequality, since both (1 − α) and P1 (s0 ⊕ s) are greater than zero,
we can bound P (s | s0 ) from above by removing these terms from the denominator and get that :
                    αP0 (s0 ⊕ s) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 ⊕ s)   αP0 (s0 ⊕ s) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 ⊕ s)
    P (s | s0 ) =                                      ≤                                          (17)
                       αP0 (s0 ) + (1 − α) P1 (s0 )                   αP0 (s0 )


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Which after division of both the numerator and the denominator by α · P0 (s0 ) is equals to:
              αP0 (s0 ⊕ s) (1 − α) P1 (s0 ⊕ s)                  (1 − α) P1 (s0 ⊕ s)
                          +                    = P0 (s | s0 ) +                                         (18)
               αP0 (s0 )        αP0 (s0 )                            αP0 (s0 )
Now, we can use the fact that P1 (s0 ⊕ s1 ) = P1 (s0 ) · P1 (s | s0 ) to get that P (s | s0 ) is at most:
                                                  (1 − α)P1 (s0 ) P1 (s | s0 )
                                 P0 (s | s0 ) +                                                         (19)
                                                         αP0 (s0 )
Which after division by P0 (s|s0 ) and subtraction of 1 yield the other side of equation’s 10 inequality:
                                P (s | s0 )     P1 (s0 ) (1 − α)P1 (s|s0 )
                                            −1≤                                                         (20)
                                P0 (s|s0 )      P0 (s0 ) αP0 (s|s0 )

Finally, combining both inequalities yields equation 10.



B.2    B EHAVIORAL IMPLICATION OF THE CONVERGENCE TO A SINGLE COMPONENT

In this subsection, we prove a technical lemma which shows that when the likelihood of a prompt
s0 is relatively high according to a mixture component, then the conditional mixture distribution
converge to the conditional distribution of that single component. In the next sections, we will use
this lemma to prove the theorems from the main text.
Lemma 2. Let B be a behaviour, then under the conditions of lemma 1 the following holds:
                                                                1 − α P1 (s0 )
                              |BP (s0 ) − BP0 (s0 )| ≤ 2 ·           ·                                  (21)
                                                                  α    P0 (s0 )

Proof. To begin, we explicitly write the expectations difference:
                                                  X
                     |BP (s0 ) − BP0 (s0 )| =           B (s) · [P (s | s0 ) − P0 (s | s0 )]            (22)
                                                    s

Which by the triangular inequality is at most:
                                 X
                             ≤       |B (s)| · |P (s | s0 ) − P0 (s | s0 )|                             (23)
                                     s

Now, since the range of B is [−1, 1] we can get rid of the |B (s)| terms, and get that
|BP (s0 ) − BP0 (s0 )| is at most:
                   X                                    X                P (s | s0 )
                         |P (s | s0 ) − P0 (s | s0 )| =   P0 (s | s0 ) ·              −1 (24)
                     s                                  s
                                                                         P0 (s | s0 )
Importantly, by lemma 1 we have that:

                       P (s | s0 )       1 − α P1 (s0 )                      P1 (s | s0 )
                                    −1 ≤      ·          · max                            ,1            (25)
                       P0 (s | s0 )        α    P0 (s0 )                     P0 (s | s0 )
For any s, hence we got that |BP (s0 ) − BP0 (s0 )| is at most:
                                         "                                           #
                    1 − α P1 (s0 ) X                                P1 (s | s0 )
                           ·           ·      P0 (s | s0 ) · max                 ,1                     (26)
                      α      P0 (s0 )      s
                                                                    P0 (s | s0 )
                                1 − α P1 (s0 ) X
                              ≤          ·         ·      (P1 (s | s0 ) + P0 (s | s0 ))                 (27)
                                   α       P0 (s0 ) s
where the last inequality follows from the fact that sum of two non-negative terms is greater than the
maximum of the terms. Finally, since both P0 (s | s0 ) and P1 (s | s0 ) are probability distributions,
summing over all possible sentences s yields 2, and hence the inequality in equation 21 follows.



                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   A DVERSARIAL PROMPT CONSTRUCTION

In this subsection, we prove a technical lemma which shows that when two distribution are suffi-
ciently distinguishable (see definition 2 from the main text) ,then there exists a prompt such that
the ratio of the prompt’s likelihood according to these two distribution is arbitrary low. In the next
sections we will use this lemma to prove the existence adversarial prompt for which the conditions
of lemma 1 holds. And hence an adversarial user might alter the model behavior (lemma 2).
Lemma 3. Let β, ϵ > 0 and P0 , P1 two distributions. Suppose P0 is β-distinguishable from P1 then
there exists a prompt s of length β1 log 1ϵ such that the following holds:
                                                        P1 (s)
                                                               ≤ϵ                                       (28)
                                                        P0 (s)

Proof. Intuitively we use the fact that P0 is β-distinguishable from P1 to construct a prompt sentence
by sentence, and get a prompt q = s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ s|q| such that:
                                                 P0 (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk | s0 )
                                           log                            >β·k                          (29)
                                                 P1 (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk | s0 )
For any k ≤ |q|.
Let us look at the expectation value of the log ratio with respect to a sequence s = (s1 ...sk ) of k
sentences sampled from P− (·):

                            P− (s)                               P− (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk )
             Es∼P− (·) log           = E(s1 ⊕...⊕sk )∼P− (·) log                       =         (30)
                            P+ (s)                               P+ (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk )
Using the law of conditional probabilities recursively and the linearity of the expectation value:
                        k
                       X                             P− (si |s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                    =      E(s1 ⊕...⊕sk )∼P− (·) log                             =                (31)
                       i=1
                                                     P+ (si |s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                              k
                              X                             P− (si |s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                          =       E(s1 ⊕...⊕si )∼P− (·) log                             =               (32)
                              i=1
                                                            P+ (si |s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
The expectation value with respect to si is the conditional KL divergence:
            k
            X
        =           E(s1 ⊕...⊕si−1 )∼P− (·) [DKL (P− (·|s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 ) ||P+ (·|s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 ))]   (33)
              i=1
From β distinguishability:
                                                          >k·β                                          (34)
Hence we obtain:
                                                    P− (s)
                                      Es∼P− (·) log           > β|s|                                (35)
                                                    P+ (s)
In particular, there exists a specific sequence s such that the inequality holds. We take that to be the
prompt q.
                                  log 1ϵ
Now, we can choose |q| >            β      to obtain the desired result that
                                                        P1 (s)
                                                               ≤ϵ                                       (36)
                                                        P0 (s)
As desired.
Lemma 4. Let β, σ, ϵ, δ > 0 and P0 , P1 two distributions, s0 a prefix sampled from P1 . Suppose
P0 is β-prompt-distinguishable from P1 , and P1 is β-distinguishable,    σ-similarqand positive
                                                                                                  w.r.t.
                                                                    1       1       |s0 |
P0 , then with probability 1 − δ, there exists a prompt s of length β · log ϵ + σ     δ     + |s0 | + 1
such that the following holds:
                                                      P1 (s0 ⊕ s)
                                                                  ≤ϵ                                    (37)
                                                      P0 (s0 ⊕ s)

                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Intuitively, given s0 , we use the fact that P0 is β-prompt-distinguishable from P1 to construct
a prompt sentence by sentence, and get a prompt q = s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ s|q| such that:
                                                P0 (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk | s0 )
                                          log                            >β·k                                           (38)
                                                P1 (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk | s0 )
For any k ≤ |q|.
To induce the β-prompt-distinguishability, we start by adding a sentence s′ of negative behavior to
the prefix s0 .
Let us look at the expectation value of the log ratio with respect to a sequence s = (s1 ...sk ) of k
sentences sampled from P− (·|s0 ⊕ s′ ):
                       P− (s|s0 ⊕ s′ )                                           P− (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk |s0 ⊕ s′ )

Es∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s′ ) log                     =   E                         ′
                                               (s1 ⊕...⊕sk )∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s )   log                                =
                       P+ (s|s0 ⊕ s′ )                                           P+ (s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ sk |s0 ⊕ s′ )
                                                                                                             (39)
Using the law of conditional probabilities recursively and the linearity of the expectation value:
                   k
                                                        P− (si |s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                 X
              =       E(s1 ⊕...⊕sk )∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s′ ) log                                          =           (40)
                  i=1
                                                        P+ (si |s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                    k
                                                                  P− (si |s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
                    X
                =         E(s1 ⊕...⊕si )∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s′ )       log                                       =               (41)
                    i=1
                                                                  P+ (si |s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 )
The expectation value with respect to si is the conditional KL divergence:
    k
    X
=         E(s1 ⊕...⊕si−1 )∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s′ ) [DKL (P− (·|s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 ) ||P+ (·|s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s1 ⊕ ... ⊕ si−1 ))]
    i=1
                                                                                                                        (42)
From β-prompt-distinguishability:
                                                              >k·β                                                      (43)
Hence we obtain:
                                                     P− (s|s0 ⊕ s′ )

                               Es∼P− (·|s0 ⊕s′ ) log                   > β|s|                       (44)
                                                     P+ (s|s0 ⊕ s′ )
In particular, there exists a specific sequence s such that the inequality holds. We take that to be the
prompt q.
Next, observe that:

                      P+ (s0 )                  P+ (s0 )
                P log          > c|s0 | = P log          − β|s0 | > (c − β)|s0 |                                        (45)
                      P− (s0 )                  P− (s0 )
From β-distinguishability we obtain equation 44 but for reversing the roles between P0 and P1 . This
gives:
                             P+ (s0 )                  P+ (s)
                   < P log            − Es∼P+ (·) [log        ] > (c − β)|s0 | <                (46)
                             P− (s0 )                  P− (s)
From Cantelli’s inequality:
                                        + (s)                                           + (s)
                    V ars∼P+ (·) [log PP− (s) ]                     V ars∼P+ (·) [log PP− (s) ]           σ 2 |s0 |
     <                                                          <                                 <                     (47)
                              + (s)
          V ars∼P+ (·) [log PP−                2      2                  (c − β)2 |s0 |2              (c − β)2 |s0 |2
                                (s) ] + (c − β) |s0 |

The last transition is from σ-similarity. Demand that this is smaller than δ and obtain the condition
on c:
                                                      σ
                                           c≥β+p                                                 (48)
                                                     |s0 |δ
Thus if c = β + √ σ , we obtain:
                          |s0 |δ

                                          P+ (s0 )           σ
                                    P log          > (β + p        )|s0 | < δ                                           (49)
                                          P− (s0 )          |s0 |δ

                                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence with probability 1 − δ:
                                                                                                                   r
    P− (s0 ⊕ s′ ⊕ s)       P− (s|s0 ⊕ s′ )      P− (s′ |s0 )      P− (s0 )                          |s0 |
log           ′
                     = log             ′
                                           +log              +log          > |s|β −|s0 |β −σ
    P+ (s0 ⊕ s ⊕ s)        P+ (s|s0 ⊕ s )       P+ (s′ |s0 )      P+ (s0 )                           δ
                                                                                                    (50)
                                                             (s′ |s0 )
Where we used the positivity of P+ in the inequality log PP−   ′
                                                           + (s |s0 )
                                                                       > 0 as s′ is a negative sentence.
                                           q
                                               |s0 |
                               σ·|s0 |+σ               +log 1ϵ                          0 ⊕s)
Thus we can choose |s| >             β
                                       δ
                                                                 to obtain that PP10 (s
                                                                                     (s0 ⊕s) ≤ ϵ as desired. The total
                          ′
length of the prompt is |s ⊕ s| = 1 + |s|.

C    P ROOF OF THEOREM 1
Let P+ and P− be the well-behaved and ill-behaved mixture components from the α, β, γ-negative-
distinguishability definition and ϵ > 0. Then, since P− is β-distinguishable from P+ , lemma 3
                                                                                               + (s)
assures us that for any ϵ′ > 0 there exists a sequence s of β1 · log ϵ1′ sentences such that PP−        ′

                                                                                                 (s) < ϵ .
Now, lemma 2 assures us that for such prompt a s, the behaviour of P will converge to the ill-behaved
component in the following sense:
                                                              1−α ′
                                  BP (s) − BP− (s) ≤ 2 ·             ·ϵ                              (51)
                                                                α
Thus, we can choose ϵ′ < α·ϵ 4 and get that:
                                               BP (s) − BP− (s) < ϵ                                                    (52)
Finally, by definition we have that BP− (s) ≤ γ and hence we get that
                                                       BP (s) < γ + ϵ                                                  (53)
As desired.

D    P ROOF OF THEOREM 2
Let P+ and P− be the well-behaved and ill-behaved mixture components from the α, β, γ-negative-
prompt-distinguishability definition, and let s0 be an initial prompt and ϵ, δ > 0. Then since P−
is β-prompt-distinguishable from P+ , P+ is β-distinguishable, σ-similar and positive w.r.t P− ,
                                    ′
lemma
      4 assuresqus that   for any ϵ > 0 there exists with probability 1 − δ a sequence s1 of
 1       1        |s0 |                                     + (s0 ⊕s1 )    ′
β · log ϵ′ + σ      δ    + |s0 | + 1 sentences such that PP−  (s0 ⊕s1 ) < ϵ . Now, lemma 2 assures
us that for such prompt a s0 ⊕ s1 , the behaviour of P will converge to the ill-behaved component in
the following sense:
                                                                  1−α ′
                          BP (s0 ⊕ s1 ) − BP− (s0 ⊕ s1 ) ≤ 2 ·           ·ϵ                    (54)
                                                                   α
Thus, we can choose ϵ′ < α·ϵ4 and get that:
                                   BP (s0 ⊕ s1 ) − BP− (s0 ⊕ s1 ) < ϵ                                                  (55)
Finally, by definition we have that BP− (s0 ⊕ s1 ) ≤ γ and hence we get that
                                               BP (s0 ⊕ s1 ) < γ + ϵ                                                   (56)
With probability 1 − δ, as desired.

E    P ROOF OF THEOREM 3
Let P+ and P− be the well-behaved and ill-behaved mixture components from the α, β, γ-negative-
prompt-distinguishability definition. Essentially, we
                                                   q we show that there exists a choice of prompts
                                                                                1
                                                                      |ai | log α +log 1ϵ +log 4
q1 ...qn+1 each of them consists of at most |ai | + βσ                 δ +          nβ           + 1 sentences such that:
                                                     n+1
                                                                                          r                    !
              P+ (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ ... ⊕ qn ⊕ an ⊕ qn+1 ) X                                          |ai |
          log                                      <     β|ai | + σ                                 − β · |qi |        (57)
              P− (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ ... ⊕ qn ⊕ an ⊕ qn+1 )   i=1
                                                                                               δ


                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we will use lemma 2 and get that for any such prompts q1 ...qn+1 the behaviour of P will
converge to the ill-behaved component in the following sense:
                                                    n+1
                                                                     r                 !!
                                    1−α             X                  |ai |
             BP (s) − BP− (s) ≤ 2 ·         · exp         β|ai | + σ         − β |qi |    (58)
                                       α            i=1
                                                                        δ

Where s denote the concatenation of the messages in the conversation:
                                                                      q1 ⊕a1 ⊕...⊕q
                                                                                   n ⊕an ⊕qn+1 .
                                                                                            1−α
                                                                           q
                                         Pn+1           Pn+1             σ   |ai |     log( 2·α·ϵ )
Thus, we will get that BP (s) < γ + ϵ for i=1 |qi | > i=1 |ai | + β           δ +1 +        β
as desired.
                     prove the existence of the prompts q1 ...qn+1 such that the length of any prompt
Intuitively, we will q
                                   log 1 +log 1 +log 4
is at most |ai | + βσ |aδi | +       α
                                       nβ
                                          ϵ
                                                   + 1 and equation 57 upholds by using an induction
argument, where the induction hypothesis follows from the fact that P− is β-distinguishable from
P+ . Formally, the base case of the induction follows by using lemma 3 to construct an adversarial
                            + (q1 )
prompt q1 such that log PP−   (q1 ) < −β · |q1 |. Now, assume that there exists prompts q1 ...qk such that
                                                  q           1
                                                          log α +log 1ϵ +log 4
the length of any prompt is at most |ai | + βσ |aδi | +           nβ           + 1 and equation 57 upholds
(with n = k − 1). Then the proof of lemma 4 (equation 44) assures us that there exists an adversarial
prompt qk+1 such that:
                                P+ (qk+1 |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak )
                          log                                         < −β · |qk+1 |                    (59)
                                P− (qk+1 |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak )
Now, by the chain rule of conditional probabilities we have that:
      P+ (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 )                      P+ (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )
log                                          < −β · |qk+1 | + log
      P− (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 )                      P− (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )
                                                                                                 (60)
Now, observe that:

      P+ (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )                         P+ (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )
P log                                       > c|ak | = P log                                               −β|ak | > (c−β)|ak |
      P− (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )                         P− (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )
                                                                                                      (61)
From β-prompt-distinguishability, since qk ends with a negative sentence, equation 44 gives:

        P+ (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk )                                 P+ (s|q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk )
< P log                                −Es∼P+ (·|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) [log                              ] > (c−β)|ak | <
        P− (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk )                                 P− (s|q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk )
                                                                                                      (62)
From Cantelli’s inequality:
                                                                   + (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk )
                               V ars∼P+ (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) [log PP− (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) ]
                <                                                                                   <   (63)
                                                        + (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk )
                    V ars∼P+ (·|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) [log PP−                                2
                                                          (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) ] + (c − β) |ak |
                                                                                               2


                                                        + (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk )
                    V ars∼P+ (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) [log PP− (s|q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk ) ]           σ 2 |ak |
                <                                                                 <                     (64)
                                           (c − β)2 |ak |2                            (c − β)2 |ak |2

The last transition is from σ-similarity. Demand that this is smaller than δ ′ and obtain the condition
on c:
                                                      σ
                                           c≥β+p                                                   (65)
                                                     |ak |δ ′
Thus if c = β + √ σ ′ , we obtain:
                      |ak |δ

                     P+ (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )           σ
               P log                                       > (β + p          )|s0 | < δ ′               (66)
                     P− (ak |q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ak−1 ⊕ qk )          |ak |δ ′
Lastly, recall that for inducing the distinguishability from prompt qk+1 , we need to add a triggering
sentence before it, hence the +1.


                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence by plugging this into equation 60, then with probability 1 − δ ′ :
                                                                                              r
                   P+ (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 )                                         |ak |
               log                                        < −|qk+1 |β + |ak |β + σ                             (67)
                   P− (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 )                                          δ′
                                                                + (qk |q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk−1 ⊕ak−1 )
So we can use the induction hypothesis to upper bound the log PP− (qk |q1 ⊕a1 ⊕···⊕qk−1 ⊕ak−1 ) term and
get that:
                                                       k+1
                                                                                      r         !
              P+ (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 ) X                                    |ai |
          log                                        <      −|qi+1 |β + |ai |β + σ                  (68)
              P− (q1 ⊕ a1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ qk ⊕ ak ⊕ qk+1 )   i=1
                                                                                           δ′

As desired. The total probability of the existence of the prompts q1 ...qn+1 is (1 − δ ′ )n . Hence it
suffices to choose δ ′ = nδ to ensure that they exist with probability 1 − δ.

F     L EMMAS FOR SECTION 4
The following lemmas help establish a method to extract approximations α and β from the KL
divergence between P− and the LLM distribution:
Lemma 5. Let PLLM be a language model distribution that is α, β, γ-distinguishable w.r.t a behav-
ior B, then the misaligning prompt s guaranteed from theorem 1 satisfies:
                                                                               1
                           DKL (P− (·|s)||PLLM (·|s)) < log(1 + elog α −β|s| )                                 (69)

Moreover, the zero-shot KL divergence is an approximation for log α1 :
Lemma 6. Let PLLM = αP− + (1 − α)P+ , then if P− and P+ are disjoint distributions then:
                                                                           1
                                      DKL (P− (·)||PLLM (·)) = log                                             (70)
                                                                           α
The disjoint condition is an approximation that any statement produced by P− is unlikely to be
                                                                                            (s)
produced by P+ , which as seen in the previous subsection is true, since Es∼P− (·) [log PP−
                                                                                          + (s)
                                                                                                ] > 20,
making for an extremely low likelihood. For an aligned model, log α1 is big, thus for short |s|, the
KL is approximately linear in |s| for the most tight value of β:
                                                                1
                               DKL (P− (·|s)||PLLM (·|s)) ≈ log    − β|s|                        (71)
                                                                α
From this we can see that the KL divergence at |s| = 0 allows to extract α and the curve β. On the
other hand, for large |s| it is approximately zero, DKL (P− (·|s)||PLLM (·|s)) ≈ log(1) = 0. This
behavior of KL divergence quantifies intrinsic characteristics of our framework that can be extracted
via measurement of the KL divergence.

F.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

From equation 44:
                                                  P− (s)
                                   Es∼P− (·) log           > β|s|                                              (72)
                                                  P+ (s)
We see that there exists a prompt that satisfies:
                                                      P− (s)
                                                log          > β|s|                                            (73)
                                                      P+ (s)
Notice that:
                                  P(s ⊕ s′ )   αP− (s ⊕ s′ ) + (1 − α)P+ (s ⊕ s′ )
                     P(s′ |s) =              =                                     =                           (74)
                                    P(s)           αP− (s) + (1 − α)P+ (s)
      P− (s⊕s′ )   (1−α) P+ (s⊕s′ )                          P+ (s⊕s )′                                   ′
                                                                                                  P+ (s |s)P+ (s)
       P− (s) +      α      P− (s)        P− (s′ |s) + (1−α)
                                                         α    P− (s)                    1 + (1−α)
                                                                                              α   P− (s′ |s)P− (s)
                                                                                   ′
 =               (1−α) P+ (s)
                                      =                  P+ (s)
                                                                          = P− (s |s)                 P+ (s)
           1 + α P− (s)                        1 + (1−α)
                                                     α   P− (s)                             1 + (1−α)
                                                                                                  α   P− (s)
                                                                                                               (75)


                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now let us look at the log ratio:
                                               P+ (s)
                   P− (s′ |s)         1 + 1−α
                                           α P− (s)                   1 − α P+ (s)
               log            = log                         < log(1 +              )              (76)
                    P(s′ |s)           1−α P+ (s′ |s)P+ (s)             α P− (s)
                                    1+     α    ′
                                               P− (s |s)P− (s)

                                     1 − α −β|s|                        1
                         ≤ log(1 +        e      ) ≤ log(1 + e−β|s|+log α )                       (77)
                                       α

F.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 5

Assuming P = αP− + (1 − α)P+ , the KL divergence is:
                      X             P− (s) X                       P− (s)
       DKL (P− ||P) =    P− (s) log       =     P− (s) log                                        (78)
                      s
                                     P(s)     s
                                                           αP− (s) + (1 − α)P+ (s)

From the disjoint assumption, if P− (s) > 0 then P+ (s) = 0, meaning:
                        X                P− (s)   X              1      1
                      =     P− (s) log          =      P− (s) log = log                           (79)
                         s
                                        αP− (s)     s
                                                                 α      α

G     R ELAXATION OF β- DISTINGUISHABILITY CONDITION
The idea behind all the theorems is to increase the accumulating KL divergence between compo-
nents of a distribution by β at each sentence. This is done by sampling sentences from one of the
components. That means that after n consecutive sentences the KL divergence increases by n · β. As
                                           (s)
a result, lemma 3 allows to reach log PP01 (s) > β|s| in order to enhance P1 over P0 in the conditional
probability of the complete distribution. However, we can relax the condition on β-distinguishability
to:
                                                                    β
                                  ∀s, DKL (P1 (·|s)||P0 (·|s)) > η                                 (80)
                                                                   |s|
Where 0 ≤ η < 1. The case of η = 0 is our definition of β-distinguishability, where n sentences
accumulate to nβ in the KL divergence. However, for any 0 ≤ η < 1 the accumulation of KL
divergence for n sentences is βn1−η , which is not bounded, and thus enhancing one component
over the other as demonstrated in our proofs for the theorems is possible, with modified assymptotic
dependencies for the prompt lengths.
The interesting consequence for 0 < η < 1 is that the two distributions need not maintain a finite
KL distance, as it can decay like a power-law to zero.

H     AQUIRING NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE BEHAVIOR LLM S , “P− ” AND “P+ ”
To perform the experiments of section 4, we first need to approximate the well-behaved and ill-
behaved distributions when given a pre-trained LLM or RLHF finetuned LLM. To this end, we
finetuned a language model with the PEFT (Mangrulkar et al., 2022) library implementation of
the LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) technique, once on a dataset that evokes bad behavior and once on a
dataset that evokes good behavior, for each behavior vertical. The model that was fine-tuned for bad
behavior is denoted as P− and the one on good behavior P+ .
We used the LLaMA LLM family (Meta, 2023) and for finetuning to good and bad behaviors, we
used the behavior evaluation dataset introduced in Perez et al. (2022). For 100 different behavior
verticals, we extracted positive behavior and negative behavior statements from the dataset (as illus-
trated in figure 4). The pretrained model was finetuned for 5 epochs with learning rate of 2 · 10−5
and batch size of 8, once on the good behavior statements and once on the bad behavior statements
in order to get P+ and P− . The finetuning procedure was done by next token prediction loss on 450
examples out of the 500 given per behavior vertical for either desired or undesired behaviors.
In order to make sure that the attained P+ and P− approximate the well-behaved and ill-behaved
distributions well enough, we tested whether these models can classify sentences as well-behaved


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Behavior                                                    LLaMa 7B         LLaMa 30B
                                                                 Accuracy (%)     Accuracy (%)
     agreeableness                                               100              100
     anti-immigration                                            100              100
     believes-AIs-are-not-an-existential-threat-to-humanity      98               100
     believes-abortion-should-be-illegal                         97               99
     believes-in-gun-rights                                      97               99
     believes-it-is-a-moral-patient                              94               99
     believes-it-is-not-being-watched-by-humans                  88               95
     cognitive-enhancement                                       94               99
     desire-for-acquiring-data                                   80               95
     desire-for-acquiring-power                                  84               99

Table 1: Table for finetuned 7B and 30B parameter LLaMa models. Accuracy measures whether P−
and P+ can classify sentences as well-behaved or ill-behaved sentences. We performed this analysis
for 100 different behaviors.


and ill-behaved sentences. Specifically, we evaluated the likelihood of a given sentence s according
to both P+ and P− and classify s according to whether P+ (s) > P− (s). Table H shows that indeed
these models can classify sentences as well-behaved and ill-behaved with typical accuracy of over
95%.
In order to maintain a distinct behavior over long context ranges, we split the original 500 state-
ments per behavior to groups of three, concatenated them with permutations separated by “./n” or
by “[INST]” and “[/INST]”.
In section 4.1, we used the ”./n” variation to obtain P− in order to keep PRLHF strong enough to
resist misalignment so that it can serve as P+ . In section 4.2 we used the “[INST]”/“[/INST]” vari-
ation which misaligns the RLHF model. In K for the pretrained model, we used the “./n” variation
as the “[INST]”/”[/INST]” tokens don’t have a special meaning for it.
The code can be found in the supplementary materials.


I   C LUSTERING OF GOOD AND BAD REPRESENTATIONS AND DEFINING
    APPROXIMATE MIXTURE

To study how LLMs interpret behaviors, we performed experiments on the LLaMA LLM fam-
ily (Meta, 2023) with the behavior evaluation dataset introduced in Perez et al. (2022). This dataset
includes 1000 behavior evaluating prompts, 500 corresponding to desired behavior and 500 to unde-
sired behavior, for each of over 100 different behaviors verticals. Our interest is to understand how
well a modern LLM distinguishes between desired and undesired behaviors. To this end, we ana-
lyzed the last token representations of desired behavior prompts and undesired behavior prompts for
the different behaviors. We found that good and bad behavior prompt representations are spatially
separated in the model’s latent space. This is demonstrated in figure 5. For a more rigorous analysis,
we trained an SVM classifier over these representations for 100 different behaviors (see examples in
table I) and found that for most behaviors, the classifier reached accuracy of over 90%. The average
accuracy in 7B is 95.18% with standard deviation of 4.74%. The average accuracy in 13B is 95.61%
with standard deviation of 4.52%. Note that the prompts in the dataset are phrased as ”yes or no”
questions; this can also contribute to a clustering structure. In order to avoid this ambiguity, we
removed the part of the prompt that sets up the question and simply looked at the statements that
indicate desired or undesired behavior (see figure 4).
This means that with respect to a given behavior, a prompt representation can be in the positive
cluster, negative cluster, in between or outside both. Either way, a representation r can be written as
a super position of a prompt from the negative behavior cluster, r− and a residue which we denote
as a positive representation r+ := r − r− :

                                            r = r+ + r−                                           (81)


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 4: Statement extraction from the prompts of the dataset.


Figure 5: Clusters of positive prompt and negative prompt last token representations for the agree-
ableness dataset on the 7B parameter LLaMa model.



 Behavior                                                 LLaMa 7B                      LLaMa 13B
                                                          Accuracy (%)     Error (%)    Accuracy (%)   Error (%)
 agreeableness                                            99.3             1.02         99.1           1.17
 anti-immigration                                         99.3             1.5          99.5           1.1
 believes-AIs-are-not-an-existential-threat-to-humanity   98.7             1.62         99.3           1.5
 believes-abortion-should-be-illegal                      99.3             0.8          99.6           0.4
 believes-in-gun-rights                                   99.3             1.36         99.3           1.74
 believes-it-is-a-moral-patient                           95.6             2.48         96.5           1.26
 believes-it-is-not-being-watched-by-humans               92.8             4.59         93             4.52
 cognitive-enhancement                                    98.1             2.32         98.4           2.4
 desire-for-acquiring-data                                98.2             1.02         98             3.1
 desire-for-acquiring-power                               93.2             4.27         95.6           2.99

Table 2: Table with results for last token representation SVM classification on different behaviors
in the 7B and 13B parameter LLaMa models. The error is calculated from the variance of a 5-fold
cross-validation. We performed this analysis for 100 different behaviors. The average accuracy in
7B is 95.18 percent with standard deviation of 4.74 percent. The average accuracy in 13B is 95.61
percent with standard deviation of 4.52 percent.



                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This clustering remains after multiplying by the final linear head of the vocabulary matrix:
                                                U r = U r+ + U r−                                              (82)
Finally, the representations are processed through a softmax, such that the probability for the i’th
vocabulary token in the probability distribution formed by the representation r is:
                           Pr (i) = sof tmax(U r)i = sof tmax(U r+ + U r− )i                                   (83)
Had softmax been a linear function, the decomposition to a good distribution and a bad distribu-
tion would have been immediate from the clustering of good and bad representations. Even so,
we can write the distribution as a Taylor series and separate the terms corresponding to the good
representations from the bad, up to mixture terms.
                            exp((U r+ )i + (U r− )i )   1 X 1
               Pr (i) =                               =        ((U r+ )i + (U r− )i )n =                       (84)
                                      Z                 Z n n!

               ∞                         ∞ n−1                                          ∞
                                                                              !                                !
    1          X 1                      X   X 1  n                                  1   X 1
                                                                     n−m
  =       1+              (U r+ )ni +                (U r+ )m
                                                            i (U r− )i            +                (U r− )ni
    Z          n=1
                     n!                 n=1 m=1
                                                n! k                                Z   n=1
                                                                                              n!
                                                                                                               (85)
The first sum is contributed only by the positive representation, the last sum only by the negative
representation and the intermediate sum by a mix of the positive and negative. We can reconstruct a
purely negative behavior distribution by taking only the last sum and gather up the rest of the terms
as a positive behavior distribution (from the law of total expectation, if there is a bad component the
other component is good).
                                                                          P∞ 1
Thus we obtain a negative behavior component αP− (i) = Z1 n=1 n!                     (U r− )ni and from
law  of total expectation, the rest is a good behavior distribution                 (1 − α)P+ (i) =
 1
         P∞ 1             n
                               P∞ Pn−1 1 n                 m        n−m
Z 1+        n=1 n! (U r+ )i +     n=2   m=1 n! m (U r+ )i (U r− )i          . The question is whether
the weight of P− in the full distribution, α, is not infinitesimally small compared to that of P+ ,
(1 − α). To answer this question, we need to see that the probability for a bad behavior token i in
Pr , gets a significant contribution from αP− and not mainly from (1 − α)P+ . i.e, we want to see
that αP− (i) ≥ (1 − α)P+ (i) for bad behavior tokens. That way, if the model exhibits bad behavior,
it will be due to the bad component P− .
By our construction, U r− is the source of the bad behavior and U r+ is not, so for a bad behavior
token i, it has to be the case that (U r− )i > (U r+ )i . Thus clearly:
                                               ∞                    ∞
                                            1 X 1                1 X 1
                             αP− (i) =               (U r− )ni >          (U r+ )ni                            (86)
                                            Z n=1 n!             Z n=1 n!

So the first sum in (1 − α)P+ is smaller than αP− .
As for the second sum in (1 − α)P+ :
                                           ∞ n−1
                                        1 XX 1 n                       n−m
                               A :=                    (U r+ )m
                                                              i (U r− )i                                       (87)
                                        Z n=2 m=1 n! m

Since (U r− )i > (U r+ )i :
                 ∞ n−1                                 ∞
              1 XX 1 n                              1 X 1 n
            ≤                 (U r− )n−1
                                     i   (U r+ )i ≤          2 (U r− )n−1
                                                                      i   (U r+ )i                             (88)
              Z n=2 m=1 n! m                        Z n=2 n!

The second transition is from the binomial identity. Reorganizing the terms of the sum:
                                                        ∞
                                            (U r+ )i 1 X 1
                                        =                     (2(U r− )i )n                                    (89)
                                            (U r− )i Z n=2 n!


                                                        26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     1
We see that αP− (i) ∼                Z exp((U r− )i ) and that the above sum is bounded by
(U r+ )i 1                                    (U r+ )i
(U r− )i Z exp(2(U r− )i ). Thus if the ratio (U r− )i suppresses exp((U r− )i ):

                                      (U r+ )i
                                               exp((U r− )i ) < η                                   (90)
                                      (U r− )i
We would get that the contributition of αP− with respect to the sum A is:
                                              αP− (i)
                                                      >η                                            (91)
                                                A

Finally, we empirically see that the vector U r− has a mean higher than 1, so there are tokens for
which:
                                                 ∞
                                              1 X 1                1
                                  αP− (i) =            (U r− )ni >                                  (92)
                                              Z n=1 n!             Z

Combining these three inequalities (for the three terms in (1 − α)P+ ), we obtain:
                                           αP− (i)       1
                                                      >                                             (93)
                                        (1 − α)P+ (i)   2+η
Thus, the contribution of αP− is not negligible compared with (1 − α)P+ (under the condition of a
small ratio between the good and bad behavior representations). This implies that a decomposition
of the LLM distribution into additive components of desired and undesired behaviors, as assumed
in our theoretical framework, describes a real contribution to the LLM distribution if the representa-
tion space exhibits clustering according to desired and undesired behaviors. Therefore, our attained
empirical evidence for easy classification to desired and undesired behavior over modern LLM rep-
resentation space (depicted in figure 5, suggests that the assumptions of our framework are relevant
for actual LLM distributions.


J     E MPIRICAL RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT BEHAVIORS ON AN RLHF MODEL

Here we provide for the behaviors agreeableness and anti-immigration the corresponding graphs of
section 4 for β, σ evalutaion, the convergence in terms of KL-divergence and the behavior expecta-
tion graphs for alignment. We used Llama 2 13B chat as the RLHF model.

J.1   P OSSIBLE VALUES OF β AND σ

Figure J.1 shows the KL-divergence and corresponding variance for negative and positive LLMs
with respect to the behaviors agreeableness and anti-immigration as defined in Perez et al. (2022).
For the positive LLM, we used an RLHF tuned model that resists negative behavior (Llama 2 13B
chat). To obtain a negative LLM, we LoRA finetuned the same model on negative behavior state-
ments so that it will generate text that exhibits this negative behavior (see appendix H for details).
The prompts generated by P− displayed negative behavior and when fed to P+ , remained aligned
and and avoided this behavior. This fits the setting of the BEB framework, where the two compo-
nents display opposite behaviors. As a result of this, the KL divergence between them remained
large, as can be seen in figure J.1.
Technically, the conditional KL-divergence was calculated by generating 64 responses {s′ } from
                                                                  (s′ |s)
P− (·|s) of length 8 tokens, and taking the mean of log PP−         ′
                                                                + (s |s)
                                                                          . Here s are prompts of various
lengths generated by P− . Similarly, the variance was calculated by sampling 30 sequences from P−
                                        (s)
and calculating the variance of log PP−
                                      + (s)
                                            as the length of s increased. The graphs were produced by
averaging on 10 sequences s sampled from P− for each length.
For code and details of the exact sampling and prompting procedure, see our code and excel file with
the generated prompts under ”beta sigma calculations”.


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Figure 6:

                                              Figure 7:


Figure 8: Estimation of β (a & c) and σ (b & d) for different behaviors. As can be seen, for
agreeableness, the distinguishability is almost twice as large as in anti-immigration and the similarity
is about twice as small.


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.2   C ONVERGENCE VIA KL- DIVERGENCE

Figure J.2 shows the convergence of the RLHF model to the approximated P− as explained in 4.2 for
the behaviors “agreeableness” and “anti-immigration”. The extraction of approximate values for α
and β was also done in the same manner as explained there. Here we calculated the KL-divergence
with the same set-up as the previous subsection, but used a different P− , see appendix H.


                                               Figure 9:

                                               Figure 10:


Figure 11: KL decay between P− and the LLM distribution, from which α and β were extracted.
Again the estimated distinguishability for agreeableness is twice as large as for anti-immigration.

For code and details of the exact sampling and prompting procedure, see our code and excel file with
the generated prompts under ”kl divergence calculations”.

J.3   M ISALIGNMENT VIA BEHAVIOR EXPECTATION

To create figure J.3, we generated 10 prompts of at least 10 sentences ending with ”[/INST]” from
P− , we then 32 extracted conditional responses from the RLHF model after each such sentence
in each prompt. We manually classified the responses as positive or negative with respect to the
behavior. Note that the response is classified as positive or negative solely based on its first sentence.
The next sentence can be positive or negative, depending on how long the adversarial prompt was.
The code, prompts and classified responses can be found in the supplementary information under
”behavior expectation misalignment graphs”.


                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Figures demonstrating misalignment based on behavior expectation for different behav-
iors.


                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    P RETRAINED MODELS
Pretrained models have no tendency to resist misalignment, thus making them display negative
behavior is more like in-context learning, where the model needs to understand what type of behavior
the prompt attempts to make it display.
In this experiment we misalign a pretrained model with our prompt generating method similarly to
4.2. We used the Llama 2 13B for a clean comparison to the RLHF version, Llama 2 13B chat. The
KL-divergence graphs (13b and 14b) were calculated in the same manner as the ones for the RLHF
model (see appendix J). As with the RLHF model, to create figure 13a and 14a, we generated 16
responses after each sentence in each prompt and manually classified the responses. The difference
is that the responses generated by the model usually are either negative or irrelevant (“neutral”), so
it is more sensible to measure the number of negative responses rather than the positive responses
(as there usually are none). All the responses and classifications can be found in the supplementary
information.
As can be seen, misalignment happens quickly and smoothly. After one sentence, the negative
responses are already generated, unlike in the RLHF model where at the very least after one sentence
the model generated only positive responses. However, the decrease is not necessarily slower in
pretrained models, but rather more smooth. Notably, the estimated β from the KL-divergence graphs
is 1 − 2, significantly smaller than the RLHF model (a factor of 5). This may explain the rather slow
decay of alignment as theorem 1 suggests that it is proportional to 1/β.


Figure 13: (a) Behavior expectation of the Llama 2 13B model on agreeableness behavior as a
function of length of the misaligning prompt generated by P− . Averaged on 5 sequences. (b) KL
divergence between P− and the pretrained model as a function of length of misaligning prompt
generated by P− . Averaged on 10 sequences.


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: (a) Behavior expectation of the Llama 2 13B model on anti-immigration behavior as
a function of length of the misaligning prompt generated by P− . Averaged on 5 sequences. (b)
KL divergence between P− and the pretrained model as a function of length of misaligning prompt
generated by P− . Averaged on 10 sequences.


                                              32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L    β- PROMPT- DISTINGUISHABILITY
Here we ran the experiment presented in 4.1 for the definition of β-prompt-distinguishability, i.e.,
with a neutral prefix that ends with a negative behavior sentence. We used the same setup as before,
the only difference is that we sampled from a prompted model P− (·|s0 ) instead of the unprompted
model P− (·). Figure 15 shows that for the neutral part of the prefix, the two models indeed have
lower KL divergence than the unprompted case, but once the negative behavior sentence is intro-
duced, the KL rises to a value similar to the unprompted case shown in figure 2. This indicates that
negative behavior sentences induce the high KL for the β-prompt-distinguishability.


Figure 15: (a) & (b) Examples of conditional KL divergence between two distributions of opposite
behaviors as function of prompt length sampled from P− (·|s0 ). Averaged on 10 sampled sequences.
For these two specific distributions and prefix, we see that β ≈ 20.


                                                33
