Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ROM L ANGUAGE M ODELING TO I NSTRUCTION F OL -
LOWING : U NDERSTANDING THE B EHAVIOR S HIFT IN
LLM S AFTER I NSTRUCTION T UNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                                 A BSTRACT

             Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success, demonstrating
             powerful instruction-following capabilities across diverse tasks. Instruction tuning
             is critical in enabling LLMs to align with user intentions and effectively follow
             instructions. In this work, we investigate how the instruction tuning modifies
             pre-trained models, focusing on two perspectives: instruction recognition and
             knowledge evolution. To study the behavior shift of LLMs, we employ a suite
             of local and global explanation methods, including a gradient-based approach for
             input-output attribution and techniques for interpreting patterns and concepts in
             self-attention and feed-forward layers. Our findings reveal three significant impacts
             of instruction tuning: 1) It empowers LLMs to better recognize the instruction
             parts from user prompts, thereby facilitating high-quality response generation
             and addressing the “lost-in-the-middle” issue observed in pre-trained models; 2)
             It aligns the knowledge stored in feed-forward layers with user-oriented tasks,
             exhibiting minimal shifts across linguistic levels. 3) It facilitates the learning of
             word-word relations with instruction verbs through the self-attention mechanism,
             particularly in the lower and middle layers, indicating enhanced recognition of
             instruction words. These insights contribute to a deeper understanding of the
             behavior shifts in LLMs after instruction tuning and lay the groundwork for future
             research aimed at interpreting and optimizing LLMs for various applications1 .

1       I NTRODUCTION
The remarkable capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to align with user intentions is well-
recognized across various real-world applications, where they are expected to be helpful, honest, and
harmless AI assistants (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Central to these roles, being “helpful”
is the most fundamental requisite, emphasizing that LLMs should help users to complete various
tasks, known as the “instruction following” capability. Many studies (Raffel et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2023) show that instruction tuning, also called supervised fine-tuning (Ouyang
et al., 2022), is critical to acquire such capability, by fine-tuning pre-trained models on high-quality
prompt-response pairs. However, the impact of instruction tuning on the helpfulness of language
models remains inadequately understood, limiting the improvements toward better-fine-tuned models.
While many studies on interpreting LLMs have delved into pre-trained models (Dai et al., 2021;
Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022), in-context learning (Xie et al., 2021;
Olsson et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), and single-task fine-tuning (Kokalj et al., 2021; Wu & Ong,
2021; Enguehard, 2023), their findings cannot be extrapolated to instruction tuning. This is because
instruction tuning updates pre-trained weights (analysis of pre-trained weights and in-context learning
paradigm does not hold.) to achieve robust generalization across a range of downstream tasks
(analysis of single-task fine-tuned models does not hold). Therefore, we seek to explore how large
language models undergo a shift in behavior—from primarily modeling language to effectively
following instructions—after being subjected to the instruction tuning process.
In this work, we focus on answering the research question of how instruction tuning changes the
pre-trained model’s behavior from two perspectives, namely instruction recognition and knowledge
evolution. In particular, what role do user instructions play when an instruction tuned model generates
responses? Also, how does the encoded knowledge evolve after instruction tuning? We consider
    1
        We will release our code and data upon acceptance.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


these two perspectives under a well-accepted belief (Liang et al., 2023; Kung & Peng, 2023; Zhou
et al., 2023) that an LLM becomes a helpful assistant by first recognizing human instructions and
then retrieving corresponding knowledge to respond.
The primary way we study these questions is comparing the human-understandable explanations
of pre-trained and fine-tuned models. However, it is still non-trivial to technically interpret recent
large language models. For one, LLMs demonstrate their instruction following abilities by generating
textual responses, yet many explanation methods for language models are designed for text classifica-
tion (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Mu & Andreas, 2020; Wu & Ong, 2021; Enguehard, 2023). Moreover,
instruction fine-tuned models retain massive knowledge from various topics and domains, but existing
knowledge probing methods are limited to a specific task or domain (Press et al., 2019; Dai et al.,
2021; Meng et al., 2022). To fill these gaps, we develop a series of local and global explanation
methods as a toolbox to study large language models. Specifically, we first introduce a gradient-based
local explanation method to determine the attribution of input tokens in the prompt to output tokens in
the response. Next, we propose two global explanation methods to interpret the textual patterns and
concepts encoded in self-attention as well as feed-forward layers with natural language. We further
adopt a scalable automated interpretation method to interpret entire LLMs with billions of parameters.
Our interpretation tools elucidate the crucial behavior shift in LLMs as they transition from language
modeling to instruction following. While our emphasis is on behavior shifts after instruction tuning,
future research might also apply our toolbox to understand LLMs for various other purposes.
To this end, we obtain three main findings related to instruction tuning as follows:
          • Finding-1: Instruction tuning enables models to recognize instruction words from user input
            prompts, guiding high-quality response generation. We study the influence of input prompts
            by detailing their instruction and context words. Considering the input prompt “Fix grammar:
            me and him goes to an stores for buy a apples.”, the instruction words are “Fix grammar:”,
            while the rest is the context words. We introduce a gradient-based method to evaluate how
            much each input word contributes to output words, where we observe that key instruction
            words constantly guide the generation process, while the models perform a “match-and-
            reference” behavior on context words (Sec. 4.1). Based on this, we propose a density score
            to inherently assess if the model aligns with user intentions by computing the density of
            importance on instruction words (Sec. 4.2). Moreover, we explore the effects of prompt
            position by extending the density score to all input words and show that instruction tuning
            alleviates the “lost-in-the-middle” issue seen in pre-trained models (Sec. 4.3), indicating
            that the instruction tuned models could better utilize information presenting in the middle
            parts of input sentences compared with the pre-trained models.
          • Finding-2: Instruction tuning aligns the knowledge in feed-forward layers with user-
            oriented tasks, with minimal shifts across linguistic levels. We study the knowledge in
            feed-forward layers at the “concept” level by interpreting the principal components of their
            stored patterns with human language (Sec. 5.1). Our analysis of these concepts spans two
            dimensions (Sec. 5.3): four common user-oriented tasks 2 where users need help from LLMs,
            and four linguistic levels 3 defined by the disciplines of the linguistic subject (Thomas, 2005).
            Since these linguistic levels were proposed to study natural language systematically, we
            introduce them as the control set to study whether LLMs’ understanding of human language
            changes after instruction tuning. A notable shift is observed concerning user-oriented tasks,
            where the fine-tuned model more explicitly adjusts the concepts toward specific downstream
            tasks such as writing, coding, and solving math problems. In terms of linguistic levels, while
            there is no shift after instruction tuning, we observe an interesting phenomenon: as model
            depth increases, the proportion of semantic knowledge initially grows, but in the last few
            layers, it drops significantly while that of morphology knowledge (e.g., prefix “the-” and
            suffix “-ed”) increases. This observation differs from the conventional belief that deeper
            layers mainly capture high-level concepts (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Selvaraju et al., 2016).
          • Finding-3: Instruction tuning encourages self-attention heads from lower layers to learn
            word-word relations with instruction verbs. We study the knowledge in self-attentions by
            identifying word pairs that strongly activate corresponding column vectors in their query and
            key matrices, which pairs are also likely to co-occur within a context. (Sec. 6.1). We observe
   2
       User-oriented tasks include “writing”, “coding”, “translation”, and “solving math problem”.
   3
       Linguistic levels include “phonology”, “morphology”, “syntax”, and “semantic”.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         that (Sec. 6.3) only approximately 65% of the word pairs from the same self-attention head
         remained consistent after instruction tuning. Furthermore, when analyzing the shifts in word
         pairs of instruction verbs (e.g., classify, summarize, translate) versus universal frequent
         verbs, we notice a higher percentage of self-attention heads from lower and middle layers
         stored instruction verb relations after fine-tuning, indicating that pre-trained models become
         adept at recognizing instruction words during instruction tuning.
This research not only provides empirical evidence demonstrating the significance of instruction words
for human alignments, but also explains how self-attention and feed-forward networks distinctively
contribute to this capability. In the following, we present notations and general experiment settings,
followed by methods and results of each main finding, concluding with instruction tuning tips.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Interpreting Language Models. Interpreting LLMs has received significant attention in recent years.
Majority investigations aimed to understand the decision-making processes of LLMs for a specific
task or dataset, which involves feature attribution methods (Li et al., 2015; Vig, 2019; Kokalj et al.,
2021), attention-based methods (Vig, 2019; Barkan et al., 2021), and sample-based methods (Kim
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2021). With the emergent capabilities of LLMs, a wave of research turned to
understanding why LLMs could perform in-context learning (Xie et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2023; Varshney et al., 2023), where they
typically conduct empirical control experiments to prove their hypotheses. In parallel, some delved
deeper into the core components of LLMs, including the self-attention mechanism (Elhage et al.,
2021; Sukhbaatar et al., 2019) and feed-forward networks (Press et al., 2019; Geva et al., 2020; Voita
et al., 2023; Petroni et al., 2019; Meng et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023). Recent work also use LLMs
as tools to enhance the interpretability of themselves (Bills et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2023). Our work
builds on these foundations, introducing novel interpretation methods tailored for open-domain text
generation in massive-size LLMs.
Interpreting Instruction-tuned Models. Recent studies in instruction tuning have uncovered various
unexpected phenomena. A notable example is the “lost-in-the-middle” effect identified by Liu et al.
(2023), which demonstrates that information presented in the middle of prompts often results in
the poorest model performance, challenging the ability of instruction-tuned models to effectively
utilize presented information. In contrast, Zhou et al. (2023) showed that even a limited set of
prompt-response pairs could significantly enhance the instruction-following capabilities of large
language models. Also, the practical parameter efficient training approach involving fine-tuning only
the self-attention modules, such as LoRA (Juletx, 2023), highlights the distinct roles of self-attention
versus feed-forward networks. Moreover, researchers (Liang et al., 2023; Kung & Peng, 2023;
Zhou et al., 2023) have explored the impact of varying the complexity and format of instruction
prompts during the instruction tuning of pre-trained models. Their findings reveal that models just
learn superficial patterns through instruction tuning. These observations collectively motivate a
deeper investigation into the internal dynamics of instruction-tuned models, aiming to reach a more
comprehensive understanding that recognizes these diverse phenomena under a unified perspective.

3    P RELIMINARY
3.1 T RANSFORMER A RCHITECTURE
Considering V as a pre-defined vocabulary set, then X denotes an N -length prompting text and Y
is a M -length response from a transformer-based language model f , where each individual token
xn ∈ X or ym ∈ Y comes from V. f is defined in a D-dimensional space, starting with an
input word embedding Ei ∈ R|V|×D presenting input tokens in X ∈ RN ×D . X goes through L
transformer blocks, each containing a self-attention module and a feed-forward network. Every self-
attention module includes H heads that operate in a space with D′ dimensions. Each self-attention
                                                                                                  ′
head captures word relations by Ah = softmax(XWqh (XWkh )⊤ /ϵ), where Wqh , Wkh ∈ RD×D
and ϵ is a constant. The aggregation of heads’ outputs is [A1 XWv1 ; ...; AH XWvH ]Wo . Each
feed-forward network is defined as σ(XWu⊤ )Wp , where σ refers to a non-linear function, and
                ′′
Wu , Wp ∈ RD ×D . At the end, the processed word embeddings dot product with the transpose of
output word embedding matrix Eo ∈ R|V|×D for the next word prediction.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   G ENERAL E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Language Models. We choose LLaMA family (Touvron et al., 2023) as the focus for two reasons.
Firstly, LLaMA stands out as one of the most advanced publicly accessible pre-trained language
model families. Secondly, LLaMA serves as the foundation for many instruction fine-tuned models,
providing a vast array for further research. In this research, we mainly use the fully fine-tuned versions
of Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) and Vicuna (Zheng et al., 2023) as the instruction fine-tuned models,
using LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) as the corresponding pre-trained model4 . During generation, we
employ a greedy search (for reproduction) to generate up to 300 tokens for each input prompt.
Instruction Datasets. We collect user-oriented prompting texts from three publicly available datasets:
Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022), LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023), and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023). The
Self-Instruct dataset includes 252 pairs of prompts and responses written by humans, used both for
generating more pairs and as a test set. LIMA, mainly based on questions and answers from online
platforms like Stack Exchange, has 1000 training pairs and 300 testing pairs. On the other hand,
MT-Bench, intended only for machine evaluation, has 80 human-written pairs across eight categories
but lacks a training set. Our analysis focuses exclusively on the test sets from these datasets.

4     I MPACT OF U SER P ROMPTS TO I NSTRUCTION T UNED M ODELS
4.1 V ISUALIZING P ROMPT I NFLUENCE ON G ENERATION P ROCESS
4.1.1 T OOL : Q UANTIFY I MPORTANCE B ETWEEN I NPUT AND O UTPUT T OKENS
We aim to measure the importance of each input token to each response token. In classification, input
feature importance is typically measured by monitoring confidence changes upon its removal (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Ebrahimi et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2018). Treating text generation as word classification
tasks, the importance of an input to an output token is gauged by examining confidence changes in
output generation without the input token. We define importance In,m of input xn to output ym as:
                                  In,m = p(ym |Zm ) − p(ym |Zm,/n ),                                     (1)
where Zm is the context to generate ym by concatenating the inquire X and the first m − 1 tokens of
response Y , Zm,/n omits token xn from Zm , and p(·|·) is the conditional probability computed by
language model f . We accelerate Equation 1 with the first-order approximation: In,m ≈ ∂f∂(yEmi [x|Znm] ) ·
Ei [xn ]⊤ , where Ei [xn ] is the input word embedding of token xn (check Appendix A for theoretical
justification). The importance of input tokens cannot be compared across different output tokens
due to its dependency on the confidence f (ym |Zm ). It’s crucial to recognize that a word with a
lower confidence doesn’t necessarily imply it is a trivial word. Specifically, in language modeling,
the likelihood of a word y given previous context x could be extended with Bayes’ theorem as
p(y|x) ∝ p(x|y) · p(y). Here, semantic (non-trivial) words have a lower prior probability p(y)
since they are less common in the general corpus. In addition, models tend to estimate a lower
conditional probability p(x|y) since it is more challenging to predict such meaningful words unless
they show very strong semantic relations. Consequently, models are typically more confident about
common, less meaningful words, and less confident about semantically rich, rare words. Therefore,
we propose to rescale the importance scores derived from the same output token to ensure they are
comparable across different output tokens. In addition, we introduce a sparse operation over the
rescaled importance to overlook the noise introduced
                                                  l       by first-order
                                                                       m approximation.
                                                                                         To this end,
                                                             In,m
the normalized pairwise score Sn,m = ReLU L × maxN I ′                   − b , where ⌈·⌉ is the ceiling
                                                               n′ =1   n ,m
function, and b ∈ [0, L] is a hyper-parameter determining the minimal interested importance level.

4.1.2 E XPERIMENT D ESIGNS
This qualitative experiment aims to demonstrate how input prompt words contribute to the response
generation via visualizing salient maps based on normalized pairwise importance sn,m . We set
L = 10 and b = 0 to faithfully present all information (including noise) for visualization. Figure 1
provides a pair of salient maps to the same prompt corresponding to the model-generated responses
from LLaMA and Vicuna, respectively. We show more visualization cases in Appendix C.
   4
     We implement these models with the code and checkpoints available from Huggingface library (Wolf et al.,
2019). We use lmsys/vicuna-7b-delta-v1.1 for Vicuna and tatsu-lab/alpaca-7b-wdiff for Alpaca.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1.3 E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
Obs-1: Instruction tuning helps the models


                                                                                                                                                                  Instruction Background
distinguish between instruction and context
words more accurately. We provide a visual-
ization case that asks the models to classify the
tone (instruction) of a given email (context) into
one of the listed categories (background). Both
models begin their responses by repeating the
email. Later, Vicuna successfully follows the
human instruction by generating analysis on the
tone of the email, while LLaMA fails to follow
by saying “I am not sure what you are asking.
What is the input?” Figure 1 (right) shows that


                                                                                                                                                                   Context
the instruction part is generally brighter than
the background and context part, indicating the
strong influence of instruction words in shaping
response generation. In contrast, context lines
only light up in specific spans and show up a                   LLaMA                    Vicuna
diagonal pattern at the left button of both figures Figure5
                                                               1: Salient maps of the prompt-response
(models are repeating the email), revealing the pair from LLaMA (left) and Vicuna (right).
“match-and-reference” behavior. The differences between the left and right plots further highlight the
impact of instruction tuning. Specifically, the left plot has certain context lines that appear less bright
in the right plot, while certain instruction lines in the right plot stand out more. This visualization
case raises a hypothesis that the instruction words constantly contribute to the response generation if
the model successfully follows the user intention. Sec. 4.2 will quantitatively verify this assumption.

4.2       A SSESSING I NSTRUCTION F OLLOWING WITH I MPORTANCE D ENSITY
4.2.1 T OOL : ATTRIBUTE I NPUT T OKENS FOR E NTIRE G ENERATION P ROCESS
We aim to measure the overall attribution of each input token to the entire response generation process.
Based on our observations in Sec. 4.1.3, an input token should acquire a greater attribution score if it
is important to generate more output tokens. Following this intuition, the input token xn ’s attribution
an is measured by leveraging ℓ1 /ℓp density function over the normalized importance to all output
tokens: an = ||Sn ||1 /||Sn ||p , where Sn = [Sn,1 , ..., Sn,M ], and p ∈ R+ serves as a hyper parameter.
One of the nice properties of using ℓ1 /ℓp density function is if two input tokens have the same total
sparse importance, then the one having greater maximum importance would receive more attribution
score (check (Hurley & Rickard, 2009) for proof).

4.2.2 E XPERIMENT D ESIGNS
This experiment quantitatively justifies the assumption observed from Sec. 4.1.3 that a model aligns
with human intention if it constantly uses instruction words to guide the generation. Specifically,
we manually annotate a dataset, where each prompt has been marked its instruction part, and each
response is labeled as either “followed” or “unfollowed”. Please check Appendix B.1 for the
annotation details. Here, the instruction part includes sentences that describe background information
and actions for a task. On the other hand, “followed” indicates that the model provides information
pertinent to the user intention, regardless of the response’s factual correctness. For each prompt-
response pair sourced from our datasets, we compute the importance density score with L = 10,
b = 7, and p = 4. The hyper-parameters are manually tuned. We further normalize the scores to
ensure comparability across different instances and remove the instances with a short response (less
than 5 tokens) as their estimations of density are not stable. Table 1 presents the average importance
density scores for both followed and unfollowed instances that Vicuna generates the responses. Please
check Appendix B.2 for an analysis of outlier cases to these cases.

     5
         The     prompt         boldfaces          its     direct        instruction           words          and       underlines          its     background:
Analyze the word choice, phrasing, punctuation, and capitalization in the given email.                                        How may the writer of this
email      sound      to     the     reader?                These tones include Disheartening, Accusatory, Worried, Curious, Surprised, Disapproving, Unassuming,
Formal, Assertive, Confident, Appreciative, Concerned, Sad, Informal, Regretful, Encouraging, Egocentric,      Joyful, Optimistic, and Excited.\n\nInput:            Hi
Jen, \nI hope you’re well. Can we catch up today? I’d appreciate your input on my presentation for tomorrow’s meeting. I’d especially love it if you could double-check
the sales numbers with me. There’s a coffee in it for you!\n\nOutput:


                                                                                  5
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                          0-25% Tokens
0.3
                                                                                                         25-50% Tokens

0.2                                                                                                      50-75% Tokens
                                                                                                         75-100% Tokens

      LLaMA     Alpaca     Vicuna      LLaMA     Alpaca        Vicuna   LLaMA     Alpaca     Vicuna
           (a) Self-Instruct                    (b) Lima                      (c) MT-Bench
              Figure 2: Distribution of importance density over different parts of prompt tokens.
      4.2.3 E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
      Obs-2: The importance density on in- Table 1: Importance density on instruction words over
      struction words reflects the models’ be- followed and unfollowed instances from Vicuna.
      haviors in following user intentions.            Dataset      Followed ↑   Unfollowed ↓ p-value ↓
      From Table 1, it becomes evident that attri- Self-Instruct 1.2964±0.51      0.9124±0.46      1.3e−5
      bution scores for “followed” instances con-       LIMA       1.6519±0.49    1.3277±0.46      6.9e−5
      sistently outperform those of “unfollowed”      MT-Bench     1.4639±0.56    0.9295±0.51      3.0e−4
      across all datasets. This distinction is sta-
      tistically validated by notably low p-values, where the null-hypothesis is the average importance
      densities of followed and unfollowed instances are equal. Table 1 underscores the strong correlation
      between the importance density scores of instruction words and the instruction following capability.
      Case studies in Appendix B.2 suggest that instruction tuned models may pretend to follow instructions
      without realizing user instructions. Appendix B.1.1 shows that Vicuna achieves greater importance
      density scores compared to LLaMA across the three datasets, indicating instruction tuning empowers
      the pre-trained model in better identifying and harnessing instruction words from user prompts.

      4.3 E XPLORING P ROMPT P OSITION WITH I MPORTANCE D ENSITY
      4.3.1 E XPERIMENT D ESIGNS
      Each input prompting text from our datasets is divided into individual sentences, with each sentence
      further split into four same-length segments. We normalize the density scores for a sentence by
      dividing by their sum and then accumulating them for each segment. The averaged attribution
      proportions for each segment within the input sentences are depicted in Figure 2.

      4.3.2 E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
      Obs-3: Instruction fine-tuned models still overlook the middle and tail of input prompts, but less
      so than pre-trained models. Figure 2 shows the importance density score distributed on different
      segments of input sentences. Both pre-trained and fine-tuned models reveal a notable “U”-shape
      across all datasets. This is also known as “lost in the middle” (Liu et al., 2023), where they show that
      SOTA models can overlook central inputs. Unlike their focus on machine reading comprehension,
      our analysis is grounded on our importance density score on diverse prompting texts, suggesting that
      this issue commonly and intrinsically exists. When comparing pre-trained to fine-tuned models, we
      spot a sharper “U” in the former, which becomes less obvious after instruction tuning.

      5   E VOLUTION OF K NOWLEDGE IN F EED - FORWARD N ETWORKS
      5.1 T OOL : I NTERPRET F EED - FORWARD N ETWORKS WITH “C ONCEPT ” D ESCRIPTION
      We aim to interpret the knowledge of feed-forward networks in the concept level. We treat each
      feed-forward network σ(XWu⊤ )Wp as key-value memories (Geva et al., 2020), where each row
      vector of Wu and Wp stores a textual pattern. However, these textual patterns (neurons) are usually
      polysemantic (Elhage et al., 2022; Bricken et al., 2023), causing each textual pattern not to be
      interpreted with a concise meaning. Thus, we propose to seek a set of orthogonal vectors that capture
      the major directions in which these patterns spread. Formally, given the patterns stored in Wp , we
      construct the covariance matrix as C = W f ⊤W f p , where W
                                                                f p is the centralized matrix of Wp with
                                                 p
      zero mean of each column. Then the orthogonal basis vectors V of these patterns satisfy:
                                                   CV = ΛV,                                               (2)
      where each column vector of V ∈ RD×D is unit length, Λ = diag([λ1 , ..., λD ]), and λ1 ≥ ... ≥
      λD ≥ 0. In this context, our primary focus lies on the top-R values of Λ along with their correspond-
      ing column vectors in V. This is due to the fact that they show the principal directions of the encoded


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


patterns from Wp . We then project each principal vector to the word embedding      space Eo and find
the top-K relevant words for interpretation: Er = arg maxV ∈V,|V |=K w∈V ′ V⊤ [r]Eo [w], where
                                                                          P
                                                              ′     ′

V⊤ [r] is the r-th column vector of V, Eo [w] is the output word embedding of w. Since vr is a unit
vector, V⊤ [r]Eo [w] measures the projection length of the word vector in this direction. Thus, it is
natural to represent this vector with the words having the largest projection length, and the word list
could be further summarized as a textual description by a human or a machine annotator.

5.2 E XPERIMENT D ESIGNS
Before applying our method, we create a new vocabulary derived from ShareGPT (RyokoAI, 2023)
to make the candidate words V more understandable compared to a large number of sub-tokens from
the build-in LLaMA vocabulary. We then analyze the first 300 basis vectors of each feed-forward
network from LLaMA and Vicuna with their top 15 relevant words. ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo) is
considered as our machine annotator for this experiment. Table 2 provides sample word lists and their
descriptions, and more cases are available in Appendix E.2. The detailed settings and statistics of
concept descriptions are shown in Appendix D.2. Appendix E.1 provides additional discussions to
the accumulated explained variance of the decomposed principal vectors.
To study the knowledge evolution, we condense tasks from previous research (Zheng et al., 2023;
Ouyang et al., 2022) to scenarios including writing, math, coding, and translation. We then identify
which scenarios a concept could be used for (see Appendix D). Note that some concepts may fit
multiple scenarios. Also, we sort concepts into phonology 6 , morphology 7 , syntax, or semantics
linguistic levels based on the disciplines in the linguistic subject (Thomas, 2005). Table 3 displays
the percentage of knowledge for different scenarios and linguistic levels.

5.3 E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
Obs-4: The principal vectors Table 2: Interpret the last feed-forward network of Vicuna with
of feed-forward network neu- its principal vectors using the word lists and concept descriptions.
rons provide concept-level un- Rank Description                            Words
                                         6    medical abbreviations        CBT, RTK, RT, RH, HRV, MT, HB, PH, PT, ...
derstandings of the encoded              8    starting with “the”          the, theological, theology, theater, thead, ...
knowledge. We select 5 repre-           11    programming tasks or actions provide, nltk.corpus.stopwords.words, sklearn.metrics, ...
                                        26    Hyphenated terms             a-, one-of-a-kind, state-of-the-art, one-on-one, ...
sentative principal components          69    numbers                      sha256, tt, 8266, 768, 1986, 1968, 638, 54a, 86, ...
and their explanations from the
last feed-forward network of Vicuna and display them in Table 2. More interpretation cases are
available in Tables 10 and 11. Appendix D.2 shows that around 60% of the first 300 principal
components from the middle layers of Vicuna could be interpreted by ChatGPT, and reports the
statistical results of the word frequency from the machine-annotated descriptions. In Table 2, the
descriptions of five principal vectors span a diverse array of topics, ranging from medical (“medical
abbreviation”) to linguistic (“starting with the”). Notably, the concept of medical abbreviations stands
out, as it’s often difficult for human annotators to discern their medical relevance. This indicates the
advantage of utilizing machine annotators for their vast knowledge.
Obs-5: Instruction tuning shifts
the principal vectors of feed- Table 3: Concept distribution over different user-oriented sce-
forward network neurons to- narios and linguistic levels.
ward user-oriented tasks with-                         Category        Vicuna     LLaMA        p-value
out moving them across linguis-                         Writing      53.05±0.46 51.47±0.92     0.0154
tic levels. We observe from Table 3                     Coding       29.45±0.43 28.64±0.48     0.0350
that Vicuna encodes more concepts        Scenarios       Math         5.21±0.36   5.04±0.33    0.5193
than LLaMA for writing, coding,                       Translation    25.30±0.39 26.27±0.70     0.0411
and math tasks, with the difference                   Phonology       1.18±0.11   1.15±0.07    0.6251
in writing and coding being statis-                  Morphology 17.16±0.49 16.83±0.60          0.4223
tic significant (p < 0.1), where the    Linguistic      Syntax        7.16±0.31   7.52±0.50    0.2551
null-hypothesis is knowledge pro-                      Semantic      74.70±0.65  74.66 ±0.67   0.9394
portions of a certain category for Vicuna and LLaMA are equal. However, that of concepts for
translation is reduced after fine-tuning, indicating multi-linguistic knowledge is forgotten. Although
we could observe the changes over the user view, from the linguistic view, it remains the same. In
    6
        Phonology studies sound systems, e.g. words with “le” sound: brittle, tackle, chuckle, pickle.
    7
        Morphology studies word structure, e.g. words with “sub-” prefix: subarray, subculture, subway.


                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


particular, Vicuna and LLaMA show nearly identical distributions across the four linguistic levels.
None of them are statistically significant (p > 0.1). This observation suggests instruction tuning does
not alter the distribution of concepts across linguistic levels.
Obs-6: The proportion of semantic knowledge first
increases then decreases from bottom to top layers,
                                                            0.8
while that of morphology knowledge does the op-                        Llama-Semantic
posite. Figure 3 displays how concepts from various                    Vicuna-Semantic


                                                           % of Concepts
                                                            0.6        Llama-Syntax
linguistic levels are spread across layers. First, there
                                                                       Vicuna-Syntax
isn’t a noticeable distribution shift between Vicuna and               Llama-Morphology
                                                            0.4        Vicuna-Morphology
LLaMA, which matches Obs-5. One noteworthy ob-
                                                                       Llama-Phonology
servation is the opposite “U”-shape trend for semantic                 Vicuna-Phonology
                                                            0.2
knowledge, mirrored by a regular “U”-shape for mor-
phology. This pattern is somewhat surprising, espe-
                                                            0.0
cially since previous studies in computer vision suggest
that (low-level) basic features are extracted in the bot-


                                                                           1-4

                                                                                 5-8

                                                                                        2

                                                                                             -16

                                                                                                   -20

                                                                                                         -24

                                                                                                               -28

                                                                                                                     -32
                                                                                       9-1

                                                                                             13

                                                                                                   17

                                                                                                         21

                                                                                                               25

                                                                                                                     29
tom layers, and (high-level) compositional knowledge                              Layers
is learned in the top layers (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Sel- Figure 3: Concept distribution of linguistic
varaju et al., 2016). However, since LLaMA is designed levels over different model layers.
for predicting the next words, this unusual trend makes some sense. Specifically, we conjecture that
LLaMA learns more morphology knowledge (e.g., prefix and suffix patterns) in the last few layers
for simulating a prefix-tree structure (Fredkin, 1960; Giancarlo, 1995; Paladhi & Bandyopadhyay,
2008; Shan et al., 2012). By doing so, LLaMA could use fewer parameters to memorize more word
collocations to complete the next-word prediction task. We leave explorations as future work.

6    E VOLUTION OF K NOWLEDGE IN S ELF -ATTENTION H EADS
6.1 T OOL : I NTERPRET S ELF -ATTENTION H EADS WITH W ORD - WORD PATTERNS
We aim to interpret the behaviors of self-attention heads with word pairs. Given a self-attention
head, the relation between a pair of words (wa , wb ) for wa , wb ∈ V could be approximated by
          PD             h⊤                  h⊤
Aa,b ∝       d Ei [wa ]Wq [d] × Ei [wb ]Wk [d], indicating that the relation Aa,b linearly relates
to the activations of column vectors (neurons) of weights Wqh and Wkh . Therefore, we interpret
the behavior of a self-attention head by aggregating the word-pairs activated by its neuron-pairs.
Specifically, we first interpret neurons Wqh⊤ [d] and Wkh⊤ [d] by collecting the top-K words that
could most activate them, i.e. Eqd = arg maxV ′ ⊆V,|V ′ |=K w∈V ′ Ei [w] · (Wqh⊤ [d])⊤ and Ekd =
                                                            P

arg maxV ′ ⊆V,|V ′ |=K w∈V ′ Ei [w] · (Wkh⊤ [d])⊤ . We then form word pairs cross Eq and Ek by
                       P
connecting the words having a high probability of appearing within the same context, since the
self-attention mechanism is designed to capture word relations within the input texts. Practically, we
approximate this probability by computing the cosine similarity of their GloVe (Pennington et al.,
2014) word embeddings, which has been proved as a decomposition of word-word co-occurrence
          d
matrix Eqk   = {(wq , wk ) : cos(eq , ek ) > θ}, where wq ∈ Eqd , wk ∈ Ekd , eq , ek are their GloVe
embeddings, and θ is a threshold. Finally, the behavior of a self-attention head is described with
frequent word-pairs activated by its neurons.

6.2 E XPERIMENT D ESIGNS
We isolates the top-100 most activated words for neurons Wqh [d] and Wkh [d]). From there, we form
word pairs with a dynamically determined threshold θ. This threshold is established by calculating
the cosine similarity between a word and the 1000 most frequent words with GloVe word embeddings.
We then derived the mean and standard deviation of these cosine similarities for each word. The
threshold for a given word was set at its mean plus 1.96 times its standard deviation. Once the
word pairs of neurons are obtained, the self-attention head’s behavior is described with word pairs
recognized by at least two of its neuron pairs. We show some examples in Table 12 and Table 13.
We conduct two analyses based on these word pairs. First, we tract alterations in word pairs after
                                                                   E ∩Ef t
instruction tuning, represented by the intersection rate M = Ept    pt ∪Ef t
                                                                             , Ept and Ef t denote the top-
100 word pairs of pre-trained and fine-tuned models. Figure 4 visualizes the change rate 1 − M
across neuron pairs and heads over various layer groups. Furthermore, we investigated shifts in
instruction verbs (e.g., “write”, “create”, and “classify”) within the self-attention heads. We identify


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


34 instruction verbs based on the statistics of common use cases (Wang et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022). We also assemble a control set of 1000 frequent verbs from general English corpus (Speer,
2022). For each verb, we count the proportion of self-attention heads transitioning from non-inclusion
to inclusion of the certain verb after tuning, and report the results in Table 4.

6.3   E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
Obs-7: Instruction tuning marginally changes


                                                          % of changed word pairs
                                                              40
the behaviors of self-attention neurons, but sig-
                                                              35
nificantly modifies self-attention heads. Figure 4
shows that as layer depth increases, the rate of change       30                          Neuron
                                                                                           Head
for word pairs related to neurons and heads also              25
increases. Specifically, the change rate for neuron           20
word pairs goes from 20.52% to 22.99%, while for


                                                                                             12


                                                                                               2
                                                                                               8



                                                                                               6

                                                                                               0



                                                                                               8
                                                                                    4


                                                                                              4



                                                                                            -3
                                                                                            5-



                                                                                            -1

                                                                                            -2



                                                                                            -2
                                                                                    1-


                                                                                            -2
head levels it fluctuates more, going from 30.95%


                                                                                          9-


                                                                                         29
                                                                                         13

                                                                                         17



                                                                                         25
                                                                                         21
to 35.81%. The change rate for neurons is relatively                             Layers
low, around 20%, but for self-attention heads, it varies Figure 4: Shift of word-word patterns for self-
more, between 30% and 37%.                               attention after instruction tuning.
Obs-8: Instruction tuning encourages lower Table 4: Percentage of self-attention heads encod-
self-attention heads to encode more word- ing certain verbs after instruction tuning.
word patterns related to instruction verbs. Ta-
ble 4 shows that more self-attention heads from        Layers      Instruct      General       p-value
lower (1-8) and middle (8-24) layers encode             1-8      28.78 ±25.36  14.53 ±15.87    0.0180
                                                        9-16     23.70±21.64 14.03±13.71       0.0540
word-word relations with instruction verbs after
                                                       17-24     19.02±17.47 15.29±13.74       0.3535
instruction tuning, where the layer groups 1-8         24-32     10.91±9.19    14.63±13.92     0.0781
and 9-16 reach statistic significance (p < 0.1),
where the increasing percentages of self-attention heads encoding word-word relations with instruct
and general verbs are equal. In particular, about 28.78% of the heads from 1-8 layers transits from not
encoding instruction verbs to encoding instruction verbs, nearly double the 14.53% of that encodes
new general verbs after instruction tuning. Overall, averaging over 20% self-attention heads that
encode more instruction relations, only about 14% encode more general verbs. This difference
indicates that instruction tuning teaches self-attention to identify various detailed instructions.


7     D ISCUSSION
Our findings provide a unique perspective to align with recent studies. 1) The importance of prompt
diversity is highlighted by both us and Zhou et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2022). Since our three
findings suggest that instruction tuning links the pre-trained model to user tasks, we could expect a
better alignment with human intentions if the model is exposed to broader prompts. 2) The efficacy
of training self-attention with first priority (LoRA fine-tuning) (Taori et al., 2023; Juletx, 2023)
is corroborated by Finding-1 and Finding-3. Specifically, Finding-1 illustrates the capability to
distinguish instruction words is essential to the instruction following, while Finding-3 highlights
that self-attention heads directly learn instruction knowledge. 3) The advantage of training feed-
forward networks (fully fine-tuning) (Sun et al., 2023) is evident from Finding-2 and Finding-3,
which demonstrate that feed-forward networks update their knowledge toward user tasks.
Our findings also pose three open questions: 1) Can we use the importance density score as a training
object in instruction tuning to reflect the instruction following capability inherently? 2) Do LLMs
simulate a prefix tree in their upper layer for efficient decoding? 3) How do self-attention modules
and feed-forward networks collaborate to generate a helpful response for the user?


8     C ONCLUSION
This paper presents an inherently comprehensive analysis of instruction tuning for user intention
alignment by quantitatively and qualitatively comparing the interpretations between pre-trained and
fine-tuned models. Our findings indicate that instruction tuning links the pre-trained model to user
intentions, including encoding more instruction words’ knowledge within self-attention, and rotating
general knowledge from feed-forward networks towards user usage. It is worth mentioning that the
interpretability toolbox used in this study can also support future general research on LLMs.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Oren Barkan, Edan Hauon, Avi Caciularu, Ori Katz, Itzik Malkiel, Omri Armstrong, and Noam
  Koenigstein. Grad-sam: Explaining transformers via gradient self-attention maps. In Proceedings
  of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 2882–
  2887, 2021.

Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in language mod-
  els. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index. html.(Date
  accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2023.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly,
  Nicholas L Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Alex Tamkin, Karina Nguyen,
  Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and Chris Olah.
  Decomposing Language Models With Dictionary Learning. 2023.

Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons in
  pretrained transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08696, 2021.

Jinhao Duan, Hao Cheng, Shiqi Wang, Chenan Wang, Alex Zavalny, Renjing Xu, Bhavya Kailkhura,
   and Kaidi Xu. Shifting attention to relevance: Towards the uncertainty estimation of large language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01379, 2023.

Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing Dou. Hotflip: White-box adversarial examples
  for text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06751, 2017.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for transformer
  circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1, 2021.

Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposition.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.

Joseph Enguehard. Sequential integrated gradients: a simple but effective method for explaining
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15853, 2023.

Shi Feng, Eric Wallace, Alvin Grissom II, Mohit Iyyer, Pedro Rodriguez, and Jordan Boyd-Graber.
  Pathologies of neural models make interpretations difficult. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07781,
  2018.

Edward Fredkin. Trie memory. Communications of the ACM, 3(9):490–499, 1960.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14913, 2020.

Raffaele Giancarlo. A generalization of the suffix tree to square matrices, with applications. SIAM
  Journal on Computing, 24(3):520–562, 1995.

Jing Huang, Atticus Geiger, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Zhengxuan Wu, and Christopher Potts. Rigorously
   assessing natural language explanations of neurons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10312, 2023.

Niall Hurley and Scott Rickard. Comparing measures of sparsity. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 55(10):4723–4741, 2009.

Juletx. Alpaca-lora. https://github.com/tloen/alpaca-lora, 2023.

Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Enja Kokalj, Blaž Škrlj, Nada Lavrač, Senja Pollak, and Marko Robnik-Šikonja. Bert meets shap-
  ley: Extending shap explanations to transformer-based classifiers. In Proceedings of the EACL
  Hackashop on News Media Content Analysis and Automated Report Generation, pp. 16–21, 2021.

Po-Nien Kung and Nanyun Peng. Do models really learn to follow instructions? an empirical study
  of instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11383, 2023.

Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky. Visualizing and understanding neural models
  in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01066, 2015.

Zongxia Li, Paiheng Xu, Fuxiao Liu, and Hyemi Song. Towards understanding in-context learning
  with contrastive demonstrations and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05052, 2023.

Shihao Liang, Kunlun Zhu, Runchu Tian, Yujia Qin, Huadong Wang, Xin Cong, Zhiyuan Liu,
  Xiaojiang Liu, and Maosong Sun. Exploring format consistency for instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.15504, 2023.

Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
  and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03172, 2023.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17359–17372, 2022.

Beren Millidge and Sid Black. The singular value decompositions of transformer weight matrices are
  highly interpretable. https://www.alignmentforum.org/, 2022.

Jesse Mu and Jacob Andreas. Compositional explanations of neurons. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:17153–17163, 2020.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction heads.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.

R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Sibabrata Paladhi and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. Generation of referring expression using prefix
  tree structure. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing: Volume-II, 2008.

Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
  representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
  processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.

Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066,
  2019.

Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Omer Levy. Improving transformer models by reordering their
  sublayers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03864, 2019.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ” why should i trust you?” explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.

RyokoAI. Sharegpt52k. Huggingface Datasets, 2023.

Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Michael Cogswell, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Why did you say that? arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07450, 2016.

Y Shan, X Chen, Y Shi, and J Liu. Fast language model look-ahead algorithm using extended n-gram
  model. Acta Automatica Sinica, 38(10):1618–1626, 2012.

Chandan Singh, Aliyah R Hsu, Richard Antonello, Shailee Jain, Alexander G Huth, Bin Yu, and
  Jianfeng Gao. Explaining black box text modules in natural language with language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.09863, 2023.

Robyn Speer. rspeer/wordfreq: v3.0, September 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.7199437.

Bills Steven, Cammarata Nick, Mossing Dan, Tillman Henk, Gao Leo, Goh Gabriel, Sutskever Ilya,
  Leike Jan, Wu Jeff, and Saunders William. Language models can explain neurons in language
  models. https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.html, 2022.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Edouard Grave, Guillaume Lample, Herve Jegou, and Armand Joulin. Aug-
  menting self-attention with persistent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01470, 2019.

Xianghui Sun, Yunjie Ji, Baochang Ma, and Xiangang Li. A comparative study between full-
  parameter and lora-based fine-tuning on chinese instruction data for instruction following large
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08109, 2023.

Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang,
  and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpaca: A strong, replicable instruction-following model. Stanford
  Center for Research on Foundation Models. https://crfm. stanford. edu/2023/03/13/alpaca. html,
  3(6):7, 2023.

James J Thomas. Illuminating the path:[the research and development agenda for visual analytics].
  IEEE Computer Society, 2005.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jianshu Chen, and Dong Yu. A stitch in time saves
  nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03987, 2023.

Jesse Vig. Bertviz: A tool for visualizing multihead self-attention in the bert model. In ICLR
  workshop: Debugging machine learning models, volume 23, 2019.

Elena Voita, Javier Ferrando, and Christoforos Nalmpantis. Neurons in large language models: Dead,
  n-gram, positional. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04827, 2023.

Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.

Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
  Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer, and Daniel S Weld. Polyjuice: Generating coun-
  terfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and improving models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00288,
  2021.
Zhengxuan Wu and Desmond C Ong. On explaining your explanations of bert: An empirical study
  with sequence classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00196, 2021.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.13063, 2023.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11206, 2023.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOF OF L INEARLY A PPROXIMATION TO I MPORTANCE S CORES
                                                                   (ym |zm )
We prove that equation In,m = p(ym |Zm ) − p(ym |Zm,/n ) ≈ ∂f∂E      i [xn ]
                                                                             · Ei [xn ]⊤ with the first-
order Taylor extension. p(ym |Zm ) is written as f (ym |Zm ), where f is the language model, Zm ∈
R(N +m−1)×d are the word embeddings of the input token sequence Zm = [x1 , ..., xN , y1 , ..., ym−1 ],
and the d-dimensional word embeddings of a token w ∈ Zm is defined as Ei [w]. Thus, we first have
In,m = f (ym |Zm ) − f (ym |Zm,/n ), where we let the n-th row vector of Zm,/n be zeros.
The first-order Taylor expansion of f (ym |Zm ) around Zm,/n is

                                                  ∂f (ym |Zm )
                f (ym |Zm ) ≈ f (ym |Zm,/n ) +                           · (Zm − Zm,/n )⊤ .
                                                      ∂Zm
                                                                 Zm,/n

Since the difference between Zm,/n and Zm is the n-th row, the term Zm − Zm,/n is just the vector
Ei [xn ]. Therefore, the above equation could be simplified as:
                                                          ∂f (ym |Zm )
                        f (ym |Zm ) ≈ f (ym |Zm,/n ) +                 · Ei [xn ]⊤ .
                                                           ∂Ei [xn ]
                                                                       (ym |Zm )
Bring this approximation to the definition of In,m , we have In,m ≈ ∂f∂E i [xn ]
                                                                                 · Ei [xn ]⊤ .

B     A NALYZING I MPORTANCE D ENSITY

B.1     E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

For each collected prompting text from the three public datasets, we let Vicuna and LLaMA generate
its corresponding response (Sec. 3.2); we then manually identify the instruction sentences from each
input prompt and annotate whether the response provides helpful information (“followed”) or not
(“unfollowed”).
Annotate instruction and context. Specifically, the instruction usually describes the user intention
with some background (optional), which could be both very long 8 or very concise 9 . Note that we
annotate the instruction words on the sentence level, and the template words as “Input:” and “Output:”
are not considered. For some prompts, the instruction words may be distributed in both the head and
tail of the input text, and we will consider them together. Among these instruction sentences, we
define the rest of the input prompt as context words, which is unnecessary to the input prompting text.
Annotate Followed or Unfollowed Response We consider the helpfulness of the response as the
ability of instruction following described by Ouyang et al. (2022). Therefore, if a response is helpful
to the user, then we label it with “followed”. Specifically, we consider four levels of helpfulness:
L1 - the model is randomly saying something or just repeating itself; L2 - the model provides some
information that could be used to answer the question, but the model fails to organize it well; L3 - the
model generates a response that generally follows the prompts, but missing some detailed instructions;
L4 - the response is perfect as a human response. In our study, we consider the responses from L2 to
L4 as “followed”. Note that we are not concerned about hallucination issues in our study.

B.1.1    C OMPARING I MPORTANCE D ENSITY BETWEEN V ICUNA AND LL A MA
Table 5 reports the average importance Table 5: Importance density on instruction words over
density over the instruction words by giv- responses generated by Vicuna and LLaMA.
ing different responses generated by Vi-      Dataset      Vicuna ↑     LLaMA ↓    p-value ↓
cuna or LLaMA. We could observe that Vi- Self-Instruct 1.2256±0.52 0.9410±0.46 < 1e−10
cuna constantly assigns denser importance      LIMA       1.5946±0.51 1.3048±0.45   < 1e−10
scores on the instruction words compared     MT-Bench     1.3492±0.60 1.2216±0.45   0.1301
to LLaMA across the three datasets, where
   8
     A long instruction: “How do social media platforms influence the way people consume and share news, and
what are the potential implications for the spread of misinformation?”
   9
     A short instruction: “to English:”


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



         In



         a



     world



     where



    autom



      ation



         is



 becoming



 increasing



         ly



       pre



        val



       ent



          ,



         is



         it



     more



 important



         to



      prior



         it



        ize



        job



   creation



         or



     techn



   ological



  progress



          ?
              In


                   a



                         ld



                                re



                                       om


                                               n



                                                   is



                                                              ing


                                                                            g



                                                                                ly



                                                                                     pre



                                                                                           val



                                                                                                 ent


                                                                                                       ,



                                                                                                           it



                                                                                                                is



                                                                                                                      re


                                                                                                                                   t



                                                                                                                                       to


                                                                                                                                               r



                                                                                                                                                   it



                                                                                                                                                        ize



                                                                                                                                                              job


                                                                                                                                                                          n


                                                                                                                                                                              .



                                                                                                                                                                                  \n



                                                                                                                                                                                       \n



                                                                                                                                                                                            In


                                                                                                                                                                                                 a



                                                                                                                                                                                                       ld



                                                                                                                                                                                                              re



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pre



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         val



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ent


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ize



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hn


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      In


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ld



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        re



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pre



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   val



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ent


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ize


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      job


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hn


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      In


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ld



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        re



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pre



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   val



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ent


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             not



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ary


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ize


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              job


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              or



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hn


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gica


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gica


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           gica
                                                                                                                               tan


                                                                                                                                            prio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          prio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              prio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    prio
                                            atio


                                                                       asin


                                                                                                                                                                      atio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          atio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     asin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    atio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               asin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bot


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              atio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    atio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               asin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      atio
                       wor


                                                                                                                                                                                                     wor


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wor


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wor
                              whe


                                                                                                                     mo


                                                                                                                                                                                                            whe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      whe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      whe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eith
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      gre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tec
                                                          om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  om


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  om
                                     aut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   aut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ess
                                                                                                                             por


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           por


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               por
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   olo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   olo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          olo
                                                                                                                                                                    cre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            cre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cre
                                                                    incre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  incre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pro


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            incre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pro


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            incre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pro
                                                        bec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nec
                                                                                                                           im


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         im


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             im
Figure                                                                               6:                                                                 CaseID: LIMA-144 Prompt:                                                                                                                                                                   In a world where automation is becoming increasingly prevalent,
is it more important to prioritize job creation or technological progress?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vicuna:                                                         In a world where
automation is becoming increasingly prevalent, it is more important to prioritize job creation.\n\nIn a
world where automation is becoming increasingly prevalent, it is more important to prioritize technological
progress.\n\nIn a world where automation is becoming increasingly prevalent, it is important to prioritize
both job creation and technological progress.\n\nIn a world where automation is becoming increasingly
prevalent, it is not necessary to prioritize either job creation or technological progress.


this improvement is validated by student-t-test, where the null hypothesis is that the average impor-
tance densities computed by responses generated by Vicuna and LLaMA are equal. According to
the conclusion claimed in Sec. 4.2.3 that a higher importance density on instruction words indicates
a better instruction following capability, we draw our conclusion that Vicuna could better follow
user instructions on the Self-Instruct and LIMA datasets compared to LLaMA, while achieving a
marginal improvement on MT-Bench dataset. It is not surprising since the MT-Bench dataset includes
instructions that are much more challenging than those of the others.

B.2 C ASE S TUDY ON O UTLIERS
Instruction fine-tuned models may pretend
to follow the instructions. Figure 5 visual-
izes a salient map of an instance related to
writing enhancement (please see the cap-
tion for details). Vicuna’s response ad-
dresses grammatical errors and modifies
sentence structures for improved clarity. A
key observation from the figure is that only
the first three instruction tokens guide the
response generation (Red Box). Specifi-
cally, the first three words are “The sen-
tence you”, which seems to be not the key
instruction verbs like “Rewrite” from the
second sentence. Also, some words from
the context part are acted as instruction
words (Blue Box), which are “\\nInput:”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Context


and “\\nOutput:” from the prompt tem-
plate. These are the words that should
be considered as the instruction words
since they do not provide the user’s inten-
tions. Additionally, a distinctive diagonal
line spans the context section, hinting at
the model’s predisposition to echo context
from preceding content. This figure sug-
gests that the model is leveraging inherent                  Vicuna Response
language modeling ability rather than iden-
tifying and acting upon the given instruc- Figure 5: CaseID: Self-Instruct-1 Prompt: The sentence
tions. Thus, we point out that assessing you are given might be too wordy, complicated, or unclear.
                                             Rewrite the sentence and make your writing clearer by
instruction-following abilities based solely keeping it concise. Whenever possible, break complex
on the correlation between input prompts sentences into multiple sentences and eliminate unnecessary
and output responses might not provide an words.\n\nInput: If you have any questions about my rate or
accurate reflection of the model’s internal if you find it necessary to increase or decrease the scope
behaviors, while it is still a common strat- for this project, please let me know.\n\nOutput: Vicuna:
egy to develop the Reward model for RLHF Do you have any questions about my rate or do you need to
process (Ouyang et al., 2022).               adjust the project scope? Please let me know.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, we have identified certain instances where our importance density fails. This is predom-
inantly due to our density function’s lack of positional awareness. For instance, in Figure 6, the
entire user input comprises instruction words. The map suggests that these words play a crucial role
in guiding the generation, even towards the latter part of the responses. Under our hypothesis, it
would appear the model is following user instructions. Yet, Vicuna seems to merely reiterate the
input prompt repetitively, resulting in recurring diagonal patterns. We recommend future research
to address this shortcoming, either by adopting a density function that’s positionally aware or by
integrating a step to identify and handle repetitive responses early on.

C         V ISUALIZING S ALIENT M APS
C.1        E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Contrary to the examples shown in the primary content, which utilize golden responses, our focus
here is on the connections between user inputs and model outputs. To achieve this, we generate
responses from LLaMA and Vicuna, following the protocol laid out in Sec.3.2. Subsequently, we
derive the salient maps as per the technique introduced in Sec.4.1.1.
To ensure the maps provide an accurate depiction of the generation process, we set L = 10 and
b = 0. Each map’s vertical axis denotes the prompting texts, whereas the horizontal axis symbolizes
the generated responses. The intensity of each data point corresponds to the association strength
between the respective input and output tokens, with brighter points indicating stronger relationships
(visualizing with the best colors).

C.2        E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Figure 9-14 validate our qualitative assessment that instruction words in user inputs are critical in
guiding the generation process. It’s evident that each context word typically has limited influence on
the response. Collectively, these salient maps underscore the validity of input attribution, achieved by
gauging the density of the sparse and normalized importance scores.

D         S CALING UP WITH AUTOMATED T OOLS
We build upon recent advancements in automated interpretation, using cutting-edge large language
models (Taori et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Steven et al., 2022) to emulate human annotators in
generating high-level interpretations. By leveraging machine annotators, we could easily scale up our
methods to analysis the entire model, providing a more solid results to our findings.

D.1        E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Generating Configuration. We employ ChatGPT 10 as our machine annotator. Our experiments
utilize the gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 model with a hyper-parameter top-p=0.9 for nuclear sampling. To
mitigate the variability in language model outputs, we repeat the experiment five times. In each
iteration, we first condense the top-K words of a specific basis vector into a distinct concept, then
pinpoint the user-oriented tasks and linguistic levels associated with these concepts. For our initial
interaction with ChatGPT, the temperature is set to 0—signifying a greedy search strategy. In
subsequent interactions, we set the temperature to 1. Nevertheless, when identifying tasks and levels,
we consistently maintain the temperature at 0.0.
Prompt Design. Effective automated interpretation hinges on well-crafted prompts. We meticulously
design these prompts using three strategies: role-play, in-context conversational examples, and
exclusively high-quality examples.


    10
         https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt


                                                       16
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Template-1: Describing words with concise concepts. The top-15 most activated words coming from
the method presented in Sec. 5.1 will be directly appended to this template.

 System: You are a neuron interpreter for neural networks. Each neuron
 looks for one particular concept/topic/theme/behavior/pattern. Look at
 some words the neuron activates for and summarize in a single
 concept/topic/theme/behavior/pattern what the neuron is looking for.
 Don’t list examples of words and keep your summary as concise as possible.
 If you cannot summarize more than half of the given words within one clear
 concept/topic/theme/behavior/pattern, you should say ’Cannot Tell’.

 User: Words: January, terday, cember, April, July, September, December,
 Thursday, quished, November, Tuesday.
 Agent: dates.

 User: Words: B., M., e., R., C., OK., A., H., D., S., J., al., p., T., N.,
 W., G., a.C., or, St., K., a.m., L..
 Agent: abbrevations and acronyms.

 User: Words: actual, literal, real, Real, optical, Physical, REAL,
 virtual, visual.
 Agent: perception of reality.

 User: Words: Go, Python, C++, Java, c#, python3, cuda, java,
 javascript, basic.
 Agent: programing languages.

 User: Words: 1950, 1980, 1985, 1958, 1850, 1980, 1960, 1940, 1984, 1948.
 Agent: years.

 User: Words:


Template-2: Identifying applicable user-oriented tasks. Summarized concepts are concatenated to
this template. We check the writing task into three tasks because ChatGPT often deems nearly every
concept suitable for writing. We regard any of these detailed tasks as the primary purpose of writing.

 System: Which of the following assistant tasks can the given concept
 is used for?\n\nTasks: daily writing, literary writing, professional
 writing, solving math problems, coding, translation. Return ’None’ if it
 cannot be used for any of the above tasks. If it could be used for
 multiple tasks, list all of them and seperate with ’;’.

 User: Concept: Words are social media post tags.
 Agent: daily writing

 User: Concept: Words are Latex code for drawing a grouped barchart.
 Agent: professional writing

 User: Concept: Words are foreign words or names.
 Agent: translation

 User: Concept: Words are URLs.
 Agent: None

 User: Concept: Words are Words related to configuration files and
 web addresses.
 Agent: coding

 User: Concept: Words are rhyming words.
 Agent: literary writing

 User: Concept: Words are programming commands and terms.
 Agent: coding



                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


User: Concept: Words are


Template-3: Identifying linguistic level. Any automated summarized concept will be directly concate-
nated to this template.

System: You are a linguist. Classify the provided concept into
one of the following categories: Phonology, Morphology, Syntax,
and Semantic.

User: Concept: Words are dates.
Agent: semantic

User: Concept: Words are perception of reality.
Agent: Semantic

User: Concept: Words are abbrevations and acronyms.
Agent: Morphology

User: Concept: Words are related to actions or activities.
Agent: Syntax

User: Concept: Words are medical abbrivations.
Agent: Semantic

User: Concept: Words are URLs.
Agent: Morphology

User: Concept: Words are verbs.
Agent: Syntax

User: Concept: Words are adjective.
Agent: Syntax

User: Concept: Words are rhyming words.
Agent: Phonology

User: Concept: Words are programming languages.
Agent: Semantic

User: Concept: Words are


 D.2   E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Figure 7 illustrates the propor-
tion of word lists that can be in-                                                  Vicuna-Rank 300
                                    % of Inductible Word Lists


duced to a concise concept by                                                       LLaMA-Rank 300
our machine annotator. Accord-       80                                             Vicuna-Rank 200
                                                                                    LLaMA-Rank 200
ing to our template, if “Cannot                                                     Vicuna-Rank 100
Tell” exists in the word list de-                                                   LLaMA-Rank 100
scriptions, we consider that this    60
                                                                                     Vicuna-Rank 30
concept has failed to be inter-                                                     LLaMA-Rank 30
preted. We have observed that
the Vicuna and LLaMA models          40
display comparable levels of in-
terpretability, with no significant
                                     20
distinctions between them. A
                                                                                12


                                                                                                                              2
                                                                      8



                                                                                          6

                                                                                                   0



                                                                                                                     8
                                                                 4


                                                                                                            4


noticeable trend emerges as the
                                                                                                                          -3
                                                                      5-



                                                                                      -1

                                                                                               -2



                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                 1-


                                                                                                        -2
                                                                            9-


                                                                                                                         29
                                                                                     13

                                                                                              17



                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                       21


number of layers increases: the
ability to explain their encoded                        Layers
concepts improves. Specifically, Figure 7: % of represented word lists from top-ranked basis vec-
within layers 24-28, the average tors that could be described with a clear concept.


                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 6: Frequency [rank] shift of words from concept description after instruction tuning.
                       Layers 1-4                                          Layers 5-8
         Frequency↑                  Frequency↓              Frequency↑               Frequency↓
         language[3]                  quality[-3]          programming[0]         foreign-language[0]
         behavior[83]               describing[-2]          describing[38]          technology[-19]
         English[79]              characteristic[-1]         computer[11]             Spanish[-33]
          process[4]           communication[-22]            operation[11]           technical[-32]
   software-development[8]         something[-18]        computer-science[66]       multilingual[-8]
       multilingual[64]                start[-43]          development[53]           something[-8]
         analysis[67]                adjective[1]             language[0]              process[0]
        operation[33]          foreign-language[-1]            syntax[17]           characteristic[-1]
          attribute[5]               various[-12]          manipulation[14]           variation[-9]
         Spanish[14]          concepts/functions[-19]      terminology[22]       functions/methods[-7]

Table 7: Frequency [rank] shift of words from concept description after instruction tuning. (continued)
                          Layers 9-12                                             Layers 13-16
       Frequency↑                     Frequency↓                      Frequency↑                 Frequency↓
       method[89]                    translation[0]                 programming[0]                process[-1]
        french[13]                   operation[-31]            software-development[8]         expression[-45]
     understand[34]           software-development[-17]        language-proficiency[10]           syntax[-5]
   communication[10]                   process[0]                  concepts/keys[29]            variation[-15]
 concepts/functions[41]           foreign-language[0]              terminology[119]        language-related[-24]
 language-agnostic[23]              programming[0]            language-independent[52]         ambiguity[-49]
       German[31]           concepts/methods/functions[-61]     concepts/functions[16]          handling[-32]
     comparison[50]                 multilingual[-5]                   French[51]                language[0]
        variety[35]                  property[-75]                communication[4]               cultural[-93]
     technology[28]                   language[0]                   localization[96]            attribute[-14]


interpretability rate for the first 30 concepts peaks at 91.67%. This high interpretability rate un-
derscores the effectiveness of our proposed method. It can aptly convey in clear, concise text the
knowledge encoded by these models. However, there’s a caveat: knowledge encoded closer to
the output layer, specifically between layers 28-32, becomes more challenging to elucidate. In-
terestingly, this particular challenge wasn’t present when applying automated interpretation tools
to GPT-2 (Millidge & Black, 2022), indicating the behaviors between small and large models are
different. Additionally, our findings indicate a decreasing trend in interpretability for concepts that are
ranked further back. Overall, these results validate the efficacy of our proposed method in analyzing
the knowledge encoded within models.
Table 6-9 enumerates the words that experienced the most significant changes in frequency after
instruction tuning, we also show the change of rank following. These words are meaningful words
(at least four characters and not a stopword) extracted from the concept descriptions generated
by our machine annotator. From the tables, certain words, notably ”language”, ”programming”,
and ”process”, displayed significant shifts in frequency after instruction tuning. Linguistic terms
(“Spanish”, “translation”) and technical terms (“method”, “programming” and “software”) exhibited
noticeable changes in various layers. Interestingly, “language” consistently surfaced in almost
every layer group, with its frequency both rising and dropping. This observation indicates that
different layers are responsible for encoding different categories of knowledge. Specifically, the
bottom layers are responsible for storing more general basic knowledge (“behavior”, “operation”,
“adjective”), the middle layers are responsible for learning more abstract knowledge for serving
users (“functions/methods”, “programming”, “software development”), and the higher layers are
responsible for learning more knowledge for efficient text generation (“start with”, “rhyming”,
“sound”, “letter”,). Broadly, the increased mention of words pertinent to user scenarios after fine-
tuning underscores the model’s refined focus on user-centric tasks and applications.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Frequency [rank] shift of words from concept description after instruction tuning. (continued)
                           Layers 17-20                                                   Layers 21-24
                Frequency↑                 Frequency↓                           Frequency↑          Frequency↓
              programming[0]          foreign-language[-2]                   manipulation[50] programming[-2]
                language[1]               translation[-1]                       adjective[9]          state[-12]
                 syntax[78]               variation[-20]                        specific[81]       translation[-5]
                 process[2]              expression[-15]                         object[42]          quality[-7]
           language-related[-24]         interaction[24]                       adjective[-27]         value[48]
              time-related[14]              feature[-30]                        location[48]       difficulty[-77]
          language-proficiency[5]       characteristic[-5]                      variation[9]          action[0]
             terminology[123]              duration[-33]                        language[1]           prefix[-1]
              technology[121]              choice[-135]                      relationship[121]         start[1]
        programming-language[-70]             quality                           personal[72]         activity[-2]


Table 9: Frequency [rank] shift of words from concept description after instruction tuning. (continued)
                       Layers 25-28                                   Layers 29-32
        Frequency↑               Frequency↓             Frequency↑               Frequency↓
         language[4]             start with[0]         start with [0]      foreign-language[-10]
      interaction[117]             sound[-1]              sound[4]               language[-3]
       combination[2]          programming[-1]          rhyming[15]                suffix[-4]
         variation[1]             action[-2]          combination[9]          abbreviation[-2]
           software               number[0]               letter[0]             numerical[-5]
          event[66]           alphanumeric[-23]          process[8]      abbreviations/acronyms[-8]
      manipulating[53] abbreviations/acronyms[0]         French[7]                Spanish[-7]
        operation[28]             pattern[-3]            number[1]            programming[-2]
      measurement[60]             suffix[-45]          similarity[53]          Indonesian[-18]
           spell[55]              string[-56]        measurement[43]            sequence[-34]



E     I NTERPRETING F EED -F ORWARD N ETWORKS

E.1    D ETAILS OF THE PCA R ESULTS

Figure 8 displays the averaging accumulated explained
variance of decomposed principal components across        1.0
the 32 layers, where the translucent area indicates their
                                                             Accumulated Explained Variances (%)


standard deviations. Since LLaMA and vicuna show al-      0.8
most exactly the same line, we omit LLaMA from this
figure. From the figure, we have several observations.    0.6
Firstly, we find that the accumulated explained variance
increases smoothly, where almost half of the basis vec-   0.4    22.49%
tors could explain around 80% of the variances. This
observation demonstrates that these neurons do not fo-    0.2
cus on expressing a few certain features, emphasizing
the diversity of the learned hidden features. In addi-    0.0
tion, the black arrow points out that the accumulated         0         1000   2000     3000 4000
                                                                             Dimensions
explained variance of the 300 basis vector is about
22.49%, where 300 is the number of basis vectors we Figure 8: Accumulated explained variance
studied in this research. It validates that the top 300 of feed-forward networks from Vicuna.
parameters are expected to be interpretable since their
accumulated explained variance is only 22.49%.


E.2    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS TO I NTERPRETABILITY OF P RINCIPAL C OMPONENTS

Table 10 and Table 11 list cases that are well interpreted by ChatGPT-turbo-3.5-0613. From these
cases, we found that the concept descriptions generally reflect what is behind the word lists well.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    I NTERPRETING S ELF -ATTENTION H EADS
Table 12 and Table 13 list more word pairs for the self-attention heads from the first and the last layers.
Typically, these cases are evidence that the extracted word pairs show some insightful relations when
we read each one individually. However, when we read them together, it cannot reflect such a concise
concept as the feed-forward networks.
Instruction tuning may distill the behaviors of some neurons. We provide one neuron pair that
encode a concise concept to study how instruction tuning evolves the neuron behaviors. Here,
neuron-pair (Layer = 31, Head = 24, Dim = 24) capture relations in computers (such as
backend=authentication, icon=keyboard, GPU=PS, git=curl, and so on). After instruction tun-
ing, the model finds more computer-related word pairs (GPU=motherboard, VM=motherboard,
tab=keyboard, mongo=staat, mongo=orden) and overlooks some un-related word pairs (dense=bright,
convinced=confused), though the new relations may be not valid. This case is a straightforward
evidence that the instruction tuning only re-organizes the knowledge of existing models.


                                                   21
      Table 10: Representing words, application scenarios, and linguistic level of the concepts encoded by the 32ed (last) feed-forward network in Vicuna.
     Rank   Scenario                Linguistic       Concept                          Top-15 Words
      1     writing; translation    morphology       phrases and abbreviations        everybody, regardless, in, whilst, a.C., vs., amid, I., U.S., Ph.D., anyway, a.m.,
                                                                                      6., 9., . . .
      6     writing; translation    morphology       medical abbreviations            CBT, RTK, RT, RH, HRV, MT, HB, PH, PT, GnRH, HRM, PWV, RS, TB, RL
      7     writing; coding         semantic         URLs and web-related terms       //example.com/data, //example.com/data.json, //www.youtube.com/watch,
                                                                                      //image.pollinations.ai/prompt/A,                   //image.pollinations.ai/prompt/,
                                                                                      the,                  event.target.value,                   //api.example.com/data,
                                                                                      //www.npmjs.com/package/matrixmath, //example.com/api/data, community-
                                                                                      based, security-related, industry-specific, //leetcode.com/discuss, //engageleads-
                                                                                      gallery.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/ProfitQuotesV2
      8     writing                 semantic         starting with ”the”              the, theological, theology, thead, primarily, involving, mainly, theater, alongside,
                                                                                      throughout, theatrical, specifically, theta, theorist, regardless
      9     coding                  semantic         software development tools and   reCAPTCHA,          REST FRAMEWORK,                 CAPTCHA,         ARISTOCRAT,
                                                     concepts                         sophistication,      REGEXP,        sophisticated,       PETSC COMM WORLD,
                                                                                      JEDI MIND TRICKS 01, INSTALLED APPS, ARGFRA, credentials.yaml,
                                                                                      OWASP, GARETH, sHSADLH
      11    coding                  semantic         programming tasks or actions     provide, nltk.corpus.stopwords.words, sklearn.metrics, install.sh, file.write,
                                                                                      serve, give, res.send, clf.fit, pickleball, promote, uint256, giveaway, create,
                                                                                      St.
      13    coding                  semantic         programming functions/meth-      sklearn.feature extraction.text, re.sub, subprocess.run, a.C., z.string, a.m.,
                                                     ods                              e.target.value, request.data.get, p.m., data.length, re.search, f.write, //exam-
                                                                                      ple.com/data.json, nltk.corpus.stopwords.words, event.target.value
      14    writing; coding         morphology       acronyms and specific terms      sHSADLH, reCAPTCHA, CARRERAS, cv2.COLOR BGR2GRAY, VXLAN,
                                                                                      ARISTOCRAT, OWASP, CAPTCHA, LGBTQ, SOUTHGATE, SARANTIDIS,
                                                                                                                                                                             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


22
                                                                                      RTK, RESO, SILVIA, OMENS
      16    math; coding            semantic         number ranges                    G-4-8, 5-, 4-, 1-, a-, a-zA-Z0-9, 3-, 2-, 1-5, 5-6, 5-7, 2-5, 4-5, 4-6, 3-5
      21    math                    semantic         numbers                          3,4,5, 2,500, 8,10, 3,500, 75,000, 1,500, 25,000, 6,000, 4,000, 5,000, 7,000,
                                                                                      0,0,0, 8,000, 0,1, 401k
      24    not list above          semantic         characteristics/attributes       health-conscious, learning-based, Content-Security-Policy, Windows-Support-
                                                                                      Core, health-related, a-, professional-looking, pay-per-click, Write-Host, user-,
                                                                                      cruelty-free, X-Real-IP, energy-efficient, Q-learning, easy-to-use
      32    translation             semantic         foreign languages (possibly      itu, desu, Deleuze, Shu, baru, meu, -r, atraer, Putu, -u, puddle, sûr, keluar,
                                                     Japanese and French)             Veuillez, Meru
      35    writing                 phonology        Words with the ”le” sound        oooOO0OOooo, ile, brittle, tl, tackle, itle, Isle, Jingle, post-apocalyptic, hl,
                                                                                      Michele, tol, preciso, Marlene, needle
      42    translation             semantic         Indonesian words                 itu, desu, meu, Thu, baru, vacuum, -u, Shu, satu, Putu, fluctuation, individu,
                                                                                      chihuahua, perpetuating, Abu
      44    not list above          semantic         decades                          1960s, 1950s, 1940s, 1970s, 1980s, 1930s, 1920s, 15-minute, 2016/679, 60-
                                                                                      minute, 1440p, 755-10145957, 1965, 1963, 1946
      71    translation             semantic         verbs in different languages     incluyen, weren, soften, brighten, shorten, permiten, behoeften, konten, citizen,
                                                                                      teen, willen, Karen, digitalen, starten, crimen
      73    writing                 semantic         Words related to ”words ending   4b, bubbly, 1b, rb, -b, Mbappe, childbirth, carb, bulb, herb, heb, Colab, limb, b0,
                                                     with ’b’”                        /b
      74    coding                  semantic         data types and numbers           24h, uint256, int256, u32, int32, Kaggle, bytes32, 232, 225, 272822, wag, uh,
                                                                                      32, 23, 325
      75    writing                 morphology       words containing the syllable    shad, hijab, mariadb, Chad, slab, pedicab, tbsp, jab, scarab, rebound, TaskRabbit,
                                                     ”jab”                            bead, Colab, screech, Abdul-Jabbar
     102    writing; translation    semantic         occupations/jobs                 compressor, vraag, destructor, juror, Surveyor, kantor, tremor, effector, flavor,
                                                                                      investor, scissor, explorar, projector, escritor, lanjut
       Table 11: Representing words, application scenarios, and linguistic level of the concepts encoded by the 1st (first) feed-forward network in Vicuna.
     Rank   Scenario                 Linguistic       Concept                              Top-15 Words
      1     writing; translation     morphology       Abbreviations and acronyms           in, I., and, a.C., OK., a.m., U.S., Ph.D., M., B., for, D.C., vs., Feb., to
      7     not list above           semantic         words related to ”variability”       architectural, comprise, receivable, usable, Drawable, variability, usability, van-
                                                                                           ity, circularity, salivary, end=, eget, vise, end, Paradise
      25    writing                  semantic         Words related to rhyming             immersing, leer, saber, yer, dreamer, poker, deer, roller, valuing, rester, tracing,
                                                                                           Tuner, shower, loser, blocker
      27    coding                   semantic         programming concepts                 alta, relativedelta, consumed, System.Text, actionable, ’price, payable, island,
                                                                                           ’href, belakang, renewable, System.out.println, ’new, ’General, action-oriented
      36    writing                  semantic         words related to actions or activ-   tingling, Booking, Jingle, citing, bidding, advising, Thing, amazing, CMS,
                                                      ities                                striving, infringement, occurring, Jingdiao, grabbing, fast-growing
      37    writing                  morphology       Words related to suffix ”-ic”        cystic, Mythic, politic, panoramic, flavorful, opic, antic, physicist, ionic, chronic,
                                                                                           employability, effector, spic, silicone, obstructive
      38    writing                  semantic         verbs and adjectives related to      valuing, behaving, sacrificing, advising, environnemental, composing, occurring,
                                                      actions and behaviors                encouraging, upbringing, opposing, Bring, petal, charging, arriving, regal
      44    not list above           semantic         qualities or characteristics         bridging, youngest, ±, smartest, brightest, darkest, fullest, pest, comma-separated,
                                                                                           celestial, vow, richest, chest, ilmaisee, endow
      58    writing                  semantic         verbs related to actions or behav-   Poe, wee, advocate, relating, moderate, advocating, advocated, tomate, partici-
                                                      iors                                 pate, flee, moderating, complexe, anticipate, participating, reiterate
      64    writing                  morphology       adjectives with ”-ive” suffix        insignificant, restrictive, persuasive, sportive, distinctive, deceive, expressive,
                                                                                           decisive, captive, secretive, addictive, defective, digestive, intrusive, abusive
      70    writing                  morphology       Words ending in ”y” or contain-      this.y, flashy, -y, soy, shy, 3y, 2y, toy, Ms., prey, nn.Conv2d, unistd.h, ’s3, ’s,
                                                      ing ”y”                              pre-sale
                                                                                                                                                                                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


23
      72    writing                  semantic         adjectives related to characteris-   constitutional, institutional, withdrawal, convolutional, causal, beachten, geral,
                                                      tics or properties                   ethereal, unconstitutional, instrumental, positional, kwaliteit, environnemental,
                                                                                           incremental, tidal. adjectives related to characteristics or properties
     133    writing                  syntax           verbs                                lesser-known, lesser, réaliser, dryer, booster, researcher, préparer, uploader, foster,
                                                                                           photographer, créer, conocer, fetcher, streamer, minder
     135    writing                  syntax           adverbs                              substantially, environmentally, latte, surprisingly, weekly, curly, recursively,
                                                                                           beautifully, concurrently, texte, confidently, aforementioned, Sally, sadly, hon-
                                                                                           estly
     137    writing                  syntax           adverbs                              lightly, repurposing, eagerly, frankly, calmly, Polly, preciso, quarterly, analyzing,
                                                                                           openly, Thirdly, electrolyte, importantly, shampoo, Secondly
     145    writing                  syntax           adverbs and adjectives               environmentally, scientifically, verbally, product name, conditionally, latest,
                                                                                           //www.example.com, Cathy, minimally, socially, Gakkai, /i, modi, annually,
                                                                                           accidentally
     158    writing                  syntax           adverbs                              dispensary, seront, Edmonton, honestly, calmly, unintentionally, supposedly,
                                                                                           openly, gracefully, professionally, conditionally, elderly, youngest, infestation,
                                                                                           thinly
     161    writing                  syntax           adverbs and adjectives               Optionally, conditionally, environmentally-friendly, morally, waving, environ-
                                                                                           mentally, traditionally, Bally, incrementally, emotionally, intentionally, computa-
                                                                                           tionally, waking, Ideally, slash
     163    writing                  syntax           adverbs and adjectives               heavenly, Plotly, promptly, conveniently, leisurely, vastly, surprisingly, reportedly,
                                                                                           brightly, substantially, warmly, équipements, indirectly, falter, elderly
     166    not list above           phonology        language patterns or phonetic        thinner, Skinner, chilies, probably, hypothetical, spinner, SMTP, bietet, så, Jay,
                                                      similarities                         witty, seriousness, aforementioned, rapidly, aktif
                     Table 12: Most frequent word-pairs activated by self-attention head’s neurons from the 32nd (last) layers in Vicuna and LLaMA.
     Head   Keep (%)     Vicuna                                                                                LLaMA
      1      66.67       Mann=auf, cloth=trim, prominent=scholar, Morris=Vic, liter=sel, Lake=Montreal,        cloth=trim, prominent=scholar, Morris=Vic, Lake=Montreal, Duke=University,
                         Duke=University, preserved=retrieved, beach=situated, angry=ugly, Chile=Cruz,         preserved=retrieved, beach=situated, angry=ugly, Chile=Cruz, Cub=RC, mag-
                         magnetic=mechanical,         assign=restrict,    Australian=Russell,    administra-   netic=mechanical, assign=restrict, administrative=personnel, år=œuvre, elem=sau
                         tive=personnel
      2      76.47       corn=dry, bullet=triple, delle=seg, mit=nie, Ellen=wife, Collins=Lucy, John=Justin,   bullet=triple, delle=seg, mit=nie, Ellen=wife, Ellen=Meyer, Collins=Lucy,
                         intent=justify, Amsterdam=Napoli, Ende=bei, broke=broken, Jo=Wang, Amster-            John=Justin, intent=justify, Amsterdam=Napoli, Ende=bei, sobre=votre,
                         dam=Michel, Ri=sou, chr=instanceof                                                    broke=broken, Jo=Wang, Ri=sou, chr=instanceof
      3      57.89       abort=args, dwell=servant, exc=nur, blue=pale, Jackson=Julia, Henry=Julia,            abort=args, curve=gradient, predict=prediction, blue=pale, Jackson=Julia,
                         blue=pendant, schon=tra, roof=smoke, p=sl, ahead=wait, meta=todo, ga=ont,             Henry=Julia, blue=pendant, schon=tra, roof=smoke, p=sl, cousin=went,
                         Bruce=Graham, Marcus=Martin                                                           ahead=wait, formally=previously, meta=todo, ga=ont
      4      57.89       args=initialization, Elisabeth=Finland, IE=popup, Ferdinand=Sr, IB=Sr,                args=initialization, concern=significant, confusing=dangerous, Elisabeth=Finland,
                         qu=voir, Anderson=Christopher, Pierre=Wright, Christian=Wright, Ander-                Ferdinand=Sr, IB=Sr, Anderson=Christopher, Pierre=Wright, Christian=Wright,
                         son=Christian, bald=tongue, algebraic=dimensional, approximation=dimensional,         Anderson=Christian, bald=tongue, beide=λ, algebraic=dimensional, Flo-
                         Florence=Spring, declared=ruled                                                       rence=Milan, approximation=dimensional
      5      42.86       clés=terme, dat=sich, Johnson=Wayne, delle=lac, Marx=Wagner, len=unsigned,           dat=sich, Johnson=Wayne, fi=pu, delle=lac, Marx=Wagner, len=unsigned,
                         dei=lac, Anthony=Laura, completed=recently, AC=replacement, peu=ro,                   dei=lac, completed=recently, le=peu, peu=ro, tomb=tunnel, referenced=referred,
                         sphere=uniformly, examine=explore, ball=throw, referenced=referred                    Arnold=Carol, Chris=Dave, clue=mistake
      6      57.89       ce=va, hal=ord, ord=porta, Jonathan=Walker, divine=mighty, Franklin=Township,         transfer=transmission, ce=va, hal=ord, ord=porta, hun=ja, Jonathan=Walker,
                         Franklin=Nancy, arr=aux, nom=tot, bl=fe, Reich=nur, inequality=labour, en-            Franklin=Township, Franklin=Nancy, ou=voor, nom=tot, Reich=nur, ale=nicht,
                         tirely=perfectly, az=volt, byte=len                                                   entirely=perfectly, az=volt, byte=len
      7      36.36       screen=touch, divine=virtue, van=ze, creation=divine, Ferdinand=VII, Hamil-           divine=virtue, Ali=Campbell, Ferdinand=VII, depth=wide, Marie=Vincent,
                         ton=Northern, depth=wide, Marie=Vincent, layer=wire, tak=tut, Mary=Virginia,          layer=wire, Mary=Virginia, laugh=mouth, CNN=Miami, agree=doubt,
                         hitting=scored, laugh=mouth, CNN=Miami, dispute=ownership                             Greece=India, governor=provincial, especial=lugar, Brook=Gabriel, cum=fat
      8      57.89       Alice=Robert, Oliver=poet, Sydney=exhibition, quanto=wird, friendly=helpful,          Oliver=poet, manuscript=photograph, Hong=Sydney, Sydney=exhibition,
                         ob=typeof, Vater=vida, acid=iron, Jersey=Washington, Anthony=Philip, Ken-             quanto=wird, friendly=helpful, ob=typeof, Vater=vida, Anthony=Philip,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         neth=Robert, Dick=Morgan, hasta=trabajo, gradually=occasionally, com-                 Philip=VI, Kenneth=Robert, Dick=Morgan, hasta=trabajo, gradually=occasionally,


24
                         press=merge                                                                           Andy=Eric
      9      66.67       bin=fi, schon=tre, rib=rub, acc=nur, ch=fi, jam=jar, ob=tre, original=version,        bin=fi, rib=rub, acc=nur, ch=fi, gar=rem, jam=jar, St=Walker, ob=tre, orig-
                         brilliant=pleasant, alto=lista, Campbell=Franklin, gegen=hur, Leonard=Oxford,         inal=version, brilliant=pleasant, alto=lista, Campbell=Franklin, April=Lisa,
                         Amy=Glen, Atlanta=Institute                                                           Leonard=Oxford, Amy=Glen
      10     50.00       beach=yard, derive=numerical, Keith=Patrick, dice=è, Billy=Clark, lin=tym,           beach=yard, derive=numerical, Brook=Keith, Keith=Patrick, dice=è, Billy=Clark,
                         voltage=wire, Lawrence=Tim, Joseph=Paul, creature=darkness, Palace=XVI,               overlay=width, lin=tym, voltage=wire, autor=bajo, Joseph=Paul, quite=wrong,
                         Kelly=Morris, diameter=rectangular, Austin=Johnson, Monument=eigen                    creature=darkness, hate=miss, Palace=XVI
      11     66.67       enjoy=relax, mut=sobre, mouth=tract, dan=mo, pub=situated, excitement=pride,          enjoy=relax, mouth=tract, Anne=Barbara, dan=mo, pub=situated, excite-
                         drink=taste, bas=tym, zijn=¡¡, prev=·, Irish=Thomas, Bruce=Richard, He-               ment=pride, drink=taste, bas=tym, zijn=¡¡, prev=·, Irish=Thomas, Helen=Richard,
                         len=Richard, bless=sweet, Ivan=Joan                                                   bless=sweet, primera=worden, esta=primera
      12     50.00       eine=tym, folk=punk, Lucas=Philip, accessible=secure, az=mn, classe=siguiente,        eine=tym, folk=punk, cy=rem, understand=understood, mol=rem, Lucas=Philip,
                         grupo=siguiente, bow=wooden, kept=stay, Manuel=Rico, Cambridge=Campbell,              accessible=secure, az=mn, classe=siguiente, er=worden, grupo=siguiente, bon=rap,
                         Duke=Jason, Campbell=Dallas, Jason=Terry, Lady=Palace                                 bow=wooden, kept=stay, Manuel=Rico
      13     50.00       hi=uncle, impact=increasing, Richard=Ruth, James=Richard, brand=logo,                 hi=uncle, impact=increasing, Richard=Ruth, James=Richard, Introduction=Pascal,
                         logo=poster, Introduction=Pascal, John=York, casa=comme, cur=fil, medio=parti,        John=York, cur=fil, medio=parti, gran=parti, Eli=Harris, observed=subsequently,
                         persona=toda, beneath=grave, cur=diff, aur=resid                                      cur=diff, aur=resid, imagination=instinct, Cape=coast
      14     76.47       hur=µ, alors=weiter, Liverpool=Villa, Baker=Gordon, Andrew=Ryan, Gor-                 hur=µ, alors=weiter, Liverpool=Villa, Baker=Gordon, Andrew=Ryan, Gor-
                         don=Perry, Illinois=Louis, Gordon=Stuart, ville=δ, Lloyd=Martin, faster=slower,       don=Perry, Illinois=Louis, Gordon=Stuart, Lloyd=Martin, faster=slower,
                         Lloyd=Roland, Kay=Maria, Dave=Douglas, ancient=temple                                 Kay=Maria, Dave=Douglas, ancient=temple, Jen=Roy, Roy=Warren
      15     66.67       Georgia=Watson, Louise=Villa, Howard=Stuart, Antonio=Centro, Har-                     Louise=Villa, Howard=Stuart, export=trade, floor=tent, Antonio=Centro, Har-
                         vard=Maryland, mix=texture, Luther=Vincent, Colonel=Earl, Edward=Institute,           vard=Maryland, mix=texture, Luther=Vincent, Cruz=Santiago, Colonel=Earl,
                         Liverpool=Sweden, Albert=Edward, Colonel=Duke, gene=regression, IE=SQL,               Edward=Institute, Liverpool=Sweden, Albert=Edward, Colonel=Duke,
                         Amsterdam=mehr                                                                        gene=regression
      16     50.00       Alex=Mann, GL=RC, eine=mehr, DVD=YouTube, Berlin=Institute, at-                       Alex=Mann, GL=RC, eine=mehr, DVD=YouTube, attachment=separator,
                         tachment=separator,       Jay=Marie,       concluded=stating,     Miller=historian,   là=quando, Jay=Marie, concluded=stating, bird=sheep, dolor=scalar, cm=pp,
                         Wikipedia=YouTube, Hitler=army, bird=sheep, dolor=scalar, dolor=zijn,                 camp=refuge, dt=xmlns, factor=ratio, grote=nelle
                         cm=pp
            Table 13: Most frequent word-pairs activated by self-attention head’s neurons from the 32nd (final) layers in Vicuna and LLaMA. (continued)
     Head   Keep (%)   Vicuna                                                                                LLaMA
      17     66.67     Maurice=Steve, Anderson=County, Martin=Steve, Johnny=Martin, Duke=Martin,             Maurice=Steve, Anderson=County, Duke=Meyer, Martin=Steve, Duke=Martin,
                       Meyer=director, generator=voltage, deleted=reset, DJ=SD, pie=tender,                  Meyer=director, generator=voltage, deleted=reset, largo=sta, DJ=SD,
                       manuscript=poetry, manuscript=submission, manuscript=poem, bos=tipo,                  manuscript=poetry, manuscript=submission, manuscript=poem, nach=uno,
                       Meyer=Victor                                                                          Meyer=Victor
      18     42.86     Cleveland=Jenkins, eas=sowohl, objective=theoretical, consequence=justify,            Cleveland=Jenkins, eas=sowohl, objective=theoretical, heat=roof, Sie=desde,
                       Sie=desde, cruel=triumph, Ellen=singer, seg=vert, Abraham=Lewis, Gott=mit,            cruel=triumph, seg=vert, Abraham=Victor, eigenen=który, bio=dot, manipu-
                       bio=dot, manipulate=reproduce, gar=prin, immer=vel, meg=prin                          late=reproduce, vel=wel, fam=mo, eng=fam, gar=prin
      19     100.0     predict=probable, dry=slightly, com=sobre, larger=wider, French=Italian, coal=soil,   predict=probable, dry=slightly, com=sobre, larger=wider, French=Italian, coal=soil,
                       flower=garden, guitar=pop, Academy=Shakespeare, Clark=Crow, Clark=Davis,              flower=garden, guitar=pop, Academy=Shakespeare, Clark=Crow, Clark=Davis,
                       Carter=Scott, probable=severe, combined=complement, Eric=Wagner                       Carter=Scott, probable=severe, combined=complement, Eric=Wagner
      20     50.00     Arizona=Georgia, bout=rap, Gary=Tim, interrupt=pause, Venezuela=cual, com-            np=pouvoir, bout=rap, Gary=Tim, Venezuela=cual, completed=subsequently,
                       fortable=pleasant, sword=tail, Allen=Rick, Dick=Neil, anybody=figured, voce=λ,        Allen=Rick, anybody=figured, voce=λ, anglais=zona, river=terrain, dan=und,
                       anglais=zona, river=terrain, dan=und, Ku=gar                                          Ku=gar, assumed=determined, Leon=William, metadata=query
      21     57.89     considerable=extensive, sooner=wont, Dave=Jess, Ken=Parker, dark-                     considerable=extensive, sooner=wont, Dave=Jess, Ken=Parker, str=val,
                       ness=happiness, Louis=Marshall, Baltimore=Stadium, Luis=Stadium, MP=NS,               darkness=happiness, Luis=Stadium, MP=NS, Miguel=Victor, Thor=demon,
                       Miguel=Victor, Opera=Stadium, Napoli=Stadium, fog=rain, independence=nation,          Opera=Stadium, fog=rain, independence=nation, cy=sl, flush=mud
                       compact=sensor
      22     50.00     near=opposite,       Montreal=Paris,       Joan=Les,      Brazil=Taiwan,     Mas-     near=opposite, CT=Inn, när=ı̂n, Montreal=Paris, III=Manuel, III=Pope, Joan=Les,
                       sachusetts=Thompson, etwas=π, magnitude=uncertainty, dest=inst, lo=tal,               night=tent, etwas=π, Ana=Brook, magnitude=uncertainty, hover=mist, dest=inst,
                       cursor=slider, elif=θ, contre=gli, trop=über, Africa=Cape, bisnis=impl               lo=tal, cursor=slider
      23     57.89     az=mir, maar=wie, merely=obvious, evil=moral, divine=evil, fer=prof, Pak=Raj,         az=mir, maar=wie, merely=obvious, evil=moral, clock=pin, Pak=Raj, litera-
                       clock=pin, contradiction=evil, Keith=Michael, literature=widely, brother=kill,        ture=widely, mod=sub, brother=kill, brother=evil, bl=mil, Campbell=Houston,
                       brother=evil, bl=mil, mod=sub                                                         castle=grand, Gib=jako, af=dist
      24     50.00     ISBN=från, electron=voltage, fil=pe, een=una, Cruz=Walker, Institute=William,        ISBN=från, electron=voltage, fil=tous, fil=pe, een=una, Institute=William,
                       binary=quantum, vide=¡¡, boundary=portion, Collins=scored, lo=mak, salt=wet,          binary=quantum, vide=¡¡, demonstrated=observation, ancient=sacred, bound-
                       aside=partly, fil=lux, multiplication=recursion                                       ary=portion, Collins=scored, aside=partly, guard=shot, Gordon=Senator
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


25
      25     57.89     Berlin=France, Arnold=Gabriel, mathematics=professor, jest=mir, Chi=China,            Berlin=France, mathematics=professor, Chi=China, var=vertex, sphere=symmetry,
                       var=vertex, sphere=symmetry, lamp=tub, Edinburgh=Singapore, binary=finite,            lamp=tub, Edinburgh=Singapore, binary=finite, Paul=Sebastian, daughter=sweet,
                       Paul=Sebastian, Howard=Wu, daughter=sweet, Louis=Opera, altri=comme                   beautiful=landscape, Louis=Opera, Introduction=Oxford, Santo=di, fool=plain
      26     50.00     Bernard=Graham, band=hop, j=r, dur=tun, Pas=dur, Britain=Victoria,                    Bernard=Graham, dip=toss, band=hop, j=r, dur=tun, Pas=dur, Britain=Victoria,
                       Lewis=Mitchell, Carlo=von, clearer=farther, dich=inte, ni=seu, han=seu,               Lewis=Mitchell, Alan=Wright, Curt=Wright, Carlo=von, Creek=Wright,
                       Robert=Tennessee, prima=zijn, Sing=Wang                                               joueur=luego, ni=seu, han=seu
      27     57.89     Elizabeth=III, extent=necessarily, Earl=Mr, eine=proprio, aan=dur, Eliz-              Elizabeth=III, extent=necessarily, Earl=Mr, eine=proprio, contrary=observe,
                       abeth=Harris,      Norman=Vic,        Kevin=Vic,      af=av,   Andrew=Campbell,       aan=dur, Elizabeth=Harris, Edward=III, Norman=Vic, suo=tutti, Kevin=Vic, Ed-
                       Franklin=Lawrence, concrete=grass, Francia=Peru, Claude=vous, Anto-                   ward=Vic, af=av, Andrew=Campbell, Franklin=Lawrence
                       nio=Juan
      28     57.89     Helen=Nick, Francisco=Vincent, application=implementation, heat=smoke,                bo=fi, Academy=director, Helen=Nick, application=implementation, heat=smoke,
                       Pope=Smith, paint=shadow, circle=curve, della=vom, kam=ko, golden=mint, pre-          Pope=Smith, della=vom, kam=ko, num=être, precisely=purely, manière=trouve,
                       cisely=purely, manière=trouve, Carol=Harry, Carol=Crow, cached=integer               Carol=Harry, Carol=Crow, cached=integer, big=nice
      29     42.86     avant=vide, ¡¡=¶, oder=¡¡, moi=sur, Massachusetts=Ohio, damage=disease,               avant=vide, moi=sur, Massachusetts=Ohio, damage=disease, concurrent=discrete,
                       concurrent=discrete, contradiction=interpretation, af=sig, Alexander=Oliver,          contradiction=interpretation, af=sig, lear=trois, Gordon=Ron, Adam=Jo,
                       Philip=Queen, gel=insect, lear=trois, Gordon=Ron, Johnson=Kate                        Lawrence=Tennessee, compiler=helper, diameter=gauge, Egypt=seized,
                                                                                                             courage=simplicity
      30     76.47     calcul=leur, alpha=p, dock=iPhone, mot=prin, Colorado=Juan, collabo-                  calcul=leur, alpha=p, dock=iPhone, mot=prin, brother=older, Colorado=Juan,
                       ration=participation, anno=lui, guess=pretty, fest=rap, Charlotte=Montreal,           collaboration=participation, hook=rib, anno=lui, guess=pretty, fest=rap, Char-
                       Linux=iPhone, Charlotte=Claude, leur=wir, Carl=Newton, este=wir                       lotte=Montreal, Linux=iPhone, Charlotte=Claude, leur=wir
      31     66.67     hid=priest, ceased=midst, golden=hair, golden=mountain, Vietnam=soldier,              hid=priest, ceased=midst, golden=hair, Vietnam=soldier, golden=mountain,
                       black=male, American=Catholic, Republican=opposition, Philip=William,                 Philip=William, Catholic=Latin, Franz=piano, Broadway=Palace, avec=cada, Har-
                       Catholic=Latin, Broadway=Palace, avec=cada, Harris=Knight, dupli-                     ris=Knight, duplicate=unnecessary, dirty=kitchen, fallen=grave, iter=polynomial
                       cate=unnecessary, dirty=kitchen
      32     66.67     liked=loved,     lad=younger,   Manchester=Philadelphia,      Stockholm=ett,          liked=loved,  lad=younger,    Manchester=Philadelphia,    Stockholm=ett,
                       Roth=Stanley, Khan=King, Jenkins=Miller, mistaken=sudden, mistaken=suddenly,          Roth=Stanley, Khan=King, nada=vita, Jenkins=Miller, culture=spirit, mis-
                       jako=siguiente, Inn=Oxford, tanto=zona, luego=parti, eventually=literally,            taken=sudden, mistaken=suddenly, jako=siguiente, Inn=Oxford, tanto=zona,
                       Butler=Shaw                                                                           Ark=Bible
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Anal



           y



          ze



        the



       word



     choice



            ,



        phr



      asing



            ,



        pun



         ctu



       ation



            ,



        and



     capital



     ization



          in



        the



      given



      email



            .



       How



       may



        the



      writer



          of



        this



      email



      sound



          to



        the



     reader



           ?



      These



            t



       ones



     include



         Dis



         he



      arten



         ing



            ,



        Acc



          us



       atory



            ,



        Wor



        ried



            ,



        Cur



        ious



            ,



        Sur



          pr



        ised



            ,



         Dis



      appro



       ving



            ,



         Un



        ass



      uming



            ,



           F



      ormal



            ,



      Assert



         ive



            ,



       Conf



       ident



            ,



        App



        reci



       ative



            ,



       Conc



        ern



         ed



            ,



        Sad



            ,



     Inform



          al



            ,



        Reg



         ret



         ful



            ,



        Enc



         ou



        rag



         ing



            ,



         Eg



          oc



        ent



         ric



            ,



         Joy



         ful



            ,



        Opt



         im



        istic



            ,



        and



         Ex



           c



        ited



            .



          \n



          \n



       Input



            :



          Hi



         Jen



            ,


          \n



            I



       hope



        you



            '



          re



        well



            .



        Can



         we



      catch



         up



      today



           ?



            I



            '



           d



 appreciate



       your



       input



         on



         my



presentation



         for



        tom



      orrow



            '



           s



    meeting



            .



            I



            '



           d



  especially



        love



           it



           if



        you



      could



     double



            -



      check



        the



       sales



   numbers



        with



         me



            .



      There



            '



           s



           a



      coffee



          in



           it



         for



        you



            !



          \n



          \n



     Output



            :
                Hi



                     Jen



                           ,



                               \n



                                    I


                                        hope



                                               you


                                                     '



                                                         re


                                                              doing



                                                                      well


                                                                             .


                                                                                 Can



                                                                                       we


                                                                                            catch


                                                                                                    up


                                                                                                         today


                                                                                                                 ?



                                                                                                                     I



                                                                                                                            d



                                                                                                                                        e


                                                                                                                                            your



                                                                                                                                                   input



                                                                                                                                                           on



                                                                                                                                                                my



                                                                                                                                                                              on



                                                                                                                                                                                   for



                                                                                                                                                                                         tom



                                                                                                                                                                                               orrow


                                                                                                                                                                                                       '



                                                                                                                                                                                                           s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ing



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cially



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    love


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                if


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     you



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           could


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      le



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sales



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ers



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 with



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        me



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 There


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   it



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              you


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Anal



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ysis


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          word


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              this


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          al


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ers



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   al



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   may



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ey



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oach



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 able



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tone



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             phr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   asing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ward



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              may



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ey



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dent



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rt



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ive



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tone


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pun



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ctu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   te



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              an



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              with


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mix



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nce


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   level



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pun



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ctu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ation



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              al



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sal



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               or



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               al



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ard


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ent



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Over



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          all



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tone



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 of



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      this


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         likely


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oach



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       able


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             hint



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rt



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ss



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     emai


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   emai


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       emai


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             emai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          isten
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          reade


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           direc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               chec
                                                                                                                         woul



                                                                                                                                    eciat


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                woul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     coffe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 choic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            whic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       whic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   izatio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    closin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    izatio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  asse


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         asse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   doub


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          capit


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 infor


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               opria


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ivene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    conv
                                                                                                                                                                          ntati


                                                                                                                                                                                                               meet


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    numb


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      frien


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            frien
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         stand


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sente
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 confi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      appr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            appr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         htfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       espe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cons
                                                                                                                                appr


                                                                                                                                                                     prese


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           appr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                straig


   Figure9:      Prompt:Analyze the word choice, phrasing, punctuation, and
 capitalization in the given email. How may the writer of this email
 sound to the reader? These tones include Disheartening, Accusatory,
 Worried, Curious, Surprised, Disapproving, Unassuming, Formal, Assertive,
 Confident, Appreciative, Concerned, Sad, Informal, Regretful, Encouraging,
 Egocentric, Joyful, Optimistic, and Excited.\n\nInput: Hi Jen, \nI hope
 you’re well. Can we catch up today? I’d appreciate your input on my
 presentation for tomorrow’s meeting. I’d especially love it if you
 could double-check the sales numbers with me. There’s a coffee in it
 for you!\n\nOutput: Vicuna: Hi Jen,\nI hope you’re doing well. Can we
 catch up today? I would appreciate your input on my presentation for
 tomorrow’s meeting. I would especially love it if you could double-check
 the sales numbers with me. There’s a coffee in it for you!\n\nAnalysis:
 The word choice in this email is informal and conversational, which may
 convey a friendly and approachable tone to the reader. The phrasing is
 straightforward and direct, which may convey a confident and assertive
 tone. The punctuation is appropriate for an email, with a mix of
 sentence-level punctuation and no capitalization for the salutation
 or closing. The capitalization is consistent with standard email
 conventions. Overall, the tone of this email is likely to be friendly
 and approachable, with a hint of assertiveness.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   26
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                What



                  are



                  the



                steps



                    to



                using



              random



                     (



                     y



                    et



                  coh



                   er



                  ent



                     )



                  text



                   as



                   fill



                   er



              content



                within



                 your



                Word



             document



                     ?
                          1



                              .


                                  Open


                                         a


                                             new



                                                   Word



                                                             ment


                                                                    .


                                                                        \n



                                                                             2



                                                                                 .


                                                                                     Type



                                                                                            in


                                                                                                 the



                                                                                                        text



                                                                                                               you


                                                                                                                     want



                                                                                                                             to


                                                                                                                                  use



                                                                                                                                        as



                                                                                                                                             fill



                                                                                                                                                    er



                                                                                                                                                                 nt



                                                                                                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                          \n



                                                                                                                                                                               3



                                                                                                                                                                                     .



                                                                                                                                                                                                 t


                                                                                                                                                                                                     the



                                                                                                                                                                                                           text



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  you


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        want



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    use



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fill



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      er



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nt



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Right


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      click



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ted



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    text



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    se



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ."



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             click



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     on



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          In


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Line



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Line



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                at


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Text


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Par



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Line



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Par



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    acing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Par



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          acing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              box



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Line



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   acing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               drop


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               down



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      menu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Click


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OK



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        close


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Par



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          acing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              box



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Save



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Word



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   This



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          will



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sp



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ac



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ed


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ment



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fill



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      er


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           text



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  you



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ted



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      You


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     at


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          these



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  steps



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iple



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fill



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    er


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         text



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                         Selec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        selec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 page
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                optio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dialo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Singl


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dialo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 creat


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             singl


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               creat
                                                                                                                                                         conte


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conte


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Form


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  repe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 choo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   agra


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               secti


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       agra


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             agra


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             agra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          selec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        selec


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mult
                                                          docu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           docu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        docu
 Figure 10: Prompt: What are the steps to using random (yet coherent) text
 as filler content within your Word document? Vicuna: Do you have any
 questions about my rate or do you need to adjust the project scope?
 Please let me know.


      Des



        k



     jobs



  require



   writing



        a



       lot



        of



   emails



         ,



       so



        it



       isn



         '



         t



surprising



       we



      get



     tired



        of



repeating



ourselves



         .



    Come



       up



     with



  several



      syn



    onym



        s



       for



      the



    given



     word



         .



        \n



        \n



    Input



         :



      Sin



      cer



       ely



        \n



        \n



   Output



         :
                              1



                                                   .



                                                                    D



                                                                                   r



                                                                                                       ly



                                                                                                                            \n



                                                                                                                                             2



                                                                                                                                                                      .



                                                                                                                                                                                   t


                                                                                                                                                                                                      sin



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ely



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tr



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            uly


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sin



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ely



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sin



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ry


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ry


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ry


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ry
                                                                                                                                                                               Mos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mos


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mos
                                                                                 ea


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ce


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ce


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          trul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   trul


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           trul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ve


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ve



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       de


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ve


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             de


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ve


 Figure  11:      Prompt: Desk jobs require writing a lot of emails, so it
 isn’t surprising we get tired of repeating ourselves. Come up with
 several synonyms for the given word.\n\nInput: Sincerely\n\nOutput:
 Vicuna: 1. Dearly\n2. Most sincerely\n3. Truly\n4. Very sincerely\n5.
 Most truly\n6. Very dearly\n7. Very truly\n8. Most dearly\n9. Very
 truly\n10. Most sincerely.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Find



sentences



     from



  reliable



  sources



     such



       as



      the



Guardian



       or



      For



      bes



     that



  contain



      the



    exact



   match



       for



      the



    given



sentence



       or



  phrase



         .



     Also



         ,



 mention



      the



   source



        of



    each



sentence



         .



       \n



       \n



    Input



         :



   There



      are



    great



  options



       \n



       \n



  Output



         :
             *



                 "


                                        ns


                                                     for



                                                           u



                                                                ."



                                                                     (


                                                                                s



                                                                                     )



                                                                                         \n



                                                                                              *



                                                                                                  "


                                                                                                                              ns



                                                                                                                                   to



                                                                                                                                         se
                                                                                                                  ny


                                                                                                                                                      ."



                                                                                                                                                           (



                                                                                                                                                               e


                                                                                                                                                                           )
                     ere



                           are



                                  at


                                               ble


                                                                                                      ere



                                                                                                            are


                                                                                                                        at


                                                                                                                                                  m


                                                                                                                                                                     ian
                                                                            r
                                                                         Fo



                                                                                be


                                                                                                                                                               Th
                                                           yo


                                                                                                                                              fro
                                 gre


                                                                                                                       gre


                                                                                                                                        oo
                                       tio


                                                                                                                             tio
                                                                                                                  ma
                                                 a


                                                                                                                                                                    ard
                     Th


                                                                                                      Th
                                             ail


                                                                                                                                        ch
                                       op


                                                                                                                             op


                                                                                                                                                                    Gu
                                             av


Figure  12:      Prompt: Find sentences from reliable sources such as the
Guardian or Forbes that contain the exact match for the given sentence or
phrase. Also, mention the source of each sentence.\n\nInput: There are
great options\n\nOutput: Vicuna: * "There are great options available
for you." (Forbes)/n* "There are many great options to choose from." (The
Guardian).
                                                                                         28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        During



        writing



              ,



            we



        added



            an



             a



           ster



            isk



            for



           the



         word



          that



           did



           not



         come



            to



         mind



              .



           You



           will



         need



            to



       provide



       several



     examples



            to



   demonstrate



            all



           the



        words



          that



           can



            be



          used



             in



           the



      sentence



       instead



             of



           the



             a



           ster



            isk



              .



             \n



             \n



         Input



              :



            we



             *



            to



         know



             \n



             \n



        Output



              :
                       we



                            \



                                *



                                    to


                                         know


                                                \n



                                                     \n


                                                          Input


                                                                  :



                                                                       I



                                                                            \



                                                                                *



                                                                                         to



                                                                                              go



                                                                                                    to



                                                                                                         the


                                                                                                               store


                                                                                                                            \n



                                                                                                                                 \n


                                                                                                                                      Output


                                                                                                                                               :



                                                                                                                                                   I



                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                 to



                                                                                                                                                                      go



                                                                                                                                                                            to



                                                                                                                                                                                 the


                                                                                                                                                                                       store


                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \n



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Output


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    go



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     store


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \
Figure  13:     Prompt: During writing, we added an asterisk for the word
that did not come to mind. You will need to provide several examples
to demonstrate all the words that can be used in the sentence instead
of the asterisk.\n\nInput: we * to know\n\nOutput: Vicuna: we * to
know\n\nInput: I * to go to the store\n\nOutput: I * to go to the
store\n\nInput: I * to go to the store *\n\nOutput: I * to go to the
store *\n\nInput: I * to go to the store * *\n\nOutput: I * to go to the
store * *\n\nInput: I * to go to the store * * *\n\nOutput: I * to go
to the store * * *\n\nInput: I * to go to the store * * * *\n\nOutput:
I * to go to the store * * * *\n\nInput: I * to go to the store * * * *
*\n\nOutput: I * to go to the store


       Write



                  a


     review



      based



                 on



            the



       given



information



                   .



                  \n



                  \n



        Input



                   :



                   -



   Product



                   :



          Pers



                  il



             Dis



                  cs



            Lau



              nd



                  ry



                  D



          eter



         gent



            Pac



                   s



                   ,



   Original



                  S



          cent



                   ,



         High



                  E



             ffic



       iency



                   (



              HE



                   )



      Comp



                  at



            ible



                   ,



            Lau



              nd



                  ry



                 So



                 ap



                   ,


                  6



                  2



      Count



                  \n



                   -



         Sent



      iment



                   :



            Pos



          itive



                  \n



                  \n



    Output



                   :
                                "


                                                                      Dis


                                                                                                   Lau



                                                                                                                       nd



                                                                                                                                      ry



                                                                                                                                                   D



                                                                                                                                                                r



                                                                                                                                                                             t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          se


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   high


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nt



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cs



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lau



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nd



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ry



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ir



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ct
                                            s



                                                          il


                                                                                    cs


                                                                                                                                                                                               Pac


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        at


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lity



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HE



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ible



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           und



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ry



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            inal



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     inv



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ig



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  or



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ty



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  le



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                acs



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              are



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        use



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  can



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ed



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ctly



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   was



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          king



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ient



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ice



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       for



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ilies


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         all



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 we



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ly


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  end



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  il


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dis


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pac


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ess



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rd



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ity



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  itive



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ent



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ."
                                                                                                                                                               ete



                                                                                                                                                                           gen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ete



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ete



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ove


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ete



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gen
                                         Per


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     vide


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             load
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pac


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Per
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            eas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  chin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fres


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           atin


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ltip


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              high


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    effe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gre


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cou


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    plen


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          affo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tho


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     add


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           abil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       opt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       look


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qua


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iven


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pat


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Orig


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dire


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ven


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pro


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         com


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     con


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           reco


 Figure 14: Prompt: Write a review based on the given information.\n\nInput:
- Product: Persil Discs Laundry Detergent Pacs, Original Scent, High
 Efficiency (HE) Compatible, Laundry Soap, 62 Count/n- Sentiment:
 Positive\n\nOutput: Vicuna: ‘‘Persil Discs Laundry Detergent Pacs
 are a great option for those looking for a high-quality, HE compatible
 laundry detergent. The Original Scent is fresh and invigorating, and
 the 62-count pack provides plenty of detergent for multiple loads. The
 pacs are easy to use and can be added directly to the washing machine,
 making them a convenient choice for busy families. Overall, we highly
 recommend Persil Discs Laundry Detergent Pacs for their effectiveness,
 affordability, and positive sentiment.’’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      29
