Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S IMULTANEOUS D IMENSIONALITY R EDUCTION : A
DATA E FFICIENT A PPROACH FOR M ULTIMODAL R EP -
RESENTATIONS L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Current experiments frequently produce high-dimensional, multimodal
         datasets—such as those combining neural activity and animal behavior or
         gene expression and phenotypic profiling—with the goal of extracting useful cor-
         relations between the modalities. Often, the first step in analyzing such datasets
         is dimensionality reduction. We explore two primary classes of approaches to
         dimensionality reduction (DR): Independent Dimensionality Reduction (IDR)
         and Simultaneous Dimensionality Reduction (SDR). In IDR methods, of which
         Principal Components Analysis is a paradigmatic example, each modality is com-
         pressed independently, striving to retain as much variation within each modality
         as possible. In contrast, in SDR, one simultaneously compresses the modalities
         to maximize the covariation between the reduced descriptions while paying less
         attention to how much individual variation is preserved. Paradigmatic examples
         include Partial Least Squares and Canonical Correlations Analysis. Even though
         these DR methods are a staple of statistics, their relative accuracy and data set
         size requirements are poorly understood. We use a generative linear model to
         synthesize multimodal data with known variance and covariance structures to
         examine these questions. We assess the accuracy of the reconstruction of the
         covariance structures as a function of the number of samples, signal-to-noise ratio,
         and the number of varying and covarying signals in the data. Using numerical
         experiments, we demonstrate that linear SDR methods consistently outperform
         linear IDR methods and yield higher-quality, more succinct reduced-dimensional
         representations with smaller datasets. Remarkably, regularized CCA can identify
         low-dimensional weak covarying structures even when the number of samples is
         much smaller than the dimensionality of the data, which is a regime challenging
         for all dimensionality reduction methods. Our work corroborates and explains
         previous observations in the literature that SDR can be more effective in detecting
         covariation patterns in data. These findings strengthen the intuition that SDR
         should be preferred to IDR in real-world data analysis when detecting covariation
         is more important than preserving variation.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Many modern experiments across various fields generate massive multimodal data sets. For in-
stance, in neuroscience, it is common to record the activity of a large number of neurons while
simultaneously recording the resulting animal behavior (Stringer et al., 2019; Steinmetz et al., 2021;
Urai et al., 2022; Krakauer et al., 2017). Other examples include measuring gene expressions of
thousands of cells and their corresponding phenotypic profiles, or integrating gene expression data
from different experimental platforms, such as RNA-Seq and microarray data (Clark et al., 2013;
Zheng et al., 2017; Svensson et al., 2018; Huntley et al., 2015; Lorenzi et al., 2018). In economics,
important variables such as inflation are often measured using combinations of macroeconomic indi-
cators as well as indicators belonging to different economic sectors (Gosselin & Tkacz, 2001; Baillie
et al., 2002; Freyaldenhoven, 2022; Rudd, 2020). In all of these examples, an important goal is to
estimate statistical correlations among the different modalities.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Analyses usually begin with dimensionality reduction (DR) into a smaller and more interpretable
representation of the data. We distinguish two types of DR: independent (IDR) and simultane-
ous (SDR) (Martini & Nemenman, 2023). In the former, each modality is reduced independently,
while aiming to preserve its variation, which we call self signal. In the latter, the modalities are
compressed simultaneously, while maximizing the covariation (or the shared signal) between the
reduced descriptions and paying less attention to preserving the individual variation. It is not clear
if IDR techniques, such as the Principal Components Analysis (PCA) (Hotelling, 1933), are well-
suited for extracting shared signals since they may overlook features of the data that happen to be of
low variance, but of high covariance (Colwell et al., 2014; Borga et al., 1997). In particular, poorly
sampled weak shared signals, common in high-dimensional datasets, can exacerbate this issue. SDR
techniques, such as Partial Least Squares (PLS) (Wold et al., 2001) and Canonical Correlations Anal-
ysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1936), are sometimes mentioned as more accurate in detecting weak shared
signal (Chin & Newsted, 1999; Hair et al., 2011; Pacharawongsakda & Theeramunkong, 2016).
However, the relative accuracy and data set size requirements for detecting the shared signals in the
presence of self signals and noise remain poorly understood for both classes of methods.
In this study, we aim to assess the strengths and limitations of linear IDR, represented by PCA,
and linear SDR, exemplified by PLS and CCA, in detecting weak shared signals. For this, we use
a generative linear model that captures key features of relevant examples, including noise, the self
signal, and the shared signal components. Using this model, we analyze the performance of the
methods in different conditions. Our goal is to assess how well these techniques can (i) extract
the relevant shared signal and (ii) identify the dimensionality of the shared and the self signals
from noisy, undersampled data. We investigate how the signal-to-noise ratios, the dimensionality
of the reduced variables, and the method of computing correlations combine with the sample size
to determine the quality of the DR. We propose best practices for achieving high-quality reduced
representations with small sample sizes using these linear methods.


2     M ODEL

2.1   R ELATIONS TO P REVIOUS W ORK

The extraction of signals from large-dimensional data sets is a challenging task when the number
of observations is comparable to or smaller than the dimensionality of the data. The undersampling
problem introduces spurious correlations that may appear as signals, but are, in fact, just statistical
fluctuations. This poses a challenge for DR techniques, as they may retain unnecessary dimensions
or identify noise dimensions as true signals. Here, we focus exclusively on linear DR methods.
For these, the Marchenko-Pastur (MP) distribution of eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of pure
noise derived using the Random Matrix Theory (RMT) methods (Marchenko & Pastur, 1967) has
been used to introduce a cutoff between noise and true signal in real datasets. However, recent
work (Fleig & Nemenman, 2022) has shown that, when observations are a linear combination of
uncorrelated noise and latent low-dimensional self signals, then the self signals alter the distribution
of eigenvalues of the sampling noise, questioning the validity of this naive approach.
Moving beyond a single modality, Bouchaud et al. (2007) calculated the singular value spectrum
of cross-correlations between two nominally uncorrelated random signals. However, it remains
unknown whether the linear mixing of self signals and shared signals affects the spectra of noise,
and how all of these components combine to limit the ability to detect shared signals between two
modalities from data sets of realistic sizes. Filling in this gap using numerical simulations is the
main goal of this paper, and analytical treatment of this problem will be left for the future.
The linear model and linear DR approaches studied here do not capture the full complexity of real-
world data sets and state-of-the-art algorithms. However, if sampling issues and self signals limit the
ability of linear DR methods to extract shared signals, it would be surprising for nonlinear methods
to succeed in similar scaling regimes on real data. Thus extending the previous work to explicitly
study the effects of linear mixtures of self signals, shared signals, and noise on limitations of DR
methods is likely to endow us with intuition that is useful in more complex scenarios routinely
encountered in different domains of science.
Examples of scenarios with shared and self signals include inference of dynamics of a system
through a latent space (Creutzig et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2022), where shared signals correspond to


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


latent factors that are relevant for predicting the future of the system from its past, while self signals
correspond to nonpredictive variation (Bialek et al., 2001). In economics, shared and self signals
correspond to diverse macroeconomic indicators that are grouped into correlated distinct categories
in structural factor models (Forni & Gambetti, 2010; Gosselin & Tkacz, 2001; Rudd, 2020; Baillie
et al., 2002). In neuroscience, shared signals can correspond to the latent space, by which neural
activity affects behavior, while self signals encode neural activity that does not manifest in behavior
and behavior that is not controlled by the part of the brain being recorded from (Sponberg et al.,
2015; Stringer et al., 2019; Natraj et al., 2022; Sani et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2016; Urai et al., 2022;
Krakauer et al., 2017).
Interestingly, in the context of the neural control of behavior, it was noticed that SDR reconstructs
the shared neuro-behavioral latent space more efficiently and using a smaller number of samples than
IDR (Sani et al., 2021). Similar observations have been made in more general statistical contexts
(Chin & Newsted, 1999; Hair et al., 2011; Pacharawongsakda & Theeramunkong, 2016; Vogelstein
et al., 2021), though the agreement is not uniform (Goodhue et al., 2006; 2012; 2013). Because
of this, most practical recommendations for detecting shared signals are heuristic (Hair Jr et al.,
2021), with widely acknowledged, but poorly understood limitations and possible resolutions (Kock
& Hadaya, 2018). Our goal is to ground such rules in numerical simulations and scaling arguments.

2.2   L INEAR M ODEL WITH S ELF AND S HARED S IGNALS

We consider a linear model with noise, mself,X , mself,Y self signals that are relevant to each modality
independently, as well as mshared shared signals that capture the interrelationships between modali-
ties. 1 It results in T observations of two high-dimensional standardized observables, X and Y :
                    h          i
                      X̃ ∈ RNX    =         RX        + UX VX + P QX ,
                                           |{z}             | {z }          | {z }
                                       Independent white noise       Self-Signal for X       Shared-Signal
                  h         i
                   Ỹ ∈ RNY        =           RY                +      UY VY            +     P QY ,        (1)
                                               |{z}                     | {z }                 | {z }
                                       Independent white noise       Self-Signal for Y       Shared-Signal

                                             X = X̃/σX̃ , Y = Ỹ /σỸ .                                (2)
The observations of X and Y are linear combinations of the following: (a) Independent white noise
                                             2           2
components RX and RY with variances σR         X
                                                  and σR   Y
                                                             . (b) Self-signal components UX and UY
                                             mself,X
residing in lower-dimensional subspaces R             and Rmself,Y with variances σU   2
                                                                                         X
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                            and σU Y
                                                                                                     . (c)
                                                                              mshared
Shared-signal components P in a shared lower-dimensional subspace R                   with variance σP2 .
These components are projected into their respective high-dimensional spaces RNX and RNY using
fixed quenched projection matrices VX , VY , QX , and QY with specified variances σV2 X , σV2 Y , σQ  2
                                                                                                        X
                                                                                                          ,
      2
and σQY , all respectively. Entries in these matrices are drawn from a Gaussian distribution with
a zero mean and the corresponding variances. Further, division by σX̃ and σỸ standardizes each
column of the data matrices by their empirical standard deviations. The total variance in the matrix
                                                                                  2       2
X̃ can be calculated as the sum of the variances of its individual components: σX̃    = σR  X
                                                                                              +mself,X ×
  2   2                   2 2
σUX σVX + mshared × σP σQX . A similar calculation can be done for the total variance in Ỹ .
We define self and shared signal-to-noise ratios γself,X/Y , γshared,X/Y as the relative strength of
signals compared to background noise per component in each modality. These definitions allow us
to examine how easily self or shared signals in each dimension can be distinguished from the noise.

                                        2
                                       σU X/Y
                                              σV2 X/Y                                    σP2 σQ
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                X/Y
                        γself,X/Y =         2            ,       γshared,X/Y =                2              (3)
                                           σR X/Y
                                                                                             σR X/Y


Our main goal is to evaluate the ability of linear SDR and IDR methods to reconstruct the shared
signal P , while overlooking the effects of the self signals UX/Y on the statistics of the shared ones.
   1
     This model is an extension of the model introduced by Fleig & Nemenman (2022), and its probabilistic
form has been studied by Murphy (2022). In its turn, the latter is an extension of work by Klami et al. (2012),
and Bach & Jordan (2005). However, within this model, we focus on the intensive limit, common in RMT
Potters & Bouchaud (2020), where the number of observations scales as the number of observed variables.
This scenario is common in many real-world applications.


                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3       M ETHODS
We apply DR techniques to X and Y to obtain their reduced dimensional forms ZX and ZY , re-
spectively. ZX , ZY are of sizes that can range from T × 1 to T × NX and T × NY , respectively.
As an IDR method, we use PCA (Hotelling, 1933). As SDR methods, we apply PLS (Wold et al.,
2001) and CCA (Hotelling, 1936; Vinod, 1976; Årup Nielsen et al., 1998), including both normal
and regularized versions of the latter. Each of these methods focuses on specific parts of the overall
covariance matrix                                    1 ⊤
                                                         X X T1 X ⊤ Y

                                    CXX CXY
                        CX,Y =                      = T1 ⊤        1 ⊤      .                       (4)
                                    CY X CY Y          TY X       TY Y
PCA aims to identify the most significant features that explain the majority of the variance in CXX
and CY Y , independently. PLS, on the other hand, focuses on singular values and vectors that explain
the covariance component CXY . Along the same lines,  √ CCA aims to find linear combinations of X
and Y that are responsible for the correlation (CXY / CXX CY Y ) between X and Y (Borga et al.,
1997). See Appendix A.1 for a detailed description of these methods.
For every numerical experiment, we generate training and test data sets (Xtrain , Ytrain ) and
(Xtest , Ytest ) according to Eqs. (1-2)2 . We apply PCA, PLS, CCA, and regularized CCA (rCCA)
to the training to obtain the singular directions WXtrain and WYtrain for each method (see Appendix
A.1). We then obtain the projections of the test data on these singular directions
                                            ZX = Xtest WXtrain ,
                                            ZY = Ytest WYtrain .                                          (5)
Finally, we evaluate the reconstructed correlations metric RC ′ , which measures how well these
singular directions recover the shared signals in the data, corrected by the expected positive bias due
to the sampling noise, see Appendix A.2 for details. RC ′ = 0 corresponds to no overlap between
the true and the recovered shared directions, and RC ′ = 1 corresponds to perfect recovery.

4       R ESULTS
We perform numerical experiments to explore the undersampled regime, T ≲ NX , NY . We use
T = {100, 300, 1000, 3000} samples, NX = NY = 1000. We explore the case of one shared signal
only, mshared = 1 and we mask this shared signal by a varying number of self signals and noise. We
vary the number of retained dimensions, (|ZX |, |ZY |), and explore how many of them are needed to
recover the shared signal in the noise and the self signal background with different SNR.
For brevity, we explore two cases: (1) One self-signal in X and Y in addition to the shared signal
(mself = 1); (2) many self-signals in X and Y . For both cases, we calculate the quality of recon-
struction as the function of the shared and the self SNR, γshared and γself . In all figures, we show RC ′
for severely undersampled (first row, T = 300) and relatively well sampled (second row, T = 3000)
regimes. We also show the value of RC 0 , the bias that we removed from our reconstruction quality
metric, for completeness, see Appendix A.2 for details. Experiments at different parameter values
can be found in Appendix A.4.
Figure 1 shows that, in Case 1, when one dimension is retained in DR of X and Y , PCA populates
the compressed variable with the largest variance signals and hence struggles to retain the shared
signal when γself > γshared , regardless of the number of samples. However, both PLS and rCCA
excel in achieving nearly perfect reconstructions. When T ≪ NX , straightforward CCA cannot be
applied (see A.1.3-A.1.4), but it too achieves a perfect reconstruction when T > NX .
In Fig. 2, we allow two dimensions in the reduced variables. For PCA, we expect this to be sufficient
to preserve both the self and the shared signals. Indeed, PCA now works for all γs and T , although
with a slightly reduced accuracy for large shared signals compared to Fig. 1. PLS and rCCA continue
to deliver highly accurate reconstructions. So does the CCA for T > NX . Spurious correlations, as
measured by RC 0 grow slightly with the increasing dimensionality of ZX , ZY compared to Fig. 1.
This is expected since more projections must now be inferred from the same amount of data.
              2
    2
    We fix σR   X/Y
                    , σV2 X/Y , σQ
                                 2
                                   X/Y
                                                  2
                                       and allow σU X/Y
                                                        , σP2 to vary when we choose γself,X/Y , γshared,X/Y .
We first generate the fixed projection matrices VX/Y , QX/Y , and we vary RX/Y , UX/Y , P for each trial.


                                                      4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                     $GGLQJ   VHOI VLJQDO  NHHSLQJ   GLPHQVLRQ DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ

                                            3&$                                                     3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                     $                           %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                     $                           %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                             γself                                                     γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


  Figure 1: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, rCCA, and noise in recovery of the shared signal for
  |ZX | = |ZY | = 1 = mself . The rows are undersampled and relatively well-sampled scenarios
  respectively. PCA struggles to detect shared signals when they are weaker than the self signals, even
  with more samples. PLS and rCCA demonstrate nearly perfect reconstruction. CCA displays no
  reconstruction in the undersampled regime T ≪ NX , and it is nearly perfect for large T .

                                                     $GGLQJ   VHOI VLJQDO  NHHSLQJ   GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ

                                            3&$                                                     3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                     $                           %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                     $                           %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                             γself                                                     γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


  Figure 2: Same as Fig. 1, but for |ZX | = |ZY | = 2 = mself + mshared . Now there are enough
  compressed variables for PCA to detect the shared signal. Other methods perform similarly to
  Fig. 1, albeit the noise is larger.

  We now turn to mself ≫ mshared . We use mshared = 1, mself = 30 for concreteness. We expect
  that the performance of SDR methods will degrade weakly, as they are designed to be less sensitive
  to the masking effects of the self signals. In contrast, we expect IDR to be more easily confused
  by the many strong self-signals, degrading the performance. Indeed, Fig. 3 shows that PCA now
  faces challenges in detecting shared signals, even when the self signals are weaker than in Fig. 1.
  Increasing T improves its performance only slightly. Somewhat surprisingly, PLS performance also
  degrades, with improvements at T ≫ NX . CCA again displays no reconstruction when T ≪ NX ,
  switching to near perfect reconstruction at large T . Crucially, rCCA again shines, maintaining its
  strong performance, consistently demonstrating nearly perfect reconstruction.
  Since one retained dimension is not sufficient for PCA to represent the shared signal when γshared ≲
  γself , we increase the dimensionality of reduced variables |ZX | = |ZY | = mself ≫ mshared ),
  cf. Fig. 4. PCA now detects shared signals even when they are weaker than the self-signals,
  γshared < γself , but at a cost of the reconstruction accuracy plateauing significantly below 1. In
  other words, when self and shared signals are comparable, they mix, allowing for partial reconstruc-
  tion. However, even at T ≫ NX , PCA cannot break into the phase diagram’s lower right corner.
  Other methods perform similarly, reconstructing shared signals over the same or wider ranges of
  sampling and the SNR ratios than in Fig. 3. For all of them, the improvement comes at the cost of
  the decreased asymptotic performance. The most distinct feature of this regime is the dramatic effect
  of noise, where 30-dimensional compressed variables can accumulate enough sampling fluctuations
  to recover correlations that are supposedly nearly twice as high as the data actually has.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                       $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ   GLPHQVLRQ DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ

                                            3&$                                                        3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                             γself                                                        γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


  Figure 3: Reconstruction results for mself = 30, mshared = 1, and |ZX | = |ZY | = 1. PCA struggles
  to detect any shared signals when they are even comparable to the self ones. PLS performance also
  degrades. CCA displays its usual impotence at small T . Finally, rCCA demonstrates nearly perfect
  reconstruction for all parameter values.
                                                     $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ    GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ

                                            3&$                                                        3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                             γself                                                        γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


  Figure 4: DR performance for |ZX | = |ZY | = mself > mshared ). PCA now detects shared signals
  even when they are weaker than the self signals. However, the quality of reconstruction is signif-
  icantly lower than in Fig. 2. PLS detects signals in a larger part of the phase space, but also with
  a significant reduction in quality, which improves with sampling. CCA has its usual problem for
  T ≪ NX , and, like PLS, it has a significantly lower reconstruction quality than in the regime in
  Fig. 3. rCCA is able to detect the signal in the whole phase space, but again with worse quality.
  Finally, spurious correlations are high, though they decrease with better sampling.
  Figure 5 now explores a regime when the dimensionality of the compressed variables is enough to
  store both the self and the shared interactions at the same time, |ZX | = |ZY | = mself +mshared = 31.
  With just one more dimension than Fig. 4, PCA abruptly transitions to being able to recover shared
  signals for all SNRs, albeit still saturating at a far from perfect performance at large T . PLS, CCA,
  rCCA, and noise show behavior remain similar to Fig. 4.
  Our analysis suggests that there are three relevant factors that determine the ability of DR to re-
  construct shared signals. The first is the strength of the shared and the self signals compared to
  each other and to noise. For brevity, in the following analysis, we fix γself and define the ratio
  γ̃ = γshared /γself to represent this effect. The second factor affecting the performance is the ratio
  between the number of shared and self signals, denoted by m̃ = mshared /mself . The third factor is
  the number of samples per dimension of the reduced variable, denoted by q̃ = T /|Z|.
  In Fig. 6, we illustrate how these parameters influence the performance of DR, RC ′ . Each subplot
  varies q̃, while holding T constant and changing |ZX |. We compare the results of PCA (representing
  IDR) and rCCA (representing SDR). Each curve is averaged over 10 trials, with error bars indicating
  1 standard deviation around the mean, using algorithmic parameters as described in Appendix A.3.
  We see that the relative strength of signals, as represented by γ̃, plays a significant role in determin-
  ing which method performs better. If the shared signals are larger (bottom) both approaches work.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                     $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ    GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ

                                            3&$                                                        3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


T


                  γshared


                                             γself                                                        γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


  Figure 5: PCA, PLS, CCA, rCCA, and noise results when 31 dimensions are kept after reduction
  (|ZX | = |ZY | = mself + mshared ). PCA now can detect more shared signals when they are weaker
  than the self signals (A1), however, with a significantly lower quality compared to figure 2, but
  suddenly explores the whole phase space, still with lower accuracy than Case 1. PLS, CCA, rCCA,
  and noise show similar behavior to figure 4.
  However, for weak shared signals (top), SDR is generally more effective. Further, the ratio between
  the number of shared and self signals, m̃, also plays an important role. When m̃ is large (left), IDR is
  more likely to detect the shared signal before the self signals, and it approaches the performance of
  SDR. However, when m̃ is small, IDR is more likely to capture the self signals before moving on to
  the shared signals, degrading performance (right). Finally, not surprisingly, the number of samples
  per dimension of the compressed variables, q̃, is also critical to the success. If q̃ is small, the signal
  is drowned in the sampling noise, and adding more retained dimensions hurts the DR process. This
  expresses itself as a peak for SDR performance around |ZX | = mshared . For IDR, the peak is around
  |ZX | = mself + mshared , thus requiring more data to achieve performance similar to SDR.
  We observe that the performance of rCCA (SDR) is almost independent of changing m̃ or γ̃, indi-
  cating that it focuses on shared dimensions even if the latter is masked by self signals. The algorithm
  crucially depends on q̃, where adding more dimensions (decreasing q̃) than needed hurts the reduc-
  tion. This is because, for a fixed number of samples, the reconstruction of each dimension then gets
  worse. In contrast, for PCA (IDR), the performance depends on all three relevant parameters, q̃, m̃,
  and γ̃. At some parameter combinations, the performance of IDR in reconstructing shared signals
  approaches SDR. However, in all cases, SDR never performs worse than IDR on this task. Further
  application of the identical methodology to a nonlinear Noisy MNIST dataset is presented in Ap-
  pendix A.5. This analysis suggests that our conclusions hold beyond the relatively simple Gaussian
  mixture model synthetic data.

  5                         D ISCUSSION
  We used a generative linear model which captures multiple desired features of multimodal data with
  shared and non-shared signals. The model focused only on data with two measured modalities.
  However, while not a part of this study, the model can be readily extended to accommodate more
  than two modalities (e. g., Xi = Ri + Ui Vi + P Qi for i = 1, ..., n, where n represents the number
  of modalities). Then, methods such as Tensor CCA, which can handle more than two modalities
  (Luo et al., 2015), can be used to get insight into DR on such data.
  We analyzed different DR methods on data from this model in different parameter regimes. Lin-
  ear SDR methods were clearly superior to their IDR counterparts for detecting shared signals. We
  observed similar results on a nonlinear dataset as well. We thus make a strong practical suggestion
  that, whenever the goal is to reconstruct a low dimensional representation of covariation between
  two components of the data, IDR methods (PCA) should always be avoided in favor of SDR. Of the
  examined SDR approaches, rCCA is a clear winner in all parameter regimes and should always be
  preferred. These findings explain the results of, for example, Sani et al. (2021) and others that SDR
  can recover joint neuro-behavioral latent spaces with fewer latent dimensions and using fewer sam-
  ples than IDR methods. Further, our observation that SDR is always superior to IDR in the context
  of our model corroborates the theoretical findings of Martini & Nemenman (2023), who proved a
  similar result in the context of discrete data and a different SDR algorithm, namely the Symmetric


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                    WRWDO GLPHQVLRQV     VKDUHG GLPHQVLRQV       VDPSOHV
                           |ZX | = mshared                     |ZX | = mself                           |ZX | = mself + mshared                  PCA(IDR)                                   rCCA(SDR)
                         m̃ =        γ̃ =                                                m̃ =       γ̃ =                                           m̃ =       γ̃ =
              $                                                                    %                                                             &


RC 0


                                                                        RC 0


                                                                                                                                             RC 0


                                     1/q̃                                                                      1/q̃                                                              1/q̃
                         m̃ =        γ̃ =                                                m̃ =       γ̃ =                                           m̃ =       γ̃ =
              $                                                                    %                                                             &


RC 0


                                                                        RC 0


                                                                                                                                             RC 0


                                     1/q̃                                                                      1/q̃                                                              1/q̃
                        m̃ =        γ̃ =                                               m̃ =       γ̃ =                                          m̃ =       γ̃ =
              $                                                                    %                                                             &


RC 0


                                                                        RC 0


                                                                                                                                             RC 0


                                     1/q̃                                                                      1/q̃                                                              1/q̃
Figure 6: Performance of PCA (IDR) and rCCA (SDR) for different values of the relevant parame-
ters of the model: the number of samples per dimension of the compressed variable (q̃), the strength
of shared signals relative to the self ones (γ̃), and the ratio of the number of shared to self signal com-
ponents (m̃), while fixing the number of samples (T = 1000) and the number of shared dimensions
(mshared = 10). Note that increasing 1/q̃ (left to right) corresponds to increasing the dimension of
the latent space |ZX | at a fixed number of samples T .


Information Bottleneck (Friedman et al., 2013). Vogelstein et al. (2021) made similar conclusions
using conditional covariance matrices for the reduction in the context of classification. More recent
work of Anonymous (2023) showed similar results using deep variational methods. Collectively,
these diverse investigations, linear and nonlinear, theoretical, computational, and empirical, pro-
vide strong evidence that generic (not just linear) SDR methods are likely to be more efficient in
extracting covariation than their IDR analogs.
Our study also answers an open question in the literature surrounding the effectiveness of SDR
techniques. Specifically, there has been debate about whether PLS, an SDR method, is effective at
low sampling (Chin & Newsted, 1999; Hair et al., 2011; Goodhue et al., 2006; 2012). Our results
show that SDR is not necessarily effective in the undersampled regime. It works well when the
number of samples per retained dimension is high (even if the number of samples per observed
dimension is low), but only when the dimensionality of the reduced description is matched to the
actual dimensionality of the shared signals.
Finally, our results can be used as a diagnostic test to determine the number of shared versus self
signals in data. As demonstrated in Fig. 6, total correlations between ZX and ZY obtained by
applying PCA and rCCA increase monotonically as the dimensionality of Zs increases, until this
dimensionality becomes larger than the signal dimensionality. For PCA, the signal dimensionality
is equal to the sum of the number of the shared and the self signals, mshared + mself . For rCCA,
it is only the number of the shared signal. Thus increasing the dimensionality of the compressed
variables and tracking the performance of rCCA and PCA until they diverge can be used to identify
the number of self signals in the data, provided that the data, indeed, has a low-dimensional latent


                                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


structure. This approach can be a valuable tool in various applications, where the characterization
of shared and self signals in complex systems can provide insights into their structure and function.
In summary, we highlight a general principle that, when searching for a shared signal between dif-
ferent modalities of data, SDR methods are preferable to IDR methods. Additionally, the differences
in performance between the two classes of methods can tell us a lot about the underlying structure of
the data. Finally, for a limited number of samples, naive approaches, such as increasing the number
of compressed dimensions indefinitely to overcome the masking of shared signals by self signals are
infeasible. Thus, the use of SDR methods becomes even more essential in such cases.

6   L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK
While this work has provided useful insight, the assumptions made here may not fully capture the
complexity of real-world data. Specifically, our data is generated by a linear model with random
Gaussian features. It is unlikely that real data have this exact structure. Therefore, there is a need
for further exploration of the advantages and limitations of linear DR methods on data that have a
low-dimensional, but nonlinear shared structure. This can be done using more complex nonlinear
generative models, such as nonlinearly transforming the data generated by Eq. (1-2), or random
feature two-layered neural network models (Rocks & Mehta, 2022). Alternatively, analyzing the
model, Eq. (1) using various theoretical techniques (Borga et al., 1997; Chernoff, 1952; Vogelstein
et al., 2021; Potters & Bouchaud, 2020) is likely to offer even more insights into its properties.
Collectively, these diverse approaches would aid our understanding of different DR methods under
diverse conditions.
A different possible future research direction is to explore the performance of nonlinear DR methods
on data from generative models with a latent low-dimensional nonlinear structure. Autoencoders and
their variational extensions are a natural extension of IDR to learn nonlinear reduced dimensional
representations (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Higgins et al., 2016).
Meanwhile, Deep CCA and its variational extensions (Andrew et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2015; Chan-
dar et al., 2016; Wang et al.) should be explored as a nonlinear version of SDR. Both of these types
of methods can potentially capture more complex relationships between the modalities and improve
the quality of the reduced representations, and while recent work suggests that (Anonymous, 2023),
it is not clear if the SDR class of methods is always more efficient than the IDR one.
Further, our analysis depends on the choice of metric used to quantify the performance of DR, and
different choices should also be explored. For example, to capture nonlinear correlations, mutual
information can be utilized to quantify the relationships between the reduced representations.
Despite the aforementioned limitations, we believe that our work provides a compelling addition to
the body of knowledge that SDR outperforms IDR in detecting shared signals quite generally.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Galen Andrew, Raman Arora, Jeff Bilmes, and Karen Livescu. Deep canonical correlation anal-
  ysis. In Sanjoy Dasgupta and David McAllester (eds.), Proceedings of the 30th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1247–1255, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR.
Anonymous. Deep variational multivariate information bottleneck - a framework for variational
  losses. In Submitted to The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZhY1XSYqO4. under review.
Francis R Bach and Michael I Jordan. A probabilistic interpretation of canonical correlation analysis.
  2005.
Richard T Baillie, G Geoffrey Booth, Yiuman Tse, and Tatyana Zabotina. Price discovery and
  common factor models. Journal of financial markets, 5(3):309–321, 2002.
William Bialek, Ilya Nemenman, and Naftali Tishby. Predictability, complexity, and learning. Neu-
 ral computation, 13(11):2409–2463, 2001.
Magnus Borga, Tomas Landelius, and Hans Knutsson. A unified approach to pca, pls, mlr and cca.
 Linköping University, Department of Electrical Engineering, 1997.
Jean Philippe Bouchaud, Laurent Laloux, M Augusta Miceli, and Marc Potters. Large dimension
  forecasting models and random singular value spectra. The European Physical Journal B, 55:
  201–207, 2007.
Joël Bun, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Marc Potters. Cleaning large correlation matrices: Tools
   from random matrix theory. Physics Reports, 666:1–109, 2017. ISSN 0370-1573. doi: https:
   //doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2016.10.005. Cleaning large correlation matrices: tools from random
   matrix theory.
Sarath Chandar, Mitesh M Khapra, Hugo Larochelle, and Balaraman Ravindran. Correlational
  neural networks. Neural Computation, 28(2):257–285, 2016. doi: 10.1162/NECO a 00801.
James Chapman and Hao-Ting Wang. Cca-zoo: A collection of regularized, deep learning based,
  kernel, and probabilistic cca methods in a scikit-learn style framework. Journal of Open Source
  Software, 6(68):3823, 2021.
Boyuan Chen, Kuang Huang, Sunand Raghupathi, Ishaan Chandratreya, Qiang Du, and Hod Lip-
  son. Automated discovery of fundamental variables hidden in experimental data. Nature Compu-
  tational Science, 2(7):433–442, 2022.
Herman Chernoff. A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum of
  observations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 493–507, 1952.
Wynne Chin and P. Newsted. Structural equation modeling analysis with small samples using partial
 least square. Statistical Strategies for Small Sample Research, 01 1999.
Kenneth Clark, Bruce Vendt, Kirk Smith, John Freymann, Justin Kirby, Paul Koppel, Stephen
  Moore, Stanley Phillips, David Maffitt, Michael Pringle, et al. The cancer imaging archive (tcia):
  maintaining and operating a public information repository. Journal of digital imaging, 26:1045–
  1057, 2013.
Lucy J Colwell, Yu Qin, Miriam Huntley, Alexander Manta, and Michael P Brenner. Feynman-
  hellmann theorem and signal identification from sample covariance matrices. Physical Review X,
  4(3):031032, 2014.
Felix Creutzig, Amir Globerson, and Naftali Tishby. Past-future information bottleneck in dynami-
  cal systems. Physical Review E, 79(4):041925, 2009.
Philipp Fleig and Ilya Nemenman. Statistical properties of large data sets with linear latent features.
  Physical Review E, 106(1):014102, 2022.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mario Forni and Luca Gambetti. The dynamic effects of monetary policy: A structural factor model
 approach. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2):203–216, 2010.
Simon Freyaldenhoven. Factor models with local factors—determining the number of relevant fac-
  tors. Journal of Econometrics, 229(1):80–102, 2022.
Nir Friedman, Ori Mosenzon, Noam Slonim, and Naftali Tishby. Multivariate information bottle-
  neck. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.2270, 2013.
Dale L Goodhue, William Lewis, and Ron Thompson. Pls, small sample size, and statistical power
  in mis research. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
  Sciences (HICSS’06), volume 8, pp. 202b–202b, 2006. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2006.381.
Dale L Goodhue, William Lewis, and Ron Thompson. Does pls have advantages for small sample
  size or non-normal data? MIS Quarterly, 36(3):981–1001, 2012. ISSN 02767783.
Dale L Goodhue, Ron Thompson, and William Lewis. Why you shouldn’t use pls: Four reasons to be
  uneasy about using pls in analyzing path models. In 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference
  on System Sciences, pp. 4739–4748. IEEE, 2013.
Marc-André Gosselin and Greg Tkacz. Evaluating factor models: An application to forecasting
 inflation in canada. Technical report, Bank of Canada, 2001.
Joe F Hair, Christian M Ringle, and Marko Sarstedt. Pls-sem: Indeed a silver bullet. Journal of
  Marketing Theory and Practice, 19(2):139–152, 2011. doi: 10.2753/MTP1069-6679190202.
Joe Hair Jr, Joseph F Hair Jr, G Tomas M Hult, Christian M Ringle, and Marko Sarstedt. A primer
  on partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM). Sage publications, 2021.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International conference on learning representations, 2016.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Sam Roweis. Stochastic neighbor embedding. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 15, 2002.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural
  networks. Science, 313(5786):504–507, 2006. doi: 10.1126/science.1127647.
Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal
  of educational psychology, 24(6):417, 1933.
Harold Hotelling. Relations between two sets of variates. Biometrika, 1936. doi: 10.1007/
  978-1-4612-4380-9 14.
Rachael P Huntley, Tony Sawford, Prudence Mutowo-Meullenet, Aleksandra Shypitsyna, Carlos
  Bonilla, Maria J Martin, and Claire O’Donovan. The goa database: gene ontology annotation
  updates for 2015. Nucleic acids research, 43(D1):D1057–D1063, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2014.
Arto Klami, Seppo Virtanen, and Samuel Kaski. Bayesian exponential family projections for cou-
  pled data sources. arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.3489, 2012.
Ned Kock and Pierre Hadaya. Minimum sample size estimation in pls-sem: The inverse square root
  and gamma-exponential methods. Information systems journal, 28(1):227–261, 2018.
John W Krakauer, Asif A Ghazanfar, Alex Gomez-Marin, Malcolm A MacIver, and David Poeppel.
  Neuroscience needs behavior: correcting a reductionist bias. Neuron, 93(3):480–490, 2017.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marco Lorenzi, Andre Altmann, Boris Gutman, Selina Wray, Charles Arber, Derrek P Hibar, Neda
 Jahanshad, Jonathan M Schott, Daniel C Alexander, Paul M Thompson, et al. Susceptibility of
 brain atrophy to trib3 in alzheimer’s disease, evidence from functional prioritization in imaging
 genetics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(12):3162–3167, 2018.
Yong Luo, Dacheng Tao, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao, Chao Xu, and Yonggang Wen. Tensor canonical
  correlation analysis for multi-view dimension reduction. IEEE transactions on Knowledge and
  Data Engineering, 27(11):3111–3124, 2015.
Vladimir Alexandrovich Marchenko and Leonid Andreevich Pastur. Distribution of eigenvalues for
  some sets of random matrices. Matematicheskii Sbornik, 114(4):507–536, 1967.
K Michael Martini and Ilya Nemenman. Data efficiency, dimensionality reduction, and the general-
  ized symmetric information bottleneck. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05649, 2023.
Kevin P Murphy. Probabilistic machine learning: an introduction. MIT press, 2022.
Nikhilesh Natraj, Daniel B Silversmith, Edward F Chang, and Karunesh Ganguly. Compart-
  mentalized dynamics within a common multi-area mesoscale manifold represent a repertoire
  of human hand movements. Neuron, 110(1):154–174.e12, 2022. ISSN 0896-6273. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.10.002.
Eakasit Pacharawongsakda and Thanaruk Theeramunkong. A comparative study on single and dual
  space reduction in multi-label classification. In Andrzej M.J. Skulimowski and Janusz Kacprzyk
  (eds.), Knowledge, Information and Creativity Support Systems: Recent Trends, Advances and
  Solutions, pp. 389–400, Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-19090-
  7.
Rich Pang, Benjamin J Lansdell, and Adrienne L Fairhall. Dimensionality reduction in neuro-
  science. Current Biology, 26(14):R656–R660, 2016.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. ACM Siggraph Computer Graphics, 19(3):287–296, 1985.
Marc Potters and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. A First Course in Random Matrix Theory: For Physicists,
 Engineers and Data Scientists. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Jason W Rocks and Pankaj Mehta. Memorizing without overfitting: Bias, variance, and interpolation
  in overparameterized models. Physical review research, 4(1):013201, 2022.
Jeremy B Rudd. Underlying inflation: Its measurement and significance. 2020.
Omid G Sani, Hamidreza Abbaspourazad, Yan T Wong, Bijan Pesaran, and Maryam M Shanechi.
 Modeling behaviorally relevant neural dynamics enabled by preferential subspace identification.
 Nature Neuroscience, 24(1):140–149, 2021.
Simon Sponberg, Thomas L Daniel, and Adrienne L Fairhall. Dual dimensionality reduction reveals
  independent encoding of motor features in a muscle synergy for insect flight control. PLOS
  Computational Biology, 11(4):1–23, 04 2015. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004168.
Nicholas A Steinmetz, Cagatay Aydin, Anna Lebedeva, Michael Okun, Marius Pachitariu, Marius
  Bauza, Maxime Beau, Jai Bhagat, Claudia Böhm, Martijn Broux, et al. Neuropixels 2.0: A minia-
  turized high-density probe for stable, long-term brain recordings. Science, 372(6539):eabf4588,
  2021.
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Charu Bai Reddy, Matteo Carandini, and
  Kenneth D. Harris. Spontaneous behaviors drive multidimensional, brainwide activity. Science,
  364(6437):eaav7893, 2019. doi: 10.1126/science.aav7893.
Valentine Svensson, Roser Vento-Tormo, and Sarah A Teichmann. Exponential scaling of single-cell
  rna-seq in the past decade. Nature protocols, 13(4):599–604, 2018.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anne E Urai, Brent Doiron, Andrew M Leifer, and Anne K Churchland. Large-scale neural record-
  ings call for new insights to link brain and behavior. Nature neuroscience, 25(1):11–19, 2022.
Hrishikesh D Vinod. Canonical ridge and econometrics of joint production. Journal of Economet-
  rics, 1976. doi: 10.1016/0304-4076(76)90010-5.
Joshua T Vogelstein, Eric W Bridgeford, Minh Tang, Da Zheng, Christopher Douville, Randal
  Burns, and Mauro Maggioni. Supervised dimensionality reduction for big data. Nature com-
  munications, 12(1):2872, 2021.
Weiran Wang, Xinchen Yan2 Honglak Lee, and Karen Livescu. Deep variational canonical correla-
 tion analysis.
Weiran Wang, Raman Arora, Karen Livescu, and Jeff Bilmes. On deep multi-view representation
 learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1083–1092. PMLR, 2015.
Svante Wold, Michael Sjöström, and Lennart Eriksson. Pls-regression: a basic tool of chemometrics.
  Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 58(2):109–130, 2001. ISSN 0169-7439. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7439(01)00155-1. PLS Methods.
Grace XY Zheng, Jessica M Terry, Phillip Belgrader, Paul Ryvkin, Zachary W Bent, Ryan Wilson,
  Solongo B Ziraldo, Tobias D Wheeler, Geoff P McDermott, Junjie Zhu, et al. Massively parallel
  digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nature communications, 8(1):14049, 2017.
Finn Årup Nielsen, Lars Kai Hansen, and Stephen C Strother. Canonical ridge analysis with ridge
  parameter optimization. NeuroImage, 1998. doi: 10.1016/s1053-8119(18)31591-x.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     L INEAR D IMENSIONALITY R EDUCTION M ETHODS

A.1.1    PCA
PCA is a widely used linear IDR method that aims to find the orthogonal principal directions, such
that a few of them explain the largest possible fraction of the variance within the data. PCA de-
composes the covariance matrix of the data matrix X, CXX = T1 X ⊤ X, into its eigenvectors and
eigenvalues through singular value decomposition (SVD). The SVD yields orthogonal directions,
                             (i)
represented by the vectors wX , that capture the most significant variability in the data. In most
numerical implementations (Pedregosa et al., 2011), these directions are obtained consecutively,
                                                                             (i)    (j)
one by one, such that the dot product between any two directions is zero wX · wX = δij . The
               (i)
eigenvectors wX are obtained as the best solution to the optimization problem:
                                                    (i) ⊤        ⊤          (i)
                                ∗(i)               wX       X (i) X (i) wX
                              wX       = arg max                                  .                (6)
                                            (i)              (i) ⊤    (i)
                                           wX           wX           wX

Here X (i) is the ith deflated matrix where X (1) is the original matrix, and for every subsequent i+1,
the matrix is deflated by subtracting the projection of X on the obtained weights: X (i+1) = X −
               ⊤
Σis=1 Xw(s) w(s)  . The eigenvectors are sorted in decreasing order according to their corresponding
                                             (i=1:k)
eigenvalues, and the first k eigenvectors wX         are selected to form the projection matrix WX .
The obtained vectors determine the size of the reduced form ZX , where |ZX | = k is the number of
                                                               (i)
vectors retained from the decomposition of X. The vectors wX are then stacked together to form the
projection matrix WX . The low-dimensional representation ZX is then obtained by multiplying the
original data matrix X with this projection matrix, resulting in the reduced data matrix ZX = XWX .
Similar treatment is done for Y in order to obtain ZY = Y WY
One of the main advantages of PCA is its simplicity and efficiency. However, one of the drawbacks
of this method is that it performs DR for X and Y independently, and one then searches for relations
between ZX and ZY by regressing one on the other. Thus obtained low-dimensional descriptions
may capture variance but not the covariance between the two datasets.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.1.2   PLS
PLS, or Partial Least Squares, performs SDR by finding the shared signals that explain the maximum
covariance between two sets of data (Wold et al., 2001). PLS performs the SVD of the covariance
matrix CXY = T1 X ⊤ Y (or equivalently CY X = T1 Y ⊤ X). The left and right singular vectors
   ∗(i)  ∗(i)                                                   (i)   (j)
(wX , wY ) are obtained consecutively pair by pair such that wX · wY = δij . They are solutions
of the optimization problem:
                                                (i) ⊤     ⊤      (i)
                         ∗(i) ∗(i)            wX X (i) Y (i) wY
                       (wX , wY ) = arg max q                                                      (7)
                                      (i)
                                    wX ,wY
                                          (i)    (i) ⊤ (i)  (i) ⊤ (i)
                                              (wX wX )(wY wY )
The matrices X (i) , Y (i) are deflated in a similar manner to PCA A.1.1. The singular vectors are
sorted in the decreasing order of their corresponding singular values, and the first k vectors are
selected to form the projection matrices (WX , WY ). The obtained vectors determine the size of the
reduced form (ZX , ZY ), where |ZX | = |ZY | = k is the number of vectors retained. The vectors
   (i)  (i)
(wX , wY ) are then stacked together to form the projection matrices (WX , WY ) respectively. The
low-dimensional representations (ZX , ZY ) are obtained by projecting the original data matrices
(X, Y ) onto these projection matrices: ZX = XWX , and ZY = Y WY .
In summary, PLS performs simultaneous reduction on both datasets, maximizing the covariance
between the reduced representations ZX and ZY . This property makes PLS a powerful tool for
studying the relationships between two datasets and identifying the underlying factors that explain
their joint variability.

A.1.3   CCA
CCA is another SDR method, which aims to find the directions that explain the maximum correlation
between two datasets Hotelling (1936). However, unlike PLS, CCA obtains the shared signals by
                                                                                   ∗(i) ∗(i)
performing SVD on the correlation matrix √C CXY  √
                                                   C
                                                        . The singular vectors (wX , wY ) are
                                                 XX    YY
                                                (i)    (j)
obtained consecutively pair by pair such that wX · wY = δij . CCA enforces the orthogonality of
 (i)   (i)                                   (i)  (j)  (i)    (j)
wX , wY independently as well, such that wX · wX = wY · wY = δij . The singular vectors are
obtained by solving the optimization problem:
                                             (i) ⊤     ⊤      (i)
              ∗(i) ∗(i)                     wX X (i) Y (i) wY
            (wX , wY ) = arg max q                                          .                      (8)
                           (i) (i)   (i) ⊤  ⊤       (i)  (i) ⊤    ⊤     (i)
                         wX ,wY    (wX X (i) X (i) wX )(wY Y (i) Y (i) wY )
Like in PLS A.1.2, the matrices X (i) , Y (i) are deflated in a similar manner. In addition, the first
                      ∗(i)  ∗(i)
k singular vectors (wX , wY ) are stacked together to form the projection matrices (WX , WY ),
which then are used to obtain the reduced data matrices ZX = XWX , and ZY = Y WY .
One of the key differences between PLS and CCA is that while both perform SDR, CCA also
                                                                                         −1/2
simultaneously performs IDR implicitly. Indeed, it involves multiplication of CXY by CXX on the
          −1/2
left and CY Y on the right, which, in turn, requires finding singular values of the X and the Y data
matrices independently.

A.1.4   R EGULARIZED CCA - R CCA
While CCA is a useful method for finding the maximum correlating features between two sets
of data, it does have some limitations. Specfically, in the undersampled regime, where T ≤
max(NX , NY ), the matrices CXX and CY Y are singular and their inverses do not exist. Using the
pseudoinverse to solve the problem can lead to numerical instability and sensitivity to noise. Reg-
ularized CCA (rCCA) (Vinod, 1976; Årup Nielsen et al., 1998) overcomes this problem by adding
a small regularization term to the covariance matrices, allowing them to be invertible. Specifically,
one tales
                                      C̃XX = CXX + cX IX ,                                         (9)
                                       C̃Y Y = CY Y + cY IY ,                                    (10)


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where C̃XX , C̃Y Y are the new regularized matrices, cX , cY > 0 are small regularization parameters
and IX , IY are identity matrices with sizes NX × NX , NY × NY respectively.
This original implementation of rCCA resulted in correlation matrices with diagonals not equal to
one. Thus, a better implementation uses a different form of regularization (Årup Nielsen et al.,
1998) by adding the Pregularization   parameters cX and cY individually to the equations as an affine
                       n
combination (i. e., i ci = 1) as the following:
                                       1       ⊤ ⊤                ⊤
                              C̃XX = (cX1 wX     X XwX + cX2 wX     wX )                        (11)
                                       T
                                       1
                              C̃Y Y = (cY1 wY⊤ Y ⊤ Y wY + cY2 wY⊤ wY ).                         (12)
                                       T
This results in the regularized equations for X and Y to be:
                                                  ⊤ ⊤               ⊤
                         C̃XX = T1 (1 − cX )wX

                                                   X XwX + cX wX      wX                        (13)
                                    1             ⊤ ⊤              ⊤

                         C̃Y Y = T (1 − cY )wY Y Y wY + cY wY wY ,                              (14)
where cX and cY are the regularization parameters, with values between 0 and 1. Writing the
regularization conditions in this form is in fact a convex interpolation problem between PLS and
CCA, which is a more robust solution and does not suffer from shortening the length of correlations
due to the added regularization. As a result, this implementation of rCCA achieves the best accuracy
among all other methods.

A.2   A SSESSING S UCCESS AND S AMPLING N OISE T REATMENT

To assess the success of DR, we calculated the ratio between the total correlation between ZXtest
and ZYtest , defined as in Eq. (5), and the total correlation between X and Y , which we input into the
model. Specifically,
           pP           we take the total correlation as the Frobenius norm of the correlation matrix,
||A||F =          σ 2 (A), where σ(A) are the singular values of the matrix A. Therefore, the metric
                 i i
of the quality of the DR is
                           ||Corr(ZXtest , ZYtest )||F   ||Corr(ZXtest , ZYtest )||F
                    RC =                               =                             ,             (15)
                               ||Corr(P, P )||F                  mshared
where Corr stands for the correlation matrix between its arguments, and we use ||Corr(P, P )||F =
mshared as the total shared correlation that one needs to recover. Statistical fluctuations aside, RC
should vary between zero (bad reconstruction of the shared variables) and one (perfect reconstruc-
tion).
In many real-world applications, the number of available samples, T , is often limited compared to
the dimensionality of the data, NX and NY . This undersampling can introduce spurious correlations.
We are not aware of analytical results to calculate the effects of the sampling noise on estimating
singular values in the model in Eq. (1) (Bun et al., 2017). Thus, to estimate the effect of the sampling
noise, we adopt an empirical approach. Specifically, we generate two random matrices, ZXrandom and
ZYrandom , of sizes T ×|ZX | and T ×|ZY |, respectively. We then calculate the correlation between these
matrices, denoted as RC 0 , for multiple such trials using the metric in Eq. (15). For random ZXrandom
and ZYrandom , RC should be zero. However, Fig. 7 shows that, especially for large dimensionalities of
the compressed variables and small T , the sampling noise results in a significant spurious RC 0 > 0,
which may even be larger than 1! Crucially, RC 0 does not fluctuate around its mean across trials, so
that the sampling bias is narrowly distributed.
To compensate for this sampling bias, we subtract it from the reconstruction quality metric,
                                         RC ′ = RC − RC 0 .                                        (16)
             ′
It is this RC that we plot in all Figures in this paper as the ultimate metric of the reconstruction
quality. While subtracting the bias is not the most rigorous mathematically, it provides a practical
approach for reducing the effects of the sampling noise.

A.3   I MPLEMENTATION

We used Python and the scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) library for performing PCA,
PLS, and CCA, while the cca-zoo (Chapman & Wang, 2021) library was used for rCCA. For


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        |Z| =
                                                                           |Z| =
                                                                        |Z| =
                                                                           |Z| =


                RC 0


                                                      T

Figure 7: The resulting correlations are averages of all the points in the phasespace, then averaged
over 10 different realizations of the matrices. The error bars are for two standard deviations around
the mean


PCA, SVD was performed with default parameters. For PLS, the PLS Canonical method was used
with the NIPALS algorithm. For both PLS and CCA, the tolerance was set to 10−4 with a maximum
convergence limit of 5000 iterations. For rCCA, regularization parameters were set as c1 = c2 =
0.1. All other parameters not explicitly here were set to their default values.
All figures shown in this paper were averaged over 10 independent realizations of
RX , RY , UX , UY , P , while fixing the projection matrices VX , VY , QX , QY . We then performed an
additional round of averaging everything over 10 realizations of the projection matrices themselves.
The simulations were parallelized and run on Amazon Web Services (AWS) servers of instance
types ml.c5.2xlarge.

A.4   E XTENDED F IGURES

In this section, we provide results of simulations similar to the main text figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, but
with a wider range of T .


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      $GGLQJ   VHOI VLJQDO  NHHSLQJ RQH GLPHQVLRQ DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ
                                                            3&$                                                       3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0                                                1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                             γself                                                       γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


Figure 8: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA in detecting shared signals with one self
signal and one dimension kept after DR.

                                                                     $GGLQJ   VHOI VLJQDO  NHHSLQJ WZR GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ
                                                            3&$                                                       3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0                                                1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                             %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                             γself                                                       γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


Figure 9: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA in detecting shared signals with one self
signal and two dimensions kept after DR.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ RQH GLPHQVLRQ DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ
                                                            3&$                                                        3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0                                                1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                             γself                                                        γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


Figure 10: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA in detecting shared signals with 30 self
signals and one dimension kept after DR.


                                                                     $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ    GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ
                                                            3&$                                                        3/6                                                                                       &&$                                                                                             U&&$                                                        RC 0                                                1RLVH                                             RC 0

                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                     $                              %                                                                                                  &                                                                                                 '                                                                                                                 (


                T


                                  γshared


                                                             γself                                                        γself                                                                                                γself                                                                                               γself                                                                                                               γself


Figure 11: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA in detecting shared signals among 30 self
signals and with 30 dimensions kept after DR.


                                                                                                                                                                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                            $GGLQJ    VHOI VLJQDOV  NHHSLQJ    GLPHQVLRQV DIWHU UHGXFWLRQ
                                                                                                    3&$                                                                                 3/6                                                                                                                 &&$                                                                                                       U&&$                                                                                    RC 0                                                     1RLVH                                                 RC 0

                                                                                  $                                                           %                                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                           '                                                                                                                                                 (


                                           T


                                                             γshared


                                                                                  $                                                           %                                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                           '                                                                                                                                                 (


                                           T


                                                             γshared


                                                                                  $                                                           %                                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                           '                                                                                                                                                 (


                                           T


                                                             γshared


                                                                                  $                                                           %                                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                           '                                                                                                                                                 (


                                           T


                                                             γshared


                                                                                                       γself                                                                                    γself                                                                                                                     γself                                                                                                          γself                                                                                                                                               γself


Figure 12: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA in detecting shared signals among 30 self
signals and with 31 dimensions kept after DR.



A.5                                       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : N OISY MNIST

A.5.1                                                 T HE DATASET


                                         W 61( 9LVXDOL]DWLRQ   X   2ULJLQDO 7HVW 'DWD                                                                                                          W 61( 9LVXDOL]DWLRQ   Y   2ULJLQDO 7HVW 'DWD                                                                                                                                                                             +LVWRJUDP RI WKH FRUUHODWLRQ EHWZHHQ X DQG Y


 'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                         'LPHQVLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                       'LPHQVLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                    'LPHQVLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &RUUHODWLRQ


Figure 13: Dataset containing paired MNIST digit samples sharing the same identity. The top
row (X) shows MNIST digits randomly subjected to scaling ((0.5 − 1.5)) and rotation with an
angle of ((0 − π/2)), while the bottom row (Y ) shows MNIST digits with an added background
Perlin noise. In the bottom row, the t-SNE visualization of the X and Y datasets (left and middle,
respectively) illustrates limited separation by digit, while the correlation range between X and Y
(right) demonstrates a wide spectrum.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To analyze linear DR methods on nonlinear data, we followed the same procedure as in Fig. 6 for
a dataset inspired by the noisy MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998; Wang et al., 2015; Wang et al.;
Anonymous, 2023). This dataset has two distinct views of data, each of dimensionality 28 × 28
pixels, examples of which are shown in Fig. 13. The first view is an image of the digit subjected
to a random rotation within an angle uniformly sampled between 0 and π2 , along with scaling by a
factor uniformly distributed between 0.5 and 1.5. The second view consists of another image with
the same digit identity with an additional background layer of Perlin noise (Perlin, 1985), with the
noise factor uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. Both views are normalized to an intensity range
of [0, 1), then flattened to form an array of 784 dimensions.
To cast this dataset into our language, we shuffled the images within labels, retaining the shared
label identity (that is the shared signal), but we still have the view-specific details (which is the self
signal). This resulted in a total dataset size of ∼ 56k images for training and ∼ 7k images for
testing. Visualization using t-SNE plots (Hinton & Roweis, 2002) on the original dataset suggested
poor separation by digit, and the two-digit views exhibited diverse correlations. This complexity
makes the task sufficiently challenging, serving as a good benchmark for evaluating the performance
of the different DR techniques.

A.5.2                                           R ESULTS

Figure 14 shows the performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, and rCCA applied to the modified Noisy
MNIST dataset for varying sampling scenarios. The three panels are evaluated for different sample
sizes (1000, 10, 000, and ∼ 56, 000 samples), from undersampled to the full dataset.
In each scenario, the training samples are used for the DR methods. Subsequently, the learned
projection matrices onto the singular directions are used to transform a separate test dataset of around
7, 000 samples into low-dimensional spaces, yielding ZX and ZY . The correlation between these
transformed spaces is computed using the Frobenius norm of the correlation matrix. As before, we
then subtracted from it the correlation value obtained from a random matrix of the same size. This
difference is then plotted against 1/q̃, which is the measure of how many dimensions are retained at
each sampling ratio.
In the undersampled scenario (1000 samples), rCCA and PLS demonstrate an early detection (in
terms of the number of kept dimensions after reduction) of shared signals, whereas PCA initially
lags behind. As the number of dimensions increases, all methods exhibit a decline in correlation due
to increased noise as we have fewer samples per dimension. CCA does not work in this scenario,
since covariance matrices are degenerate.
Upon increasing the sample size (10, 000 samples), a similar pattern emerges initially, where all
methods experience an increase in total correlation till a certain number of kept dimensions is
reached, then a decline when adding more dimensions. The decline is because one needs to es-


                                                                                7RWDO &RUUHFWHG &RUUHODWLRQ YV 1/q̃ IRU GLIIHUHQW T
                                                                                              3&$                 3/6                  &&$                      U&&$
                                                         T =                                                           T =                                                           T =
  kCorr(ZX , ZY )k F − kCorr(Random)k F


                                                               1/q̃                                                               1/q̃                                                            1/q̃

Figure 14: Performance of PCA, PLS, CCA, rCCA applied to the modified Noisy MNIST dataset
across varying sampling scenarios. Each panel represents different sample sizes (1000, 10, 000,
and approximately 56, 000 samples). The x-axis denotes the inverse of the number of samples per
retained dimensions (1/q̃), while the y-axis represents the total corrected correlation between the
obtained low-dimensional representations ZX and ZY .


                                                                                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


timate more singular vectors from the same number of samples. However, beyond a certain number
of singular vectors, an increase in correlation is observed. This is because the number of vectors
is now sufficient to learn both the shared and the self signals. We observe that rCCA maintains
superior performance, while PCA reaches peak correlation at a higher number of kept dimensions,
providing a rough estimation of the number of true self and shared signals. With the full dataset
(approximately 56,000 samples), a similar trend is seen. Yet CCA’s performance approaches that of
rCCA.
Notably, the consistent superiority of Simultaneous Dimensionality Reduction (SDR) over Inde-
pendent Dimensionality Reduction (IDR) is reaffirmed, emphasizing its effectiveness in detecting
shared signals even in nonlinear datasets.


                                               21
