Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NVEILING THE U NSEEN : I DENTIFIABLE C LUSTERS
IN T RAINED D EPTHWISE C ONVOLUTIONAL K ERNELS

 Zahra Babaiee           Peyman M. Kiasari                 Daniela Rus       Radu Grosu
 TU Vienna & MIT         TU Vienna                         MIT               TU Vienna
 zbabaiee@mit.edu        peyman.kiasari@tuwien.ac.at       rus@mit.edu       radu.grosu@uwien.ac.at


                                             A BSTRACT

         Recent advances in depthwise-separable convolutional neural networks (DS-
         CNNs) have led to novel architectures, that surpass the performance of classi-
         cal CNNs, by a considerable scalability and accuracy margin. This paper re-
         veals another striking property of DS-CNN architectures: discernible and explain-
         able patterns emerge in their trained depthwise convolutional kernels in all layers.
         Through an extensive analysis of millions of trained filters, with different sizes and
         from various models, we employed unsupervised clustering with autoencoders, to
         categorize these filters. Astonishingly, the patterns converged into a few main
         clusters, each resembling the difference of Gaussian (DoG) functions, and their
         first and second-order derivatives. Notably, we were able to classify over 95%
         and 90% of the filters from state-of-the-art ConvNextV2 and ConvNeXt models,
         respectively. This finding is not merely a technological curiosity; it echoes the
         foundational models neuroscientists have long proposed for the vision systems of
         mammals. Our results thus deepen our understanding of the emergent properties
         of trained DS-CNNs and provide a bridge between artificial and biological visual
         processing systems. More broadly, they pave the way for more interpretable and
         biologically-inspired neural network designs in the future.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been extensively studied in order to understand how
they learn ever since their inception. As early as the seminal papers on CNNs, researchers discovered
that CNNs learn filters in their initial layers that detect edges or specific edge colors when applied to
natural images (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). These learned features bear a strong resemblance to Gabor
filters, which are related to responses in the primary visual cortex, and thus present some of the
most striking links between neuroscience and machine learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016). However,
interpretability significantly decreases as one examines deeper layers. Consequently, subsequent
work has mainly focused on inspecting the features learned by convolutional layers, rather than the
weights themselves, to elucidate how CNNs operate (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Yosinski et al., 2015;
Olah et al., 2017; Bau et al., 2017). While studying the learned features by convolutional layers is
intuitive, comprehending the filter weights of deep layers of CNNs remains an open question.
In recent years, depthwise-separable convolutional neural networks (DS-CNNs) have become
widely adopted in computer vision. The significantly lower computational costs of DS-CNNs en-
abled MobileNets (Howard et al., 2017) to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy, with substantially fewer
parameters and multiplication-addition operations, than traditional CNNs. Following this break-
through, DS-CNNs have become the de facto standard in most modern CNN architectures, as they
offer a favorable option for scaling up networks (Liu et al., 2022). However, most studies analyzing
and interpreting the learned kernels and feature maps of CNNs, remained confined to the traditional
architectures, using regular convolutions (Zhou et al., 2018; Bau et al., 2017). In contrast, the emer-
gent properties and associated interpretability of DS-CNNs are nowadays largely under-explored.
Through an extensive investigation of several model types and sizes, including regular CNNs and
DS-CNNs, trained on ImageNet-1k and ImageNet-21k, we discovered a striking property of DS-
CNN kernels. Unlike regular convolutions, depthwise convolutions exhibit repeating patterns in
their trained kernel weights. Moreover, these patterns persist throughout all layers, even in deeper


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                       2
      (a) DoG(x, y)            (b) −DoG(x, y)             (c) dDoG(x,y)
                                                                 dx
                                                                                   (d) d DoG(x,y)
                                                                                          dx2

Figure 1: 3D and 2D plots of the DoG function and its derivatives, utilized in Neuroscience for modeling
visual receptive fields and in Image Processing for edge and brightness change detection.


stages of the DS-CNNs. This reveals a new level of structure and interpretability in the emergent
representations learned by DS-CNNs that has not been identified and characterized before.
Furthermore, we discovered that these identifiable patterns are highly clusterable. To this end, we
employed an unsupervised autoencoder-based clustering methodology, mapping each kernel to a sin-
gle hidden dimension. In the autoencoder outputs, clear clusters emerged, enabling us to categorize
nearly all kernels across all layers into eight main classes. Through this classification, we uncov-
ered an intriguing property: the prominent clusters have spatial patterns resembling the difference
of Gaussian (DoG) functions and their first and second-order derivatives, as shown in Figure 1.
Fascinatingly, DoG derivatives have been extensively proposed in neuroscience to model biological
visual receptive fields (Young, 1987; Young et al., 2001). Incorporating fixed-weight DoG kernels
alongside traditional convolutional kernels has shown enhancements in network performance, par-
ticularly under conditions of changing lighting and the presence of noise Babaiee et al. (2021). This
suggests a profound link between the representations learned by DS-CNNs and those employed in
mammalian visual systems. Moreover, the identifiable patterns emerging in DS-CNN kernels have
not been previously characterized for modern DS-CNN architectures. Thus, our findings may inform
the development of novel bio-inspired network designs and training methodologies. More broadly,
this research helps narrow the gap between contemporary machine learning and neuroscience mod-
els of sensory processing.
In summary, the key contributions of our work are:

 • We conduct the first large-scale analysis of structures emerging in trained DS-CNN kernels.
 • We develop unsupervised clustering of millions of DS-CNN filters into core underlying patterns.
 • We demonstrate that these discernible patterns are present in all layers of the DS-CNNs.
 • We show that the patterns are strikingly similar to the neuroscientific DoG-derivatives models.
 • Our findings thus reveal new interpretability and biological parallels of DS-CNNs, respectively.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Our survey covers depthwise separable convolutions (DSC), kernel analysis, and biological vision.
Depthwise Separable Convolutions. DSCs decouple the spatial and channel-wise computation in
two steps: depthwise convolutions (DC) and pointwise convolutions. This decoupling significantly
reduces the computational demands without compromising model efficacy. MobileNet popularized
the use of DS-CNNs for efficient, high-performance architectures in resource-limited environments
(Howard et al., 2017). In its wake, DS-CNNs have emerged as the cornerstone for a plethora of
CNN architectures, including EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019a), MobileNetv2 (Howard et al., 2017),
MobileNetv3 (Howard et al., 2019), MixNet (Tan & Le, 2019b), and MNasNet (Tan et al., 2019).
Post-Vit CNNs: A Resurgence. Leveraging vision transformers’ approach (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), recent studies enhance CNNs with transformer-style and large kernel convolutions. DSCs
add efficiency, similar to transformers, for better scalability. ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022) exten-
sively analyzes recent vision transformers and presents a highly performant pure convolutional
model using 7×7 DCs. Further modernized CNNs have since emerged, including ConvMixers


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) VGG          (b) ResNet       (c) DenseNet     (a) MobileNetV3 (b) EfficientNet (c) ConvNextV2
            (i) Samples of Regular CNNs                          (ii) Samples of Depthwise CNNs

Figure 2: Random samples of regular (i) and depthwise (ii) convolutional kernels across all layers. Depthwise
convolutions show structured patterns while regular convolutions appear uninterpretable.

which utilize patching and isotropic depthwise blocks (Trockman & Kolter, 2022), Hornets with
recursive gated convolutions for high-order spatial interactions (Rao et al., 2022), and MogaNets
using dilated DCs (Li et al., 2022). Most recently, ConvNextV2 introduced a fully convolutional
masked autoencoder with global-response normalization to enhance inter-channel competition (Woo
et al., 2023). Together, these innovations demonstrate that DSCs are a key enabler for scalable,
transformer-inspired CNN architectures, which are achieving state-of-the-art results.
Studies on Trained Convolutional Kernels. Studies on trained convolutional kernels have
sought to elucidate the learned representations of deep-vision systems. However, most prior work
was focused on visualizing kernels in initial layers, where Gabor-like and edge-detecting filters
emerge (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Analyzing deeper layers proved far more challenging, as dis-
cernible patterns in kernel weights became increasingly opaque. Thus, many studies centered on
visualizing and analyzing learned feature maps rather than the kernels themselves (Olah et al., 2020;
Voss et al., 2021). (Gavrikov & Keuper, 2022) assessed distribution shifts between filters across
axes like dataset, task, and architecture. Our previous work investigates the presence of on/off-
center DoG filters as the two most prominent clusters in depthwise convolutional filters Babaiee
et al. (2024). However, the exploration does not extend to other potential clusters in these filters. In
this work, we are extending our study covering up to 90-95% of filters clustered, and discovering
first and second order derivatives of DoGs in these clusters. Our work thereby spotlights DCs as an
avenue to unpacking the black box of trained convolutional networks.
Biological Models of Vision. The neuroscientific investigations have led to mathematical mod-
els capturing the response properties of biological vision systems. (Young, 1987) proposed the
Gaussian derivative model, where retinal ganglion and cortical simple cells act as linear filters, well-
approximated by Gaussian derivatives. This aligns with difference-of-Gaussians (DoG) models of
retinal ganglion receptive fields (Rodieck, 1965). Furthermore, Gabor filters effectively characterize
simple cell tuning in the primary visual cortex (V1), but their mathematical formulation requires
complex functions (Jones & Palmer, 1987). The same tuning, however, can be achieved with even
greater accuracy, by biologically plausible DoG derivatives (Lindeberg, 2021; Tomen et al., 2021).
These seminal neuroscience works thus established DoG filters and their directional derivatives, Our
findings align with established models of low-level visual processing in mammals, showing parallels
between patterns in trained DC kernels and biological vision’s receptive field.

3    A NALYSIS OF T RAINED K ERNELS
We conducted an extensive empirical analysis to compare the patterns emerging in trained convo-
lutional kernels of both regular and DCs, respectively, across diverse state-of-the-art CNN archi-
tectures. Our goal was to discern any interpretable patterns in these learned representations. We
gathered pre-trained models on ImageNet for the following architectures: AlexNet, VGG, ResNet,
DenseNet, MobileNetV2, MobileNetV3, EfficientNet, EfficientNetV2, MixNet, MNasNet, Con-
vNeXtV1, ConvNextV2, ConvMixer, HorNet, and MogaNet. These architectures use different ker-
nel sizes, and for each model, we used several model sizes and configurations available.
The DS-CNNs analyzed all begin with a regular-convolutional layer, followed by DSC layers. This
first layer (also called patching layer), uses a kernel size equal to the stride, to divide the input into
patches in the new generation of DS-CNNs, similar to ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). As observed


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      O -Center dx 2   O -Centre     O -Centre Cross                           O -Centre dx        O -Centre dy


On-Center dx 2         On-Centre   On-Centre Cross                    On-Centre dx            On-Centre dy


Figure 3: Reconstructed spectrum of 7x7 kernel filters from the 1D hidden code of the autoencoder model,
trained on more than 1 million filters. Each segment of the spectrum is marked with the corresponding cluster
label. (See Figure 16 for the architecture of the autoencoder.)
in (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the patching layer learns Gabor-like filters. We therefore omitted it from
our analysis and focused on the subsequent DC layers, which are far less studied, up to the deepest
 ff


stages. This allows us to rigorously characterize the patterns emerging in trained DC kernels across
a wide range of layers, from early features in the first layers to late abstractions in the last layers.
To investigate the patterns in trained kernels, we first visually inspected the filters across layers for
each model. As shown in Figure 2(i), the regular-convolution filters appear devoid of any discernible
structure across models and layers. This aligns with prior analysis that found minimal interpretabil-
ity beyond early layers in regular CNNs. In contrast, the DC kernels shown in Figure 2(ii), exhibit
clear visual patterns that are consistent across diverse model sizes and layers. These patterns are con-
sistent with DoG derivatives as shown in Figure 1. The patterns persist even in the deepest layers,
indicating that interpretable representations emerge throughout the full network. Moreover, filters
of different kernel sizes converge to similar patterns, suggesting a common underlying structure.
These visualizations reveal a stark difference in
the emergent patterns of regular versus DC rep-
resentations. The recurring interpretable pat-
terns in DCs are explored next through a quan-
titative analysis. We focus on the 7×7 ker-
nels from ConvNeXt, which were vectorized
and centered before visualization, apply a prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) on the kernels
across layers. We derive the first 3 PCs explain-
ing the most variance, and we project each ker-
nel onto these 3 components. We then visualize
the embeddings in a 3D scatter plot. As shown
in Figure 4, the PCA projection reveals distinct
clusters forming in the ConvNeXt kernel em- Figure 4: Scatter plot of PCA applied on 7×7 Con-
                                                   vNeXt filters. Sample filters from the 4 most clear clus-
bedding space. This indicates recurrent iden- ters are visualized on the side of the plot.
tifiable patterns emerging in the learned repre-
sentations. The recurring filter patterns motivate categorization and further investigation to decode
their meaning, as done in the next section.


4      C LUSTER I DENTIFICATION OF T RAINED K ERNELS
4.1      M ODEL AND M ETHOD

To carry out a comprehensive classification of the trained kernels, we developed an unsupervised
clustering method using autoencoders. The primary objective was to project the kernels onto a
compact hidden dimensional space and subsequently execute clustering within this dimensionally
reduced space. Distinct models were trained for each kernel size of 5×5 and 7×7. For every distinct
kernel size, kernels learned from diverse models, and scales exhibiting the corresponding size were
assembled. The compilation comprised over one million kernels for each size category. For an
extensive enumeration of the models used, please refer to the Appendix.
The autoencoder consists of two main components: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder has four
intermediate layers, each followed by a leaky rectified linear unit (Leaky ReLU) activation. The
code layer employs a sigmoid activation, to map filters to values within [0,1]. The final decoder


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) On-Centre           (c) On-Centre Cross         (e) On-Centre dx          (g) On-Centre dy


      (b) Off-Centre         (d) Off-Centre Cross         (f) Off-Centre dx         (h) Off-Centre dy

Figure 5: Random samples from each of the prominent classes of 7×7 kernels of ConvNextV2-tiny trained on
ImageNet. Our method classifies the samples with notable accuracy.



layer uses a tanh activation, to accurately reconstruct the original normalized filters in [-1,1]. We
utilize a mean-centered cosine similarity loss to accommodate the invariance of filter patterns to
linear transformations. Although higher code dimensions yield lower reconstruction loss, we opt for
a 1D code to enable convenient visualization and labeling of distinct class intervals for employing the
clustering as a classification. While the reconstruction quality is slightly reduced, the interpretability
of the clusters is substantially enhanced with this compromise.
Data preprocessing was initiated with the centering of the filters and the normalization of their
lengths to unity, ensuring alignment of all filters on a central hyperplane, represented as 1T r = 0.
Given the uniform alignment of the normalized filters on a singular hyperplane, dimensionality
reduction was possible by transforming the basis of the space to the central hyperplane1T r = 0.


4.2   I NFERENCE S TAGE

After training the autoencoder, the next step is to identify and label the clusters that emerge, corre-
sponding to different code intervals. To this end, we uniformly sample 500 codes from the 1D space
[0,1], with equal spacing, and pass each code through the trained decoder. This generates a spec-
trum of reconstructed kernels, representing the space of clusters. By visualizing this reconstruction
spectrum, we can discern distinct intervals that correspond to different structural patterns.
We manually assign labels to the most prominent clusters, based on their visual patterns.
In Figure 3, we illustrate the reconstruction spectrum for 7×7 ConvNeXt-V2 DC kernels, with
labeled intervals corresponding to the 10 most prevalent clusters. The emerging patterns span a
diverse range of patterns, as found in the DC kernels. Strikingly, the patterns of DoG functions and
their derivatives are clearly discernible, as shown in Figure 1.
Based on the visual motifs detected, we assign semantic labels to each cluster interval. The
DoG function DoG(x,y) appears as an On-Centre pattern. Similarly, we label its inverted version
−DoG(x, y) as Off-Centre. Following this nomenclature, we identify the Off-Centre and On-Centre
first and second-order derivatives of these DoG functions, respectively, based on their spatial pat-
terns. Interestingly, another common pattern discovered is the shape-of-a-cross pattern, occurring
with both on- and off-centers. We refer to them as Off-Centre Cross and On-Centre Cross patterns.
In total, we consistently converge on just 10 core structural patterns spanning DoG functions, their
first and second-order derivatives, respectively, and cross-like (2D-absolute-sinc-like) centers and
offsets. Next, we study the prevalence and properties of these kernels. Remarkably, through this
unsupervised clustering, we are able to categorize millions of heterogeneous depthwise convolution
kernels into just a small set of identifiable recurring patterns that arise during training.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) On-Centre          (c) On-Centre Cross         (e) On-Centre dx           (g) On-Centre dy


     (b) Off-Centre          (d) Off-Centre Cross        (f) Off-Centre dx         (h) Off-Centre dy

Figure 6: Random samples from each of the prominent classes of 5×5 kernels of EfficientNet-b4 trained on
ImageNet.

To analyze the learned convolutional filters, we perform inference by sampling 10,000 scalar codes
uniformly from [0, 1] and passing them through the decoder. This reconstruction from the latent
space helps mitigate potential inconsistencies from the encoder. We then compare each recon-
structed filter to its original via cosine dissimilarity, taking the minimum value. If this minimum
dissimilarity is below a chosen threshold, we assign the filter to that scalar code’s cluster. This
clustering based on minimal reconstruction loss allows precise classification of similar filters.
The threshold value is a key parameter controlling cluster assignment and enables reliable clustering.
We select a threshold of 0.3 for 7x7 kernels and 0.2 for 5x5 kernels. Using stricter threshold for 5x5
kernels improves robustness because lower dimensional spaces tend to have closer vectors angularly.
Table 1: Percentages of filters in each model that we could classify with high accuracy by using our
autoencoder-based clustering method, alongside the model size and model accuracy on ImageNet.

            Model                        Parameters     Model Accuracy       Filters Clustered
            ConvNextV2 tiny 22k          28 M           83.9%                98.16%
            ConvNextV2 tiny              28 M           83.0%                97.33%
            ConvNeXt tiny                28 M           82.1 %               95.21 %
            HorNet tiny                  22 M           82.8%                80.71%
            MogaNet small                25 M           83.4%                78.87%
            ConvMixer 768 32             21 M           80.1%                56.64%
            ConvNextV2 huge 1k 224       660 M          86.3%                82.08%
            ConvNextV2 huge 22k 384      660 M          88.7%                92.41%
            ConvNextV2 large 1k 224      198 M          84.3%                90.82%
            ConvNextV2 large 22k 224     198 M          86.6%                96.63%
In Table 1 we show the proportion of filters that we found, from each model, all having 7x7 ker-
nels, and that we were able to successfully classify, with high accuracy. The classification pertains
to filters exhibiting a reconstruction loss lower than 0.3. This table, for reasons of succinctness,
represents a single model from each unique architecture. A comprehensive table is available in the
appendix.
Significantly, the classification was especially successful for the ConvNeXt series. Over 97% of
the filters from ConvNextV2 and more than 95% from ConvNeXtv1 were effectively classified,
highlighting the efficacy of our methodology in discerning structural patterns within these models.
Moreover, in the MogaNet filters, despite their use of dilated convolutions, a distinct structural
pattern also exhibited over 80% classification success. This observation is crucial as it illustrates the
ubiquity of the discovered patterns: they emerge in all the DSC-CNN models considered, even if
they employ varied convolutional structures, such as dilated DCs.
Furthermore, models with higher accuracy generally had more clusterable filters. The ConvMixer
model is interestingly the weakest performer, as it had the most unclustered kernels and somewhat


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of ConvNextV2 Tiny
                 1.0
                 0.8                                                                      on-center
                                                                                          off-center
    Proportion
                 0.6                                                                      on-center cross
                                                                                          off-center cross
                 0.4                                                                      first derivative
                                                                                          2nd derivative
                 0.2                                                                      others

                 0.0
                        0
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                       10
                       11
                       12
                       13
                       14
                       15
                       16
                       17
                                            Layer
Figure 7: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all ConvNeXtV2 layers, showing the dominance of
DoG cluster patterns across all layers.

noisier weights. Models trained on more data (ImageNet-22k) also exhibited higher clusterabil-
ity. Overall, these results demonstrate that the recurring patterns we uncovered, arise consistently,
especially in high-performing architectures. The depthwise kernel structure becomes increasingly
pronounced as models improve, suggesting the patterns are linked to generalization ability.


5       U NDERSTANDING THE I DENTIFIED C LUSTERS

In this section, we conduct further in-depth analysis to better understand the properties of the dis-
covered clusters. We study the ConvNeXt-V2 model with 7×7 kernels which has a total of 6624
DC kernels. We selected this model for several reasons. First, larger 7×7 kernels exhibit more
diverse and clearer patterns compared to smaller sizes. Second, among 7×7 models, ConvNeXt-V2
demonstrated the cleanest filters with minimal noise and achieved the highest ImageNet accuracy.
Third, over 97% of ConvNeXt-V2 kernels were accurately categorized by our clustering approach.
By leveraging this state-of-the-art architecture with high clusterability, we can gain key insights
into the properties of the recurring patterns uncovered in DC kernels across models. Through both
quantitative characterization and qualitative visualization, we unravel the structure of the learned
representations in the following. Among the models which have 5×5 kernels, we have selected
EfficientNet-b4. This model has a total of 49632 DC kernels.
Models with 3 × 3 Kernels. We observed that the autoencoder does not fit very well on the ker-
nels with size 3. Our hypothesis is that in low dimensional space, the angles between kernels are
smaller and it is harder to disentangle them. Instead, we applied k-means clustering on min-max
encoded 3x3 kernels, categorizing them into 10 classes. Visualizations for MobileNetV3 (Appendix
Section N) reveal the same recurring On/Off-Center and 1st derivative-like patterns despite using an
alternate unsupervised methodology.
To characterize the relative prevalence of each cluster, we compute the proportion of the kernel
patterns assigned to each class, across layers, for each model. In Figure 7 we display the barplot
visualizing the percentage of ConvNeXt-V2 kernels categorized into each distinct class (pattern).
The most frequent patterns are the On-Centre and Off-Centre clusters, followed by their cross vari-
ants. For visual clarity, the four first derivative subtypes are merged into one class, which appears
next most common. The second derivatives comprise the least frequent group. We label remaining
unrecognized patterns as “Others”, as they constitute a small fraction. This barplot only includes
accurately classified kernels, excluding indiscernible patterns, hence proportions do not total to 1.
We have observed a consistent prevalence hierarchy, maintained across layers, with DoG structures
dominating the initial layers. Very interestingly, the proportions of cross-shaped clusters increase
in the later layers, while the proportion of DoGs and their first derivatives decreases. In the final
convolutional layer, the cross motifs comprise almost all of the most common patterns.
In Figure 11 we display the barplot of the cluster proportions for EfficientNet-B4 kernels, across
layers. Similarly to ConvNeXt, the most frequent patterns are the On-Centre and Off-Centre pat-
terns. The first derivative clusters comprise the next most common group. Unlike in ConvNeXt-V2
however, the cross-shaped clusters are far less prevalent in EfficientNet. As shown in Figure 9, we
additionally identified two more clusters, named “Square-On” and “Square-Off”, that exhibit larger


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of EfficientNet B4
                0.8                                                                      on-center
                                                                                         off-center
                0.6                                                                      on-center cross
   Proportion                                                                            off-center cross
                                                                                         square on
                0.4                                                                      square off
                                                                                         first derivative
                0.2                                                                      2nd derivative
                                                                                         others
                0.0
                       0
                       1
                       2
                       3
                       4
                       5
                       6
                       7
                       8
                       9
                      10
                      11
                      12
                      13
                      14
                      15
                      16
                      17
                                           Layer
Figure 8: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all EfficientNet-b4 layers, highlighting the sudden
emergence of square kernels in one layer (see appendix Section D).



solid centers, resembling the On-Centre and Off-Centre patterns. As shown in Figure 11, these
square clusters uniquely emerge in layer 10. Notably, the first layer in EfficientNet has a lower per-
centage of correctly classified kernels, with unrecognized “Other” patterns being the most frequent.
The On-Square and Off-Square patterns emerge in almost all models
with 5×5 kernels. Notably, the square shape does not appear centered
but rather manifests in the upper left or bottom right corners. We hy-
pothesize this offset localization is due to the small odd size of 5×5
kernels, where a larger central block would not fit properly. Intriguingly,
each model learns these squared clusters fixed to the same corner posi-
tion for both the On and Off variants. This indicates certain architectural
hyperparameters, like kernel size, induce consistent localized deforma-
tions in the recurring patterns. We have included more investigations
into this in the appendix Section D. Nonetheless, the core identity of the Figure 9: On-Square and
discernible patterns remains intact. Quantifying such subtleties between Off-Square kernels, emerg-
models provides further insights into the underlying structural represen- ing only in 5×5 Kernels.
tations learned by the DSC-CNNs across a diverse set of network archi-
tectures. We have included a more comprehensive set of cluster proportions barplots for additional
models in the Appendix.
To further illustrate the consistency of uncovered, learned patterns within each pattern-cluster, we il-
lustrate in Figure 5, random ConvNeXt-V2 kernel samples, drawn from the On-Centre, Off-Centre,
Cross, and the first-order derivatives classes. The samples in each category exhibit strong visual
similarity to their assigned label, with clean and coherent structures. The fact that thousands of
heterogeneous kernels, converge to such (almost) identical motifs is remarkable, and reveals a be-
havioral simplicity, underlying the emergent representations in depthwise convolutions.
Rather than memorizing a wide range of random patterns, the network distills the filters into a small
set of basic building blocks like DoG derivatives and crosses. This provides intuitive insight into
how DCs operate: by learning a compact basis set of structural features, that are replicated densely.
To assess total cluster proportions across models, we compared barplots of all models and found
notable consistency among versions of each architecture. Figure 11 illustrates this uniformity in
models ConvNeXt, ConvNeXtV2, and Hornet, irrespective of model size or training dataset. The full
plot containing all models is available in the appendix Section J.1. However, Moganet and the dual
sets in ConveNextV2 are exceptions, with Moganet varying first derivative filters and ConveNextV2
showing a shift between on/off-center and cross filters, as detailed in the appendix Section J.2.
Training on ImageNet 1K and 21K datasets did not significantly impact these proportions. These
observations indicate the architectural design’s primary influence over filter distribution, suggesting
inherent stability and scalability across these filters.
In order to quantify the emergent patterns, we compute the distribution of total activation (sum of
kernel weights) for each cluster. In Figure 10 we show box plots summarizing these distributions.
The first-order derivative clusters are centered at zero, indicating balanced positive and negative
weights. This distribution is in accordance with the symmetric nature of the derivatives of the


                                                            8
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                  3URSRUWLRQ RI 0DLQ )LOWHUV $FURVV 'LIIHUHQW 0RGHOV

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RQ FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RII FHQWHU FURVV
3URSRUWLRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILUVW GHULYDWLYH


                                          +RU1HW                        &RQY1H[W9                   &RQY1H[W9                                                         &RQY1H[W                                  0RJD1HW
                                        O                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                VPDO       EDVH ODUJH EDVH   N ODUJH KXJH    N        N        N                                   EDVHDUJH   NDUJH   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                O                                   VPDO            EDVH ODUJH
                                                                                                      ODUJH KXJH KXJH                                                                            [O

      Figure 11: Comparative Barplot of Cluster Proportions Across Models, Showcasing Consistency across ar-
      chitectures, regardless of model size or training data.

      Gaussian functions and provides further evidence that these kernels might indeed compute these
      basis functions.
      The cross-shaped clusters exhibit                                                                                                        RII FHQWHU FURVV
      much higher total activations, cor-                                                                                                                    RII FHQWHU
      responding to their visual patterns.                                                                                                         RII FHQWHU G[[
                                                                                                                                                      RQ FHQWHU G[
                                                                                                                            &DWHJRU\

      The On-Centre and Off-Centre clus-                                                                                                              RII FHQWHU G\
      ters show mirrored activation distri-                                                                                                           RQ FHQWHU G\
      butions, with the On-Centre DoG ker-                                                                                                         RQ FHQWHU G[[
      nels having a greater overall weight.                                                                                                                          RWKHUV
                                                                                                                                                             RQ FHQWHU
      These quantitative results reinforce                                                                                                     RQ FHQWHU FURVV
      our qualitative observations. The ac-
      tivation statistics capture unique sig-                                                                                                                                                                       6XP
      natures of each pattern that match
      their assigned visual labels.                                                                             Figure 10: Box plots of total activation for each cluster of Con-
                                                                                                                vNextV2, revealing the symmetry and zero-mean in most clusters.
       6                        C ONCLUSION
      In our large-scale study, we analyzed patterns in trained DC kernels from various CNN architec-
      tures. By visualizing and clustering millions of filters, we identified recurring, interpretable motifs.
      Notably, the predominant patterns resemble DoGs and their derivatives, akin to models of visual
      receptive fields in neuroscience.
      Our discoveries provide fundamental new insights into the representations learned by modern DS-
      CNNs. We showed these networks distill dense convolutional filters into a simple vocabulary of
      basic building blocks, reminiscent of those identified in biological vision. The structural motifs
      become increasingly pronounced in higher-performing models, suggesting a link between pattern
      recurrence and generalization capability.
      This work bridges the gap between deep learning, neuroscience, and classical image processing. Our
      approach sets the stage for more interpretable, biologically-inspired convolutional architectures.
      Future Work. Our study focused on image models. The next steps include analyzing video ar-
      chitectures with 3D convolutions to understand pattern evolution over time, which might align with
      spatiotemporal visual cortex receptive fields. The identified motifs also lay the groundwork for
      initialization and regularization methods, aiming to enhance model generalization and efficiency.
      The cause of cross-shaped filters is uncertain; a potential link to orthogonal Gaussian function sum-
      mation is explored in Appendix Section B. Further investigation into these patterns is needed.
      Finally, the clusters could inform the development of novel differentiable image filters mimicking
      the DoG-like learned representations. Integrating these bio-inspired learned kernels into existing
      CNN operators could lead to enhanced performance and interpretability.
      There remain many open questions about the root causes and downstream impacts of the identifiable
      recurring structures uncovered in depthwise convolutional neural networks. Our discoveries open
      up numerous avenues for future work, to elucidate the implications of this surprising simplicity,
      underlying complex emergent deep learning representations.


                                                                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Z.B. is partially supported by the Doctoral College Resilient Embedded Systems, which is run jointly
by the TU Wien’s Faculty of Informatics and the UAS Technikum Wien. P.K. is supported by
the Doctoral Colledge on Trustworthy Autonomous CPS. This research was funded in part, by the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) I 6605.

R EFERENCES
Zahra Babaiee, Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. On-off center-
  surround receptive fields for accurate and robust image classification. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 478–489. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/babaiee21a.html.
Zahra Babaiee, Peyman M. Kiasari, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Neural echos: Depthwise con-
  volutional filters replicate biological receptive fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 8216–8225, January 2024.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017.
Xiaohan Ding, Xiangyu Zhang, Yizhuang Zhou, Jungong Han, Guiguang Ding, and Jian Sun.
  Scaling up your kernels to 31x31: Revisiting large kernel design in cnns. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.06717, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale, 2020.
Paul Gavrikov and Janis Keuper. Cnn filter db: An empirical investigation of trained convolutional
  filters. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 19066–19076, June 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. http:
  //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun
  Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Quoc V. Le, and Hartwig Adam. Searching
  for mobilenetv3. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), October 2019.
Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand,
  Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for
  mobile vision applications. CoRR, abs/1704.04861, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1704.04861.
J. P. Jones and L. A. Palmer. The two-dimensional spatial structure of simple receptive fields in cat
   striate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 58(6):1187–1211, 1987. doi: 10.1152/jn.1987.58.6.
   1187. URL https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1987.58.6.1187. PMID: 3437330.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
  convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Weinberger
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
Siyuan Li, Zedong Wang, Zicheng Liu, Cheng Tan, Haitao Lin, Di Wu, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiang-
  bin Zheng, and Stan Z Li. Efficient multi-order gated aggregation network. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.03295, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tony Lindeberg. Normative theory of visual receptive fields. Heliyon, 7(1):e05897, 2021.
  ISSN 2405-8440. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e05897. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405844021000025.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2(11):e7,
  2017.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Yansong Tang, Jie Zhou, Ser-Lam Lim, and Jiwen Lu. Hornet:
  Efficient high-order spatial interactions with recursive gated convolutions. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
R. Rodieck. Quantitative Analysis of Cat Retinal Ganglion Cell Response to Visual Stimuli. Vision
  Research, 5(12):583–601, 1965.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
 works. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th In-
 ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v97/tan19a.html.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V Le. Mixconv: Mixed depthwise convolutional kernels. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1907.09595, 2019b.
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and
 Quoc V Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2820–2828, 2019.
Nergis Tomen, Silvia-Laura Pintea, and Jan Van Gemert. Deep continuous networks. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 10324–10335. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/tomen21a.html.
Asher Trockman and J. Zico Kolter. Patches are all you need? CoRR, abs/2201.09792, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.09792.
Chelsea Voss, Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Ben Egan,
  Swee Kiat Lim, and Chris Olah. Visualizing weights. Distill, 2021. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.
  007. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/visualizing-weights.
Sanghyun Woo, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, In So Kweon, and
  Saining Xie. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.00808, 2023.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Anh Nguyen, Thomas Fuchs, and Hod Lipson. Understanding neural
  networks through deep visualization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2067–2075, 2015.
R.A. Young, R.M. Lesperance, and W.W. Meyer. The gaussian derivative model for spatial-temporal
  vision: I. cortical model. Spatial vision, 14(3-4):261–319, 2001.
Richard A. Young. The gaussian derivative model for spatial vision: I. retinal mechanisms. Spatial
  Vision, 2(4):273 – 293, 1987. doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/156856887X00222. URL https:
  //brill.com/view/journals/sv/2/4/article-p273_3.xml.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 European conference on computer vision, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Revisiting fine-
  grained visual categorization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), pp. 394–410, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Appendix

A    C OMPLETE D O G P LOTS
Employing two different first-degree DoGs results in a diverse set of derivatives: four first-order and
six second-order derivatives are derived. However, for simplicity and due to the relative rarity of
second-derivative filters in our filter set, Figure 12 selectively illustrates only two of these second-
order derivatives.


                                                                                       2
      (a) DoG(x, y)             (b) dDoG(x,y)
                                       dx
                                                          (c) dDoG(x,y)
                                                                 dy                (d) d DoG(x,y)
                                                                                          dx2


                                                                                        2
     (e) −DoG(x, y)            (f) −dDoG(x,y)
                                      dx
                                                         (g) −dDoG(x,y)
                                                                dy                (h) −d DoG(x,y)
                                                                                          dx2

         Figure 12: Complete diagram of the On and Off DoG filters and their derivatives.

For a more comprehensive understanding, DoG and its associated derivatives have been visualized
on a 7x7 grid, as depicted in Figure 13.


                                                                                        2
      (a) DoG(x, y)             (b) dDoG(x,y)
                                       dx
                                                          (c) dDoG(x,y)
                                                                 dy                (d) d DoG(x,y)
                                                                                          dx2


                                                                                           2
     (e) −DoG(x, y)             (f) −DoG(x,y)
                                       dx
                                                         (g) −dDoG(x,y)
                                                                dy                (h) −d DoG(x,y)
                                                                                          dx2

 Figure 13: Complete diagram of the On and Off DoG filters and their derivatives on a 7x7 grid.



                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     H YPOTHESIS ON M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULA OF C ROSS -PATTERN F ILTERS
The DoGs and their higher derivatives are a well-established concept in image processing. As figure
14 shows, cross-pattern filters share a visual affinity with DoGs, yet their precise mathematical
formulation remains unknown to us.


    Figure 14: Samples of Cross-Pattern Filters, magnified by 100 to show the first two decimals.

Our investigations suggest that the sum of two orthogonal Gaussian functions provides a near re-
semblance, as demonstrated in Figure 15, where the functions are visualized on a 7x7 grid across a
spectrum of standard deviations:

                                                                            −x2                                     −y 2

                                                           exp                                + exp
                                                                            2σ 2                                    2σ 2

This formulation is mostly consistent with the spatial characteristics of cross-pattern filters and offers
a potential mathematical model for their behavior.


        (a) 0.4                     (b) 0.5                                               (c) 0.6                                     (d) 0.7                                      (e) 0.8

    Figure 15: Sum of Gaussians with standard deviations ranging from 0.4 to 0.8, on a 7x7 grid.

While this model mirrors the cross-pattern scheme, dissimilarities exist, particularly the more intense
central density of the cross-pattern filters, which diverges from the Gaussian summation.
Further research is needed. Future work should refine the model to account for the observed central
density and spatial details of the cross-pattern filters, possibly through the use of Gaussian functions.

C     AUTOENCODER A RCHIRTECTURE
Figure 16 shows the architecture of the autoencoder for kernel size 7, with 1D hidden code in red.

                                   32                                                                                                          32
                                                 16                                                                              16
                                                                                                                                                            Reconstructed Kernel


                                                               8                                                    8
                                                                            4                          4
                   Input Kernel


                                                                                          1
                                                                                Sigmoid
                                        L-ReLU


                                                                   L-ReLU


                                                                                              L-ReLU


                                                                                                           L-ReLU


                                                                                                                        L-ReLU


                                                                                                                                      L-ReLU
                                                      L-ReLU


                                                                                                                                                    Tan-H


                                  Figure 16: Autoencoder architecture and its layers.


                                                                                           14
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       D                        T HE C URIOUS C ASE OF S QUARE K ERNELS
      Analysis of the filter clustering proportions in EfficientNets and Mo-
      bileNets reveals a consistent pattern where one or two layers predom-
      inantly learn square kernels in almost all models. For instance, in the
      EfficientNet-B4 model, this is notably observed in the 22nd layer(layer
      10 of 5×5 kernels). To delve deeper into this phenomenon and assess
      the influence of training procedures and random initialization, we con-
      ducted an experiment where the EfficientNet-B4 model was trained us-
      ing two distinct random seeds over a period of 50 epochs. The resulting
      barplots, depicted in Figure 18, demonstrate that both training instances
      exhibit a similar trend to that observed in the Pytorch-released, fully- Figure 17: On-Square
      trained model. Remarkably, in both cases, the 16th layer (layer 4 of 5×5 and Off-Square kernels
      kernels), shows a higher concentration of clustered filters, mirroring the
      pattern in the fully trained model (referenced as Figure 9 in the main text). This trend is particularly
      intriguing as these layers are positioned at the beginning of a block, suggesting that the model may
      prioritize training these initial layers, potentially impacting the types of filters learned.

                                3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI (IILFLHQW1HW %  UDQGRP VHHG Y

                                                                                                                                                                                              RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                              RQ FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RII FHQWHU FURVV
3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                              VTXDUH RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 VTXDUH RII
                                                                                                                                                                                              ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                              RWKHUV


                                                                                                          /D\HU
                                3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI (IILFLHQW1HW %  UDQGRP VHHG Y

                                                                                                                                                                                              RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                              RQ FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RII FHQWHU FURVV
3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                              VTXDUH RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 VTXDUH RII
                                                                                                                                                                                              ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                              RWKHUV


                                                                                                          /D\HU

      Figure 18: barplot of relative cluster proportions of EfficientNet-B4 after 50 epochs of training with
      two different random seeds


                                                                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E             T HE C URIOUS C ASE OF H OR N ET T INY
In contrast to other HorNet models (small, base, and large), HorNet Tiny is illustrated by an abnor-
mal behavior observed in Layer 14. Layer 14 presents an anomaly, with a significant reduction or
absence of clustered filters. This deviation is evident in Figure 19.

                    Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of hornet_tiny_weights
              0.8                                                                                on-center
                                                                                                 off-center
              0.6                                                                                on-center cross
 Proportion


                                                                                                 off-center cross
              0.4                                                                                first derivative
                                                                                                 2nd derivative
              0.2                                                                                others

              0.0
                     0
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     4
                     5
                     6
                     7
                     8
                     9
                    10
                    11
                    12
                    13
                    14
                    15
                    16
                    17
                    18
                    19
                    20
                    21
                    22
                    23
                    24
                                                   Layer
Figure 19: Barplot depicting clustered filter proportions in HorNet Tiny layers, highlighting the
unexpected emergence of unidentified filters in Layer 14.

To further clarify this anomaly, we have visualized random samples from Layers 13, 14, and 15
in Figure 20. This comparison distinctly showcases the unusual patterns observed in Layer 14, in
contrast to its adjacent layers.


                      (a) Layer 13                     (b) Layer 14                        (c) Layer 15

Figure 20: Random Samples from Layers 13, 14, and 15 of HorNet Tiny, highlighting the abrupt
appearance of seemingly uninterpretable patterns in Layer 14.

Despite investigations, the underlying cause of this phenomenon remains unclear to us. This aspect
of our research has yet to be fully understood, presenting an avenue for future exploration.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   E XPLORING A PPLICATIONS : A N E XPERIMENT ON C ONV M IXER
In models utilizing 7x7 filters, the ConvMixer model displayed a notably low
score (56%) in filter clustering proportions. Analysis of the model’s kernels,
as illustrated in Figure 21, revealed the presence of noisy kernels. Despite
apparent underlying similarities, many were classified as unclustered by our
algorithm, due to the strict loss threshold. We hypothesize these filters are
inclined to align with DoG cluster patterns.
To investigate our hypothesis, we performed an experiment on network ini-
tialization. We chose the ConvMixer768-32 model, utilizing a 14-patch size,                    Figure 21: Samples
and trained it over 50 epochs. A second model was initialized with various                     of convMixer filters
DoG functions, using random variances similar to trained kernels. The ini-                     showing noisy fea-
tialization was uniformly distributed: 45% on-center, 10% off-center, 15%                      tures.
cross, 20% first derivative, and the rest second derivatives. This model was
then trained under the same conditions.
The table below summarizes our experiment’s findings, showing notable improvements in accu-
racy and an increased proportion of clustered filters in the DoG-initialized model compared to the
baseline. Additionally, consistent layer proportions suggest minimal filter changes during training.
Figure 25 illustrates these cluster proportions post-training in the barplot.
Disclaimer. This experiment was conducted a single time without optimizing proportions and vari-
ances; further refinement could improve results, but that was not our main objective here.
                  Model                   Initilization     Accuracy (%)     Clustered Filters (%)
                  ConvMixer 768-32          Kaiming            66.35                 56.65
                  ConvMixer 768-32           DoGs              69.01                 96.03

                          Table 2: Comparison of Normal and Initialized ConvMixer 768-32
Figure 22 compares random filters from the ConvMixer768-32 at epoch 50, both with and without
initialization. It is evident that the initialized filters exhibit much clearer patterns.


      (a) Trained filters with Kaiming initilization             (b) Trained filters with DoGs initilization

Figure 22: Random Samples from ConvMixer768-32 trained without and with DoG initialized
weights. Filters with initialization are cleaner and less noisy.

            Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of ConvMixer 768 32_layer Epoch 50
                         1.0
                         0.8                                                              on-center
                                                                                          off-center
                                                                                          on-center cross
            Proportion


                         0.6
                                                                                          off-center cross
                         0.4                                                              first derivative
                                                                                          2nd derivative
                         0.2                                                              others

                         0.0
                                0
                                1
                                2
                                3
                                4
                                5
                                6
                                7
                                8
                                9
                               10
                               11
                               12
                               13
                               14
                               15
                               16
                               17
                               18
                               19
                               20
                               21
                               22
                               23
                               24
                               25
                               26
                               27
                               28
                               29
                               30
                               31


                                                    Layer

     Figure 23: barplot of cluster proportions of ConvMixer initialized by DoGs after training



                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    F ILTER PATTERNS T IMELINE
We monitored the Convmixer768-32 model’s filters from the initial stage to epoch 50, less than its
full 300-epoch training, to observe DoG pattern development. Figure 24 presents barplots of filter
proportions at 5, 10, 25, and 50 epochs, showing a gradual emergence of DoG patterns, with the
on-center DoG appearing first.
                                                                                                                       3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI &RQY0L[HU       BOD\HU LQ HSRFK

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RQ FHQWHU FURVV
         3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RWKHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                    /D\HU
                                                                                                                   3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI &RQY0L[HU       BOD\HU LQ HSRFK

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RQ FHQWHU FURVV
         3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RWKHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                   /D\HU
                                                                                                                   3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI &RQY0L[HU       BOD\HU LQ HSRFK

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQ FHQWHU FURVV
         3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RWKHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                   /D\HU
                                                                                                                   3URSRUWLRQ RI &OXVWHUHG )LOWHUV LQ (DFK /D\HU RI &RQY0L[HU       BOD\HU LQ HSRFK

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RQ FHQWHU FURVV
         3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QG GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RWKHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                   /D\HU

    Figure 24: Barplot of relative cluster proportions of ConvMixer768-32 in various epochs.

                                                                                                                                                            3URSRUWLRQV RI &OXVWHUHG ILOWHUV E\ (SRFKV
                                           3URSRUWLRQV RI &OXVWHUHG ILOWHUV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (SRFKV
                                                                                                                       Figure 25: Total proportion of filters clustered across time.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    G ENERALIZATION OR M EMORIZATION ?
This section delves into how overfitting impacts the patterns filters learn. We experimented by train-
ing the ConvMixer768-32 model on a limited portion of the ImageNet dataset, specifically a subset
of just 10 classes. The training was conducted for 200 epochs without any form of regularization, de-
liberately steering the model towards overfitting. The results of this experiment were quite revealing.
Figure 26-b displays a random selection of kernels from the overfitted model. A striking difference
is observed when compared to the model trained on the complete ImageNet dataset (Figure 26-a):
the kernels lack clear patterns. This finding hints at a potential link between the development of DoG
patterns and the model’s comprehensive understanding of images, rather than mere memorization.
To further probe this hypothesis, we subjected the same model to training on the small-sized Cifar10
dataset. The kernels from this training, as shown in Figure 26-c, similarly lack discernible patterns,
reinforcing the notion that a dataset with a larger variety is necessary for the model to develop
recognizable patterns in its filters.


    (a) Trained on full ImageNet   (b) Trained on 10-class ImageNet        (c) Trained on Cifar10

Figure 26: Comparative Analysis of Filter Patterns in ConvMixer768-32 Models trained on different
data.


I   L ARGE 27×27 K ERNELS
In order to investigate the presence of the DoG family filters in DS-CNN models with larger kernel
sizes, we examined trained filters of model RepLKNet-XL (Ding et al., 2022). Our investigation
revealed the presence of DoG-shaped filters in this model, especially in early layers, akin to those
observed in smaller models. Figure 27 shows selected samples from the trained kernels of this
model. As one can see, despite the large kernels, the patterns emerge in small central area.


               Figure 27: Selected Samples of ReplKNET-XL Model 27×27 Kernels.


                                                  19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                3URSRUWLRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3URSRUWLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                                           3URSRUWLRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WLQ\                                                                                                                                                                                              DWWRB NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                           KRUQHWBWLQ\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WLQ\B  NB NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IHPWRB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WLQ\B  NB NB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQ FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                        KRUQHWBVPDOO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               QDQRB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WLQ\B  NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               QDQRB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                        KRUQHWBEDVH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VPDOO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WLQ\B  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VPDOOB  NB NB

                                                                                                                                        KRUQHWBODUJH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VPDOOB  NB NB                                                                                                                                                                                                   WLQ\B  NB   BHPD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VPDOOB  NB                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EDVH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C OMPLETE P ROPORTIONS P LOTS


                                                                                            PRJDQHWB[WLQ\BV]   B [EV   BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EDVH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EDVHB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R ELATIVE CLUSTER PROPORTIONS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EDVHB NB
                                                                                             PRJDQHWBWLQ\BV]   B [EV   BHS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EDVHB  NB   BHPD


20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EDVHB  NB NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ODUJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EDVHB  NB NB
                                                                                             PRJDQHWBWLQ\BV]   B [EV   BHS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3URSRUWLRQ RI 0DLQ )LOWHUV $FURVV 'LIIHUHQW 0RGHOV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KXJHB NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EDVHB  NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3URSRUWLRQ RI 0DLQ )LOWHUV $FURVV 'LIIHUHQW 0RGHOV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3URSRUWLRQ RI 0DLQ )LOWHUV $FURVV 'LIIHUHQW 0RGHOV


                                                                                           PRJDQHWBVPDOOBV]   B [EV   BHS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ODUJH                                                                                                                                                                                               SLFRB NB   BHPD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ODUJHB NB                                                                                                                                                                                                   QDQRB NB   BHPD
                                                                                           PRJDQHWBEDVHBV]   B [EV   BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ODUJHB  NB NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WLQ\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ODUJHB  NB
                                                                                             PRJDQHWBODUJHBV]   B [EV  BHS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ODUJHB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [ODUJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ODUJHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RQ FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [ODUJHB  NB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                           PRJDQHWB[ODUJHBV]   B [EV  BHS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RQ FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KXJHB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [ODUJHB  NB NB   BHPD


     Figure 28: Proportion plots for ConveNextV2, ConveNext, HorNet, and Moganet Models.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RII FHQWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RQ FHQWHU



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RII FHQWHU FURVV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RQ FHQWHU FURVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [ODUJHB  NB                                                                                                                                                                            KXJHB  NB   BHPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A comprehensive set of bar plots, as referenced in Figure 11, is provided here for detailed analysis.
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       J.2                             C ONVENEXT V2 D UAL C LUSTER P ROPORTIONS

      In ConveNextV2 models, a unique duality in cluster proportions is observed, distinct from other
      models, as Figure 28 reveals two separate proportion sets in ConveNextV2: 11 versions in the first
      and 7 in the second.
      Figure 29 comparing ConveNextV2 huge 1k and 22k suggests the set difference may stem from a
      shift to on/off-cross from on/off-center filters.
      Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_huge_1k_224_ema_weights
                                                1.0
                                                0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         on-center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            off-center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            on-center cross
                            Proportion


                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            off-center cross
                                                0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         first derivative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2nd derivative
                                                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         others

                                                0.0
                                                                           0
                                                                           1
                                                                           2
                                                                           3
                                                                           4
                                                                           5
                                                                           6
                                                                           7
                                                                           8
                                                                           9
                                                                          10
                                                                          11
                                                                          12
                                                                          13
                                                                          14
                                                                          15
                                                                          16
                                                                          17
                                                                          18
                                                                          19
                                                                          20
                                                                          21
                                                                          22
                                                                          23
                                                                          24
                                                                          25
                                                                          26
                                                                          27
                                                                          28
                                                                          29
                                                                          30
                                                                          31
                                                                          32
                                                                          33
                                                                          34
                                                                          35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer
      Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_huge_22k_384_ema_weights
                                                          1.0
                                                          0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                on-center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             off-center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on-center cross
                                Proportion


                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             off-center cross
                                                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                first derivative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2nd derivative
                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                others

                                                          0.0
                                                                             0
                                                                             1
                                                                             2
                                                                             3
                                                                             4
                                                                             5
                                                                             6
                                                                             7
                                                                             8
                                                                             9
                                                                            10
                                                                            11
                                                                            12
                                                                            13
                                                                            14
                                                                            15
                                                                            16
                                                                            17
                                                                            18
                                                                            19
                                                                            20
                                                                            21
                                                                            22
                                                                            23
                                                                            24
                                                                            25
                                                                            26
                                                                            27
                                                                            28
                                                                            29
                                                                            30
                                                                            31
                                                                            32
                                                                            33
                                                                            34
                                                                            35


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Layer
                                                                                                                     Figure 29: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers

      To validate our hypothesis, we merged labels of on-center and on-cross filters (and off-center with
      off-cross) in ConveNextV2’s proportion barplot. Figure 30 confirms our hypothesis, displaying
      homogeneous patterns across all proportions. It is notable that seemingly the merged labels are
      nearly 50/50 across all models.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3URSRUWLRQ RI 0DLQ )LOWHUV $FURVV 'LIIHUHQW 0RGHOV
                                                                        RQ FHQWHU   FURVV
                                                                     RII FHQWHU   FURVV
                                                                        ILUVW GHULYDWLYH
                                                                         QG GHULYDWLYH

3URSRUWLRQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EDVH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ODUJH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WLQ\
                                       DWWRB NB   BHPD


                                                                                 IHPWRB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                    QDQRB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                       QDQRB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                          WLQ\B  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WLQ\B  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EDVHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EDVHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KXJHB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SLFRB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QDQRB NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ODUJHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ODUJHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KXJHB  NB   BHPD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KXJHB  NB   BHPD


      Figure 30: Homogenized Proportions in ConveNextV2 Filters, Merging On-Center/On-Cross and
      Off-Center/Off-Cross Labels.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    T HE C OMPLETE H IDDEN D IMENSION S PACE R ECONSTRUCTION P LOTS


Figure 31: Hidden space spectrum of Autoencoder trained on 5 × 5 kernels used for labeling classes.


Figure 32: Hidden space spectrum of Autoencoder trained on 7 × 7 kernels used for labeling classes.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L   M ODELS U SED AND THE P ROPORTIONS OF T HEIR F ILTERS C LUSTERED

                  Model                                   Filters Clustered (%)
                  MobileNetV3 large 100 1k miil 78 0              87.09
                  MobileNetV3 large 100 in21k miil                85.71
                  MobileNetV3 large 100 ra                        78.03
                  MobileNetV3 large 21k                           85.71
                  MobileNetV3 large                               87.09
                  MobileNetV3 100                                 78.44
                  EfficientNet b0 ra                              73.12
                  EfficientNet b0                                 73.12
                  EfficientNet b1                                 69.37
                  EfficientNet b2 ra                              70.48
                  EfficientNet b3 ra2                             74.28
                  EfficientNet b4 ra2 320                         73.78
                  EfficientNet el pruned70                        50.91
                  EfficientNet el                                 52.74
                  EfficientNet em ra2                             58.46
                  EfficientNet es pruned75                        49.78
                  EfficientNet es ra                              50.43
                  EfficientNet lite0 ra                           61.08
                  tf EfficientNet b0 aa                           76.61
                  tf EfficientNet b0 ap                           74.97
                  tf EfficientNet b0 ns                           77.49
                  tf EfficientNet b1 aa                           73.36
                  tf EfficientNet b1 ap                           73.83
                  tf EfficientNet b1 ns                           78.31
                  tf EfficientNet b2 aa                           71.62
                  tf EfficientNet b2 ap                           71.81
                  tf EfficientNet b2 ns                           77.50
                  tf EfficientNet b3 aa                           70.32
                  tf EfficientNet b3 ap                           71.48
                  tf EfficientNet b3 ns                           76.81
                  tf EfficientNet b4 aa                           67.03
                  tf EfficientNet b4 ap                           69.67
                  tf EfficientNet b4 ns                           75.34
                  tf EfficientNet b5 ap                           69.76
                  tf EfficientNet b5 ns                           73.32
                  tf EfficientNet b5 ra                           67.12
                  tf EfficientNet b6 aa                           63.80
                  tf EfficientNet b6 ap                           68.15
                  tf EfficientNet b6 ns                           71.96
                  MixNet s                                        73.25
                  MixNet m                                        66.34
                  MixNet l                                        69.43
                  MixNet xl ra                                    58.91
                  MnasNet a1                                      71.59
                  MnasNet b1                                      62.61
                  SpnasNet 100                                    58.66
                  FBNet 100                                       59.94

        Table 3: List of Models with 5 × 5 kernels used and their Filter Clustering Results


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Model                           Filters Clustered (%)
                       ConvNextV2 atto 224 1k                  96.47
                       ConvNextV2 femto 224 1k                 97.74
                       ConvNextV2 pico 224 1k                  95.96
                       ConvNextV2 nano 224 1k                  96.94
                       ConvNextV2 nano 224 22k                 97.94
                       ConvNextV2 nano 384 22k                 97.45
                       ConvNextV2 tiny 224 1k                  97.33
                       ConvNextV2 tiny 224 22k                 98.16
                       ConvNextV2 tiny 384 22k                 98.20
                       ConvNextV2 base 224 1k                  93.38
                       ConvNextV2 base 224 22k                 97.56
                       ConvNextV2 base 384 22k                 97.56
                       ConvNextV2 large 224 1k                 90.82
                       ConvNextV2 large 224 22k                96.63
                       ConvNextV2 large 384 22k                96.67
                       ConvNextV2 huge 224 1k                  82.08
                       ConvNextV2 huge 384 22k                 92.41
                       ConvNextV2 huge 512 22k                 92.43
                       ConvNext tiny 224 1k                    95.21
                       ConvNext tiny 224 22k 1k                87.55
                       ConvNext tiny 384 22k 1k                86.91
                       ConvNext tiny 224 22k                   88.09
                       ConvNext small 224 1k                   94.68
                       ConvNext small 224 22k 1k               94.48
                       ConvNext small 384 22k 1k               93.84
                       ConvNext small 224 22k                  94.57
                       ConvNext base 224 1k                    93.57
                       ConvNext base 384 1k                    93.13
                       ConvNext base 224 22k 1k                93.82
                       ConvNext base 384 22k 1k                92.91
                       ConvNext base 224 22k                   93.87
                       ConvNext large 224 1k                   91.26
                       ConvNext large 384 1k                   90.77
                       ConvNext large 224 22k 1k               88.59
                       ConvNext large 384 22k 1k               88.06
                       ConvNext large 224 22k                  88.93
                       ConvNext xlarge 224 1                   87.67
                       ConvNext xlarge 224 22k 1k              87.95
                       ConvNext xlarge 384 22k 1k              87.67
                       ConvNext xlarge 224 22k                 88.11
                       MogaNet xtiny 224 1k                    78.19
                       MogaNet tiny 224 1k                     80.82
                       MogaNet tiny 256 1k                     84.16
                       MogaNet small 224 1k                    78.87
                       MogaNet base 224 1k                     70.22
                       MogaNet large 224 1k                    58.49
                       MogaNet xlarge 224 1k                   55.30
                       HorNet tiny 224 1k                      80.71
                       HorNet small 224 1k                     79.09
                       HorNet base 224 1k                      72.86
                       HorNet large 224 1k                     68.58
                       ConvMixer 512 20 layer 1k               58.02
                       ConvMixer 768 32 layer 1k               56.65
                       ConvMixer 768 initialized*              96.03

Table 4: List of Models with 7 × 7 kernels used and their Filter Clustering Results
*Note: Please see Section F


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M    P ROPORTION BAR C HARTS

Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of moganet_tiny_sz256_8xbs128_ep300_weights
                  1.0
                  0.8                                                                           on-center
                                                                                                off-center
                                                                                                on-center cross
     Proportion

                  0.6
                                                                                                off-center cross
                  0.4                                                                           first derivative
                                                                                                2nd derivative
                  0.2                                                                           others

                  0.0
                          0
                          1
                          2
                          3
                          4
                          5
                          6
                          7
                          8
                          9
                         10
                         11
                         12
                         13
                         14
                         15
                         16
                         17
                         18
                         19
                                                     Layer
Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of moganet_base_sz224_8xbs128_ep300_weights
                   1.0
                   0.8                                                                          on-center
                                                                                                off-center
                   0.6                                                                          on-center cross
      Proportion


                                                                                                off-center cross
                   0.4                                                                          first derivative
                                                                                                2nd derivative
                   0.2                                                                          others

                   0.0
                          0
                          1
                          2
                          3
                          4
                          5
                          6
                          7
                          8
                          9
                         10
                         11
                         12
                         13
                         14
                         15
                         16
                         17
                         18
                         19
                         20
                         21
                         22
                         23
                         24
                         25
                         26
                         27
                         28
                         29
                         30
                         31
                         32
                         33
                         34
                                                     Layer
Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of moganet_large_sz224_8xbs64_ep300_weights
                  0.8
                                                                                                on-center
                                                                                                off-center
                  0.6                                                                           on-center cross
     Proportion


                                                                                                off-center cross
                  0.4                                                                           first derivative
                                                                                                2nd derivative
                  0.2                                                                           others

                  0.0
                      01
                       23
                        45
                         67
                          89
                     10
                     11
                     12
                     13
                     14
                     15
                     16
                     17
                     18
                     19
                     20
                     21
                     22
                     23
                     24
                     25
                     26
                     27
                     28
                     29
                     30
                     31
                     32
                     33
                     34
                     35
                     36
                     37
                     38
                     39
                     40
                     41
                     42
                     43
                     44
                     45
                     46
                     47
                     48
                     49
                     50
                     51
                     52
                     53
                     54
                     55
                     56
                     57


                                                     Layer
Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of moganet_xlarge_sz224_8xbs64_ep300_weights
                   0.8
                                                                                                on-center
                   0.6                                                                          off-center
                                                                                                on-center cross
      Proportion


                   0.4                                                                          off-center cross
                                                                                                first derivative
                                                                                                2nd derivative
                   0.2                                                                          others

                   0.0
                         01
                          23
                           45
                            67
                             89
                        10
                        11
                        12
                        13
                        14
                        15
                        16
                        17
                        18
                        19
                        20
                        21
                        22
                        23
                        24
                        25
                        26
                        27
                        28
                        29
                        30
                        31
                        32
                        33
                        34
                        35
                        36
                        37
                        38
                        39
                        40
                        41
                        42
                        43
                        44
                        45
                        46
                        47
                        48
                        49
                        50
                        51
                        52
                        53
                        54
                        55
                        56
                        57
                        58
                        59


                                                     Layer
                         Figure 33: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers


                                                         25
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convmixer_768_32_ks7_p7_relu_weights
                             0.7
                             0.6                                                                          on-center
                                                                                                          off-center
                             0.5                                                                          on-center cross
                Proportion


                             0.4                                                                          off-center cross
                             0.3                                                                          first derivative
                                                                                                          2nd derivative
                             0.2                                                                          others
                             0.1
                             0.0
                                    0
                                    1
                                    2
                                    3
                                    4
                                    5
                                    6
                                    7
                                    8
                                    9
                                   10
                                   11
                                   12
                                   13
                                   14
                                   15
                                   16
                                   17
                                   18
                                   19
                                   20
                                   21
                                   22
                                   23
                                   24
                                   25
                                   26
                                   27
                                   28
                                   29
                                   30
                                   31
                                                             Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnext_tiny_22k_224_weights
              1.0
              0.8                                                                                         on-center
                                                                                                          off-center
                                                                                                          on-center cross
 Proportion


              0.6
                                                                                                          off-center cross
              0.4                                                                                         first derivative
                                                                                                          2nd derivative
              0.2                                                                                         others

              0.0
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                             10
                             11
                             12
                             13
                             14
                             15
                             16
                             17
                                                           Layer
                   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnext_base_weights
              1.0
              0.8                                                                                         on-center
                                                                                                          off-center
                                                                                                          on-center cross
Proportion


              0.6
                                                                                                          off-center cross
              0.4                                                                                         first derivative
                                                                                                          2nd derivative
              0.2                                                                                         others

              0.0
                        0
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                       10
                       11
                       12
                       13
                       14
                       15
                       16
                       17
                       18
                       19
                       20
                       21
                       22
                       23
                       24
                       25
                       26
                       27
                       28
                       29
                       30
                       31
                       32
                       33
                       34
                       35


                                                          Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnext_large_22k_224_weights
                1.0
                0.8                                                                                       on-center
                                                                                                          off-center
                                                                                                          on-center cross
   Proportion


                0.6
                                                                                                          off-center cross
                0.4                                                                                       first derivative
                                                                                                          2nd derivative
                0.2                                                                                       others

                0.0
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                             10
                             11
                             12
                             13
                             14
                             15
                             16
                             17
                             18
                             19
                             20
                             21
                             22
                             23
                             24
                             25
                             26
                             27
                             28
                             29
                             30
                             31
                             32
                             33
                             34
                             35


                                                           Layer
                                   Figure 34: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers


                                                                     26
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_tiny_weights
             1.0
             0.8                                                                                        on-center
                                                                                                        off-center
                                                                                                        on-center cross
Proportion



             0.6
                                                                                                        off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                        first derivative
                                                                                                        2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                        others

             0.0
                           0
                           1
                           2
                           3
                           4
                           5
                           6
                           7
                           8
                           9
                          10
                          11
                          12
                          13
                          14
                          15
                          16
                          17
                                                        Layer
             Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_large_weights
             1.0
             0.8                                                                                        on-center
                                                                                                        off-center
                                                                                                        on-center cross
Proportion


             0.6
                                                                                                        off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                        first derivative
                                                                                                        2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                        others

             0.0
                     0
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     4
                     5
                     6
                     7
                     8
                     9
                    10
                    11
                    12
                    13
                    14
                    15
                    16
                    17
                    18
                    19
                    20
                    21
                    22
                    23
                    24
                    25
                    26
                    27
                    28
                    29
                    30
                    31
                    32
                    33
                    34
                    35
                                                        Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_huge_1k_224_ema_weights
                          1.0
                          0.8                                                                           on-center
                                                                                                        off-center
                                                                                                        on-center cross
             Proportion


                          0.6
                                                                                                        off-center cross
                          0.4                                                                           first derivative
                                                                                                        2nd derivative
                          0.2                                                                           others

                          0.0
                                 0
                                 1
                                 2
                                 3
                                 4
                                 5
                                 6
                                 7
                                 8
                                 9
                                10
                                11
                                12
                                13
                                14
                                15
                                16
                                17
                                18
                                19
                                20
                                21
                                22
                                23
                                24
                                25
                                26
                                27
                                28
                                29
                                30
                                31
                                32
                                33
                                34
                                35


                                                           Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of convnextv2_huge_22k_384_ema_weights
                           1.0
                           0.8                                                                          on-center
                                                                                                        off-center
                                                                                                        on-center cross
              Proportion


                           0.6
                                                                                                        off-center cross
                           0.4                                                                          first derivative
                                                                                                        2nd derivative
                           0.2                                                                          others

                           0.0
                                  0
                                  1
                                  2
                                  3
                                  4
                                  5
                                  6
                                  7
                                  8
                                  9
                                 10
                                 11
                                 12
                                 13
                                 14
                                 15
                                 16
                                 17
                                 18
                                 19
                                 20
                                 21
                                 22
                                 23
                                 24
                                 25
                                 26
                                 27
                                 28
                                 29
                                 30
                                 31
                                 32
                                 33
                                 34
                                 35


                                                           Layer
                                 Figure 35: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers


                                                                   27
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of hornet_tiny_weights
             0.8                                                                                    on-center
                                                                                                    off-center
             0.6                                                                                    on-center cross
Proportion



                                                                                                    off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                    first derivative
                                                                                                    2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                    others

             0.0
                    0
                    1
                    2
                    3
                    4
                    5
                    6
                    7
                    8
                    9
                   10
                   11
                   12
                   13
                   14
                   15
                   16
                   17
                   18
                   19
                   20
                   21
                   22
                   23
                   24
                                                    Layer
                   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of hornet_small_weights
             0.8
                                                                                                    on-center
                                                                                                    off-center
             0.6                                                                                    on-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                    off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                    first derivative
                                                                                                    2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                    others

             0.0
                    0
                    1
                    2
                    3
                    4
                    5
                    6
                    7
                    8
                    9
                   10
                   11
                   12
                   13
                   14
                   15
                   16
                   17
                   18
                   19
                   20
                   21
                   22
                   23
                   24
                                                    Layer
                   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of hornet_base_weights
             0.8
                                                                                                    on-center
             0.6                                                                                    off-center
                                                                                                    on-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                    off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                    first derivative
                                                                                                    2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                    others

             0.0
                    0
                    1
                    2
                    3
                    4
                    5
                    6
                    7
                    8
                    9
                   10
                   11
                   12
                   13
                   14
                   15
                   16
                   17
                   18
                   19
                   20
                   21
                   22
                   23
                   24


                                                    Layer
                   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of hornet_large_weights

             0.8                                                                                    on-center
                                                                                                    off-center
             0.6                                                                                    on-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                    off-center cross
             0.4                                                                                    first derivative
                                                                                                    2nd derivative
             0.2                                                                                    others

             0.0
                    0
                    1
                    2
                    3
                    4
                    5
                    6
                    7
                    8
                    9
                   10
                   11
                   12
                   13
                   14
                   15
                   16
                   17
                   18
                   19
                   20
                   21
                   22
                   23
                   24


                                                    Layer
                             Figure 36: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers



                                                             28
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of efficientnet_b0_weights
             0.8                                                                                               on-center
                                                                                                               off-center
             0.6                                                                                               on-center cross
                                                                                                               off-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                               square on
             0.4                                                                                               square off
                                                                                                               first derivative
             0.2                                                                                               2nd derivative
                                                                                                               others
             0.0
                                  3

                                        4

                                                8

                                                        9

                                                                10

                                                                          11

                                                                                12

                                                                                        13

                                                                                                  14
                                                               Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of efficientnet_b2_ra-bcdf34b7_weights
                                                                                                               on-center
                      0.8                                                                                      off-center
                                                                                                               on-center cross
                      0.6                                                                                      off-center cross
        Proportion


                                                                                                               square on
                      0.4                                                                                      square off
                                                                                                               first derivative
                      0.2                                                                                      2nd derivative
                                                                                                               others
                      0.0
                                    0

                                        1

                                             2

                                                   3

                                                         4

                                                              5

                                                                     6

                                                                            7

                                                                                8

                                                                                      9

                                                                                             10

                                                                                                   11
                                                                 Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of efficientnet_b4_ra2_320-7eb33cd5_weights
                                  0.8                                                                           on-center
                                                                                                                off-center
                                  0.6                                                                           on-center cross
                                                                                                                off-center cross
                     Proportion


                                                                                                                square on
                                  0.4                                                                           square off
                                                                                                                first derivative
                                  0.2                                                                           2nd derivative
                                                                                                                others
                                  0.0
                                         0
                                         1
                                         2
                                         3
                                         4
                                         5
                                         6
                                         7
                                         8
                                         9
                                        10
                                        11
                                        12
                                        13
                                        14
                                        15
                                        16
                                        17


                                                                   Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of tf_efficientnet_b6_ns-51548356_weights
                           0.8                                                                                 on-center
                                                                                                               off-center
                           0.6                                                                                 on-center cross
                                                                                                               off-center cross
             Proportion


                                                                                                               square on
                           0.4                                                                                 square off
                                                                                                               first derivative
                           0.2                                                                                 2nd derivative
                                                                                                               others
                           0.0
                                     0
                                     1
                                     2
                                     3
                                     4
                                     5
                                     6
                                     7
                                     8
                                     9
                                    10
                                    11
                                    12
                                    13
                                    14
                                    15
                                    16
                                    17
                                    18
                                    19
                                    20
                                    21
                                    22
                                    23
                                    24


                                                                  Layer
                                        Figure 37: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers


                                                                           29
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of tf_mobilenetv3_small_075-da427f52_weights
                                1.0
                                                                                                              on-center
                                0.8                                                                           off-center
                                                                                                              on-center cross
                                0.6                                                                           off-center cross
                   Proportion

                                                                                                              square on
                                0.4                                                                           square off
                                                                                                              first derivative
                                0.2                                                                           2nd derivative
                                                                                                              others
                                0.0
                                      0

                                             1

                                                     2

                                                              3

                                                                          4

                                                                               5

                                                                                       6

                                                                                                7
                                                                  Layer
         Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of mobilenet_v3_large_weights
             0.8                                                                                             on-center
                                                                                                             off-center
                                                                                                             on-center cross
             0.6                                                                                             off-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                             square on
             0.4                                                                                             square off
                                                                                                             first derivative
             0.2                                                                                             2nd derivative
                                                                                                             others
             0.0
                                  3


                                            4


                                                        5


                                                                     12


                                                                               13


                                                             Layer                         14
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of mobilenetv3_large_100_in21k_miil_weights
                            0.8                                                                              on-center
                                                                                                             off-center
                                                                                                             on-center cross
                            0.6                                                                              off-center cross
               Proportion


                                                                                                             square on
                            0.4                                                                              square off
                                                                                                             first derivative
                            0.2                                                                              2nd derivative
                                                                                                             others
                            0.0
                                      0


                                                 1


                                                            2


                                                                          3


                                                                                   4


                                                                                             5


                                                                  Layer
   Proportion of Clustered Filters in Each Layer of mnasnet_a1-d9418771_weights
             0.8                                                                                             on-center
                                                                                                             off-center
             0.6                                                                                             on-center cross
                                                                                                             off-center cross
Proportion


                                                                                                             square on
             0.4                                                                                             square off
                                                                                                             first derivative
             0.2                                                                                             2nd derivative
                                                                                                             others
             0.0
                                  0


                                            1


                                                        2


                                                                     3


                                                                               4


                                                                                           5


                                                             Layer
                                      Figure 38: Barplot of relative cluster proportions across all Layers


                                                                          30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N    K-M EANS C LUSTERING OF M OBILE N ET V3 L ARGE 3 × 3 K ERNELS


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               32
