Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A L ATENT S PACE T HEORY FOR E MERGENT A BILITIES
IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Languages are not created randomly but rather to communicate information. There
         is a strong association between languages and their underlying meanings, resulting
         in a sparse joint distribution that is heavily peaked according to their correlations.
         Moreover, these peak values happen to match with the marginal distribution of
         languages due to the sparsity. With the advent of LLMs trained on big data and
         large models, we can now precisely assess the marginal distribution of languages,
         providing a convenient means of exploring the sparse structures in the joint dis-
         tribution for effective inferences. In this paper, we categorize languages as either
         unambiguous or ε-ambiguous and present quantitative results to demonstrate that
         the emergent abilities of LLMs, such as language understanding, in-context learn-
         ing, chain-of-thought prompting, and effective instruction fine-tuning, can all be
         attributed to Bayesian inference on the sparse joint distribution of languages.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Over the past few years, large language models (LLMs) have emerged as the predominant method
for most natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Radford et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022). With the increase in model size and training data, LLMs have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in solving various NLP tasks, including semantic understanding,
few-shot in-context learning, chain-of-thought prompting, and effective instruction fine-tuning for
alignment. These abilities are often referred to as emergent capabilities as they have been observed to
emerge as the model size and training data increase (Wei et al., 2022b). In contrast to a simple scaling
law, they are not the same abilities just extended to a new data distribution but some new abilities
unseen in smaller model/data scales. Machine learning researchers are keen to know how LLMs have
developed these skills to perform well on unseen tasks, especially since LLMs are primarily trained
in an unsupervised manner to predict the next tokens in text. Some empirical studies have suggested
that the emergent abilities of LLMs may be linked to the label space and input data distributional
properties (Min et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022), multitask prompted learning (Sanh et al., 2022),
and pre-training term frequencies (Razeghi et al., 2022). Moreover, Xie et al. (2022); Wang et al.
(2023) have proposed theories that explain in-context learning of LLMs as Bayesian inferences that
use prompts to recover latent concepts. More recently, Wies et al. (2023) established a PAC based
framework for in-context learnability, and Hahn and Goyal (2023) claimed that the emergent abilities
arise through recombination of compositional structures in natural languages.
Motivated by Xie et al. (2022), our study proposes a novel latent space theory to explain the emergent
abilities of LLMs. While Xie et al. (2022) considered a specific type of data distribution generated by
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), we examine general data distributions by exploring the sparsity
property that is universally present in the joint distributions of languages. LLMs, which serve as a
universal density approximator to the marginal distribution, offer a convenient means of exploring
these sparse structures for effective inferences. We categorize languages as either unambiguous or
ε-ambiguous and present quantitative results demonstrating that the emergent abilities of LLMs can
be attributed to Bayesian inference on the sparse joint distribution of languages. Furthermore, we
provide simulation results on synthetic languages that validate our theoretical findings.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   A L ATENT S PACE M ODEL FOR L ANGUAGE G ENERATION
Languages are not created randomly, but with a specific purpose in mind, which is to convey
information. Languages are composed of distinct, relatively independent units, such as sentences
in natural languages or statements in programming languages. These separate pieces of language
are referred to as "messages" in this paper. Each message, represented as x, is in turn composed
of a sequence of symbols from an alphabet with varying lengths. A message is created with the
aim of expressing a single and definite intention, denoted as θ. The set of all possible intentions
constitutes another space, denoted as Θ. We assume that the intention space Θ is a countable set
of many distinct intentions. Each θ may represent a simple intention, which is an element from a
finite set, or a composite intention that is made up of several simpler concepts or components through
concatenation or recursion. Here we only require that the intention space Θ is discrete and complete,
and each element in Θ is unique.
In this study, we investigate a popular stochastic process for language generation (Pieraccini and
Levin, 1992; Miller et al., 1994):
Step one: To generate a message, we first select an intention θ we wish to convey from a prior
distribution q(θ): θ ∼ q(θ). Since the underlying intention θ is not explicitly specified, it is
considered a latent variable, and therefore the intention space Θ is a latent space.
Step two: After sampling an intention, say θ0 , from the prior distribution in the previous step, we
generate a message x to convey the intention using a conditional distribution q(x|θ) by conditioning
on θ0 , i.e., x ∼ q(x|θ0 ). To ensure that the generated message is meaningful, we require that the
conditional distribution q(x|θ) is appropriately formulated such that the generated messages satisfy
one of the following conditions:

      1. Unambiguous condition:
                                                 Pr(θ0 |x) = 1.                                     (1)
         This condition implies that we can precisely infer the underlying intention from the message
         with certainty. If this condition holds for all messages generated in a language, it is called
         an unambiguous language.
      2. Dominant condition with ε-ambiguity:
                                Pr(θ0 |x) ≥ 1 − ε(x)      (with 0 ≤ ε(x) < 1).                       (2)
         In this scenario, we cannot definitively deduce the underlying intention from the observed
         message, but we can do so with a reasonable level of confidence. If every message generated
         in a language satisfy this condition with an ε ∈ [0, 1), it is called an ε-ambiguous language.
         Each generated message has an ε value that measures its degree of ambiguity. The smaller
         the ε value of a message, the more precise and explicit it is. For any given intention θ0 , it
         is possible to revise the message x in order to reduce its ε value. This can be achieved by
         adding more details or choosing a better expression that makes the message less ambiguous.

From the perspective of communication, it makes sense that any practically-useful languages have
been designed or evolved to satisfy either the condition of being unambiguous or the condition of
being dominant. Otherwise, a message x becomes gibberish so that it does not serve the purpose
of communication. It is important to note that neither of these conditions limits the possibility of
expressing a single intention through multiple messages. The key constraint is whether or not we can
confidently infer the intended meaning from each given message. For example, computer languages
are designed to satisfy the unambiguous condition. For any computation task (viewed as an intention
θ0 ), we can always write many different programs to achieve the same purpose. However, once we
are given a piece of computer programs, it will perform one particular computation without any
ambiguity. Even if the program has errors or bugs, it still carries out a specific action in a definitive
manner. On the other hand, natural languages are well known to be notoriously ambiguous. Almost
every message written in a natural language can be misinterpreted one way or another. However, we
argue that every meaningful message in natural languages must satisfy the dominant condition so that
the probability of misunderstanding is bounded by a sufficiently small number. If the probability of
miscommunication is kept low, the message can still be valuable in conveying some information. In
such cases, generating additional messages that are aligned with the same intention can enhance the
likelihood of effectively communicating the intended meaning to a level that is considered adequate.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 1 Assume that two ε-ambiguity messages, i.e. x1 and x2 , are independently generated
under a common intention θ∗ , and their ambiguity levels are ε1 and ε2 respectively. If these two
independent messages are concatenated as a single composite message (x1 , x2 ), the level of ambiguity
in determining the shared intention θ∗ decreases to ε1 ε2 . 1

The joint distribution of languages, whether they are unambiguous or ε-ambiguous, shows an
intriguing property of sparsity (see Appendix B). For any unambiguous language, we have

                                                           q(x) θ = θ0
                         Pr(θ0 |x) = 1 =⇒ q(θ, x) =                                     (3)
                                                             0   θ 6= θ0

For an ε-ambiguous language, we have
                                                                       q(θ0 , x)      1
                               Pr(θ0 |x) ≥ 1 − ε(x) =⇒                            ≥                          (4)
                                                                      q(Θ\θ0 , x)   ε(x)
where Θ\θ0 denotes a complement set containing all elements in Θ except θ0 , and q(Θ\θ0 , x) is
                                                                                                  ∆
defined
P       as the total residue after the contribution of the intention θ0 is taken out: q(Θ\θ0 , x) =
  θ∈Θ,θ6=θ0 q(θ, x) = q(x) − q(θ0 , x).

The above latent space model can be extended to generate a composite segment of languages that is
composed of multiple messages, i.e., X = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xm }. The marginal distribution of X can be
computed based on the latent space model as:
                                                X                                  m
                                                                                   Y
              q(X) = q(x1 , x2 , · · · , xm ) =           q(θ1 , θ2 , · · · , θm )   q(xi |θi )
                                                        θ1 ,··· ,θm                       i=1

where θi (∀i = 1, 2, · · · , m) denotes the latent variable under which each message xi is generated.
If these intentions are coherent, their joint probability q(θ1 , θ2 , · · · , θm ) is high, otherwise it is
low. Obviously, for unambiguous or ε-ambiguous languages, the term corresponding to the actual
intentions of all messages will dominate the above summation over other possible intentions.
The above latent space model for language generation has been known for a long time (Pieraccini
and Levin, 1992; Miller et al., 1994; Blei et al., 2003; Wei et al., 2022a). However, when we apply
this model to any practical language-related task, we face two insurmountable challenges:
i) The latent space Θ is unknown. We can only be certain that Θ is a complete set encompassing all
possible distinct intentions that are relevant to the underlying task. We lack understanding of what
the individual components of θ may be and how to effectively construct them in order to achieve a
complete Θ for any practical application. For a considerable period of time, many AI researchers
have maintained the belief that we cannot achieve artificial general intelligence without possessing
the full knowledge and ability to explicitly specify and model the underlying latent space Θ.
ii) All true probability distributions, i.e. q(θ), q(x|θ), q(x), are not available. In the past, a variety of
statistical models have been proposed to approximate these unknown distributions. However, due
to the constraints in computing resources, it tended to use simple or small models for this purpose,
which could only provide rough estimates for these true distributions and were never able to assess
them with precision.
This paper aims to elucidate why and how the existing practices of utilizing LLMs have inadvertently
addressed the two aforementioned issues, leading to a significant enhancement in the inference
performance without requiring explicit knowledge of Θ. This sudden improvement is often viewed
as the emergent abilities from these extensive language models as they appears simply as a result of
increasing model scale and data size.

3       LLM S ARE A UNIVERSAL DENSITY APPROXIMATOR OF MARGINAL
        DISTRIBUTION q(x)

For any message x in a language consisting of T symbols, x = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xT }, according to the
general product rule of probability, we have
                 q(x) = q(x1 , x2 , · · · , xT ) = q(x1 )q(x2 |x1 ) · · · q(xT |x1 , x2 , · · · , xT −1 ).
    1
        See a detailed proof in Appendix A.


                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If we can construct a statistical model to accurately compute these conditional probabilities condi-
tioned on any history string (no more than T − 1 symbols), denoted as h for notational convenience,
we will be able to compute the true marginal distribution q(x) for any message of no more than T
symbols. Let’s denote this statistical model as pΛ (x|h), where Λ stands for all parameters of this
model, we may use this model to compute a distribution for any x (no more than T symbols) as
follows:
             pΛ (x) = pΛ (x1 , x2 , · · · , xT ) = pΛ (x1 )pΛ (x2 |x1 ) · · · pΛ (xT |x1 , x2 , · · · , xT −1 )
Generally speaking, pΛ (x) 6= q(x) because the statistical model can only be viewed as a rough
approximation of the true marginal distribution q(x) at best. In the following, we will discuss a
special case where a sufficiently large statistical model is constructed so that pΛ (x) can approach
q(x) asymptotically.

Definition 1 A parametric statistical model pΛ (x) is called a universal density approximator if
there exists a set of parameters Λ for any given probability distribution q(x) so that pΛ (x) can
approximate q(x) up to any precision:

                              ∀ q(x), ∀  > 0, ∃Λ :           q(x) − pΛ (x) ≤   (∀x).

Lemma 1 A composition of some universal function approximators and the softmax function leads
to a universal density approximator to the above conditional distribution q(x|h).

For any history h, q(x|h) is a multinomial distribution (of all unique symbols in alphabet), we
can take logarithm to obtain the required input for the softmax function to derive this multinomial
distribution. A set of universal function approximators can be constructed to map any h to its required
input so that the given conditional distribution is modelled precisely (Asadi and Jiang, 2020; Jiang,
2021).

Lemma 2 A sufficiently large transformer model is a universal function approximator.

Yun et al. (2020) have proved that transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) can universally ap-
proximate arbitrary continuous sequence-to-sequence functions. An immediate corollary is that
transformers can precisely map each input sequence h to any output values.

Theorem 1 If a statistical model pΛ (x) is a universal density approximator, the model parameters
Λn is the maximum likelihood estimation from a training set consisting of n i.i.d. samples randomly
drawn from any distribution q(x), then we have
                                                 lim    pΛn (x) = q(x)
                                                n→∞

for all x.

Theorem 1 can be viewed as a corollary from the consistency property of maximum likelihood
estimation (Lehmann and Casella, 1998; Hogg et al., 2019). See Appendix C for a proof.
As in today’s large language models (LLMs), if we construct a universal density approximator
pΛ (x|h) for any history h (no more than T − 1 symbols) using the so-called GPT structures (Radford
et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), and furthermore if we use maximum likelihood estimation to derive
its parameters, denoted as Λ∗ , from an infinite number of text messages that are presumed to be
generated from the above latent space model (as in Brown et al. (2020)), according to Lemmas 1 and
2, and Theorem 1, we have
                                            pΛ∗ (x) = q(x)                                       (5)
for all x (no more than T symbols) generated from the same latent space model. In other words,
today’s LLM techniques allow us to accurately assess the margin distribution of languages, which
was not possible in the past. In Merrill et al. (2022), a similar assertion is put forth, suggesting that an
ideal language model, having thoroughly learned its intended distribution, can effectively establish
the entailment relationship between sentences.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING WITH LLM S
Large Language models (LLMs) have surprised many NLP researchers with their ability to compre-
hend any given text prompt and generate highly relevant fluent responses. What is remarkable is
that LLMs are trained through a predict-next-token approach, which is not explicitly linked with the
semantic meanings of languages. However, it is easy to tell that this predict-next-token approach is
essentially the maximum likelihood estimation of the marginal distribution q(x). Assume an LLM
Λ∗ is well trained from an infinite number of text messages so that this model converges to the
true marginal distribution of languages as shown in eq.(5). Despite this seemingly limited training
approach, LLMs demonstrate a remarkable capacity to understand the content of any text prompt and
generate coherent and appropriate responses. Here, we will explain how this happens in LLMs.
Assume the prompt x is a message generated from the above latent-space-based language generation
process, where x is generated based on a hidden intention θx . We do not know exactly what θx is but
we are sure it belongs to the latent space Θ. For simplicity, we first assume the language generation
process is unambiguous. When we sample the LLM Λ∗ to generate a reply conditioned on the prompt
x, we can easily compute the distribution of all possible replies y as follows:
                                               pΛ∗ (x, y)   q(x, y)
                                 pΛ∗ (y|x) =              =
                                                pΛ∗ (x)      q(x)
Let’s use θ to indicate the latent variable in the above language generation process, we further derive
the numerator as follows:
                            X                   X
                 q(x, y) =       q(x, θ, y) =       q(x, θ) q(y|x, θ) = q(x) q(y|x, θx )
                           θ∈Θ               θ∈Θ

The last step in the above relies on the sparsity property of unambiguous languages in (3). Substituting
it to the above equation, we further have
                                       pΛ∗ (y|x) = q(y|x, θx )
In other words, when we sample the LLMs to generate a reply based on the prompt x, it essentially
uses the exactly same language generation process conditioned on both the prompt and its true
unknown intention θx . Even though we do not know what θx is, the magic of the LLMs lies at that
this unknown intention can be implicitly explored by the LLMs in such a way that the reply y is
generated under this intention to continue the prompt x. This is the fundamental reason why the
LLMs can perfectly understand the meaning of any text prompt and accordingly generate a highly
relevant and fluent reply because the conditional sampling on LLMs is essentially identical to the
same language generation process that yields a text message under the intention θx in the first place.
Next, let’s extend the above result to ε-ambiguous languages.

Proposition 2 For ε-ambiguous languages, the conditional distribution of LLMs and the true condi-
tional distribution in the language generation process are bounded as:

                                   pΛ∗ (y|x) − q(y|x, θx ) ≤ ε(x)                                    (6)

where ε(x) denotes the ambiguity of the prompt.

See Appendix D for a detailed proof. Proposition 2 suggests that the ambiguity in language generation
deviates the distribution of all possible replies from the ideal distribution in the language generation.
However, their difference is bounded by the ambiguity of the prompt, i.e. ε(x). This explains
why choosing a well-crafted prompt can minimize the margin of error and result in more proficient
responses (Liu et al., 2021; Rubin et al., 2022).

5    I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING IN LLM S
One impressive capability of large language models (LLMs) is their ability to perform few-shot
in-context learning. Even when presented with tasks that were not included in their initial training,
LLMs can quickly learn these tasks by observing just a few examples without any need to modify


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


their model parameters. After observing a few such examples, the LLM can immediately apply the
newly acquired skill to any new cases following the examples.
Let’s first explain the typical setting for few-shot in-context learning in LLMs. Assume we
want to teach an pre-trained LLM Λ∗ to conduct a new task by providing an instruction text x,
along with a few independent examples of input-output pairs associated with this new task, i.e.
(i1 , o1 ), (i2 , o2 ), · · · , (im , om ). We further assume that the underlying unknown intention associated
with this task is denoted as θ∗ . In other words, both the instruction x and all provided examples
are generated independently under the same intention θ∗ of this task (Xie et al., 2022). More-
over, since these examples correctly reflect how this task is performed, we have q(ok | ik , θ∗ ) ≈ 1
(∀k = 1, 2, · · · , m).
We have the following in-context learning results for unambiguous languages and ε-ambiguous
languages, respectively.
Proposition 3 Under the above setting, for unambiguous languages, the conditional probability
distribution of the LLM Λ∗ given the instruction prompt and all examples and a new case is equal to
the true conditional distribution used in language process under the common intention θ∗ :
                        pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 ) = q(y|im+1 , θ∗ )         (7)
See a detailed proof in Appendix E. Proposition 3 suggests that, if we sample the conditional
distribution of the LLM, it is equivalent to sampling the ideal conditional distribution in language
generation under the shared true intention θ∗ and the new input ii+1 . As this conditional distribution
peaks at the correct output om+1 , i.e. q(om+1 | im+1 , θ∗ ) ≈ 1, we will get om+1 at a high probability.
Moreover, as we have seen at above, for unambiguous languages, it does not help much by providing
more examples for in-context learning. Next, let’s see what may happen if we perform in-context
learning on ε-ambiguous languages.
Proposition 4 Under the same setting, for ε-ambiguous languages, we have
                                                                                m
                                                                                Y
  pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 ) − q(y|im+1 , θ∗ ) ≤ ε(x)ε(im+1 )   ε(ik , ok ) ≤ εm+2
                                                                                                 0   (8)
                                                                                k=1
where ε(x) is the ambiguity of the prompt, ε(ik , ok ) the ambiguity of k-th example, and ε(im+1 ) for
im+1 . Here ε0 stands for the maximum ambiguity among the prompt and all examples.
See a detailed proof in Appendix F. Proposition 4 shows that LLMs deviate from the ideal generation
process due to the language ambiguity but the error bound exponentially decreases with respect to
the number of provided examples. As a result, for ambiguous languages, we tend to have better
performance if more relevant examples are provided for few-shot in-context learning. This is
consistent with what has been observed in many in-context learning experiments on LLMs (Brown
et al., 2020).

6    C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPTING AND F INE - TUNING IN LLM S
If we are given a composite argument X, consisting of a sequence of multiple messages as
X = {x0 , x1 , · · · , xm }, where these messages are generated under their own intentions, i.e.,
{θ0 , θ1 , · · · , θm }. If these messages in the argument are coherent as a sequence of reasoning
steps, it represents a higher level chain of thought, characterised by the sequence of these underlying
intentions: θ0 → θ1 → · · · → θm . Empirical results have shown that it will significantly improve the
chance for LLMs to correctly arrive at the final conclusion if these intermediate reasoning steps are
explicitly specified in prompts, which is often called chain-of-thought prompting. Here let’s use the
latent space model to explain how the chain-of-thought prompting may help LLMs to correctly infer
the final conclusion in multi-step reasoning tasks.
Similarly, we start with a simple case for unambiguous languages. Taking the above composite
argument X as example, assume x0 is the question, and x1 , · · · , xm−1 denotes all intermediate
reasoning steps, and xm the final conclusion. If we only prompt the question without using chain-of-
thought, the probability for an LLM to arrive at the correct conclusion is computed as:
                       q(x0 , xm )   q(θ0 , θm )q(x0 |θ0 )q(xm |θm )
      pΛ∗ (xm |x0 ) =              =                                 = q(θm |θ0 )q(xm |θm )     (9)
                         q(x0 )              q(θ0 )q(x0 |θ0 )

                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If the argument from x0 to xm requires many reasoning steps, the direct transition from the intention
θ0 to θm may be rare and under-represented in the training corpus so that q(θm |θ0 ) is extremely small.
If we directly prompt the LLMs as above, the chance to arrive at the correct conclusion is slim. On
the other hand, if we use the chain-of-thought prompting, the conditional probability is computed as:
                                          q(x0 , x1 , · · · , xm−1 , xm )
    pΛ∗ (xm |x0 , x1 , · · · , xm−1 ) =                                   = q(θm |θ0 , · · · , θm−1 )q(xm |θm )
                                            q(x0 , x1 , · · · , xm−1 )
As θm is an immediate reasoning step after θ0 → θ1 · · · → θm−1 , the transition to θm occurs more
often in the training corpus, as there are many other training examples that may follow the same
reasoning chain. As a result, the transition probabilities q(θm |θ0 , θ1 , · · · , θm−1 ) are higher since
more information is conditioned. This makes it more likely for the LLM to arrive at xm by going
through θ0 → θ1 · · · → θm−1 than by transitioning directly from θ0 to θm .

7    A LIGNING LLM S TO F OLLOW I NSTRUCTION
Assume that an LLM Λ∗ is prompted with an instruction x, which is a message generated under an
unknown intention θx . Let’s consider the conditional distribution of all possible responses y that may
be generated by the LLM under this instruction. For unambiguous languages, we have
                                                   q(x, θ0 , y, θ)
                                        P P
                             q(x, y)        0
                                                                     X
              pΛ∗ (y|x) =            = θ Pθ               0
                                                                   =      q(θ|θx )q(y|θ)            (10)
                              q(x)              θ 0 q(x, θ )               θ∈Θ
         0
where θ and θ denote the latent variables to generate the instruction and its response.
Similarly, for ε-ambiguous languages, we have
                                         X
                             pΛ∗ (y|x) −      q(θ|θx )q(y|θ) ≤ ε(x)                                          (11)
                                                  θ∈Θ

where ε(x) denotes the ambiguity of the instruction.
The results presented above demonstrate that when an LLM receives an instruction x, all possible
responses follow a mixture distribution. Each specific response is generated by first selecting an
intention θ based on the transition probability from the prompt intention, i.e. q(θ|θx ). Then, a
response y is generated by sampling the conditional distribution, i.e. q(y|θ), to reflect the selected
intention. Therefore, the underlying intention of any generated response largely depends on the
transition probability from the prompt intention, i.e. q(θ|θx ). If the LLM’s training set is sufficiently
large, these transition probabilities tend to take higher values for those intentions strongly related to
the prompt intention θx , whether through causation or mere association. However, some of these
intentions may be harmful or offensive, so LLMs need to be fine-tuned to avoid generating hurtful
responses (Ouyang et al., 2022).
To fine-tune an LLM, a number of responses to common prompts are manually labeled as good or
bad by human annotators. These labeled responses are then used to train the LLM via reinforcement
learning so that the probabilities of generating bad responses are significantly reduced. By adjusting a
single transition probability q(θ|θx ), it is possible to improve not only one particular instruction x but
also many other instructions generated under the same intention. This is why instruction fine-tuning
for LLMs is often very effective (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022).

8    S IMULATION E XPERIMENTS
In order to verify the theoretical results on ε-ambiguous languages, we need to create synthetic
languages with explicitly known distributions, and a simple mechanism to control the level of
ambiguity. In this paper, we propose using a doubly-embedded Markov chain model to generate
both unambiguous and ε-ambiguous languages. To generate the synthetic languages, we begin
by sampling an intention from a circular Markov chain of six states that moves in one direction:
θ0 → θ1 → θ2 → θ3 → θ4 → θ5 → θ0 . Each state corresponds to a distinct intention, and
has a 50% chance of staying and a 50% chance of jumping to the next state. After sampling an
intention, we use another intention-specific Markov chain to generate a message for that intention.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustration of the convergence of the transformer-based LLMs as more and more training data is
added. Left: the cross-entropy objective functions. Right: The average difference between the probability
distributions pΛ∗ (x) and q(x) on an unseen validation set.



These intention-dependent Markov chains consists of 18 states, corresponding to 18 alphabetic letters
(from a to r). To generate unambiguous languages, we use only three distinct letters to construct a
message for each intention, such as using only {a, b, c} for θ0 , {d, e, f } for θ1 , and so on. In this
case, each intention-dependent Markov chain has only 3 × 3 nonzero probabilities (corresponding to
the three selected letters) in its 18 × 18 transition matrix. On the other hand, to generate ε-ambiguous
languages, we inject small amounts of noise into these sparse transition matrices so that each letter
has a small probability of jumping to other letters rather than those dedicated to the same intention.
By varying the amount of noise added to the transition matrices, we can simulate different levels of
ε-ambiguity. After generating a message for a given intention using an intention-dependent Markov
chain, a newline character is appended to signify the message’s end. After that, the next intention
is selected using the circular Markov chain, and another message is generated for that intention in
the same way. This process can be repeated as many times as desired to generate multiple messages.
The true distributions of these generated languages can be precisely calculated from all transition
matrices of the doubly-embedded Markov chain model. Therefore, these synthetic languages can be
used in simulation experiments to verify the theoretical results on ε-ambiguous languages.


8.1   C ONVERGENCE OF LLM S

For our experiments, we train a character-level GPT-like model (Radford et al., 2018) on the synthetic
languages we generated. The GPT model has three layers and about 21 million parameters. We vary
the amount of training data and the block size used by transformers in each layer. The convergence
of transformer-based GPT models is depicted in Figure 1, as a function of the amount of training
data. The models exhibit a rapid convergence on the simple synthetic language. The left panel of
the figure shows the learning curves of three transformers of different block sizes, using the regular
cross-entropy objective function (equivalent to the negative log-likelihood function). In the right
panel, the average difference between the model distribution pΛ∗ (x) and the true distribution q(x)
is shown when evaluated on an independent validation set. The results clearly indicate that the gap
between these two probability distributions reduces quickly as the transformer models observe more
training data. Interestingly, transformers model the true distribution slightly better with a larger block
size, even though this does not increase the number of model parameters.


8.2   L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING WITH LLM S

To validate Proposition 2, we first use the trained language model to generate a partial message
x based on an intention θx . We then prompt the LLM with the partial message x and calculate
the KL divergence between the model’s conditional distribution pΛ∗ (y|x) and the true conditional
distribution on the underlying intention q(y|x, θx ). In the left of Figure 2, the average KL divergence
of three languages with varying levels of ambiguity is displayed, demonstrating that the gap is small
for unambiguous languages and slightly increases as the languages become more ambiguous.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Illustration of language understanding (left) and in-context learning (right) of LLMs on synthetic
languages with various levels of ambiguity.



8.3   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING IN LLM S

To verify the results presented in Propositions 3 and 4 regarding in-context learning, we follow a
two-step process. Firstly, we generate multiple messages based on the same intention using the
trained model. Then, we concatenate these messages to create a single prompt for the LLM. We then
compare the KL divergence between the model’s conditional distribution and the true distribution
under the correct intention as a function of the number of independent messages in the prompt. The
results, as shown in the right panel of Figure 2, demonstrate that the average KL divergence remains
small and constant for unambiguous languages, but increases for ε-ambiguous languages. However,
the gap for ε-ambiguous languages can be reduced by adding more messages to the prompt.



9     F INAL R EMARKS

In this paper, we have presented a novel latent space theory that explains the remarkable capabilities
of LLMs. Our theory categorizes languages as either unambiguous or ε-ambiguous, and establishes
quantitative results that attribute the LLMs’ emergent abilities to their unique approach for exploring
sparse structures in joint distributions through being a universal approximator of the marginal
distribution. Simulation experiments on synthetic data have confirmed our findings related to
language ambiguity.
This paper assumes all languages are generated from a latent intention space. The key idea in this
paper is that, without explicitly knowing how this intention space is constructed, LLMs can implicitly
accessing the conditional distribution of text contingent on any intent in this space, provided that the
model and data are sufficiently large. This elucidates the reason behind LLMs’ ability to produce
text resembling human replies, as these conditional distribution is essential in language generation, a
process akin to human communication.
Our theoretical findings primarily revolve around an asymptotic analysis applied when a sufficiently
expressive model is effectively trained on a substantial amount of data. In this scenario, eq.(5) holds
rigorously, serving as the fundamental basis for all the results detailed in our paper. In practical
settings, as we train increasingly larger models with progressively larger datasets, it is described by
the limit in Theorem 1. This consistent convergence suggests that when we utilize more data and
more capable models for training, the disparity between the two distributions in eq.(5) diminishes.
As a result, we can draw the following conclusions: i) For small models, the gap between these
distributions can be arbitrarily large, rendering the content discussed in our paper inapplicable; ii) As
we enhance the model’s capabilities and increase the volume of training data, up to a certain point,
the gap becomes sufficiently small, allowing these emergent abilities to commence; iii) Beyond that,
the utilization of even more data and increasingly capable models enhances the manifestation of the
emergent abilities in Wei et al. (2022b) as it well approaches the asymptotic results in our paper. In
essence, our theoretical findings imply the scaling behavior of LLMs and suggest that the emergence
of these abilities is contingent upon the scale of the model and the amount of training data employed.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Behnam Asadi and Hui Jiang. On approximation capabilities of relu activation and softmax output layer in
  neural networks. In preprint arXiv:2002.04060, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.04060.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 3:993–1022, March 2003. ISSN 1532-4435. URL https://www.jmlr.org/papers/
  volume3/blei03a/blei03a.pdf.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen
  Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
  Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark,
  Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models
  are few-shot learners. In preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
  14165.

Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K. Lampinen, Jane X. Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H. Richemond,
   Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learning in trans-
   formers. In preprint arXiv:2205.05055, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05055.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul
  Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha
  Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prab-
  hakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael
  Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk
  Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito,
  David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani
  Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor
  Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,
  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck,
  Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. In preprint
  arXiv:2204.02311, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai, Mirac
  Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha
  Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun
  Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and
  Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. In preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416.

Michael Hahn and Navin Goyal. A theory of emergent in-context learning as implicit structure induction. In
  preprint arXiv:2303.07971, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07971.

Robert Hogg, Joseph W. McKean, and Allen T. Craig. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics. Pearson., 2019.
  ISBN 9781292264769. URL https://books.google.ca/books?id=wz0QyQEACAAJ.

Hui Jiang. Why learning of large-scale neural networks behaves like convex optimization. In preprint
  arXiv:1903.02140, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02140.

Hui Jiang. Machine Learning Fundamentals. Cambridge University Press, 2021. URL https://books.
  google.ca/books?id=jSFGEAAAQBAJ.

Erich L. Lehmann and George Casella. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, USA,
   second edition, 1998. URL https://books.google.ca/books?id=4f24CgAAQBAJ.

Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What makes good
   in-context examples for GPT-3? In preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
   2101.06804.

William Merrill, Alex Warstadt, and Tal Linzen. Entailment semantics can be extracted from an ideal language
  model. In preprint arXiv:2209.12407, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.12407.

Scott Miller, Robert Bobrow, Robert Ingria, and Richard Schwartz. Hidden understanding models of natural
  language. ACL ’94, page 25–32, USA, 1994. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/
  981732.981736. URL https://doi.org/10.3115/981732.981736.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? In preprint arXiv:2202.12837,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.12837.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
  Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training
  language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.

Roberto Pieraccini and Esther Levin. Stochastic representation of semantic structure for speech understand-
  ing. Speech Communication, 11(2):283–288, 1992. ISSN 0167-6393. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
  0167-6393(92)90022-Y. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  016763939290022Y. Eurospeech ’91.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language understanding by
  generative pre-training. 2018.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
  Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. In
  preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.

Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV au2, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot reasoning. In preprint arXiv:2202.07206, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2202.07206.

Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context learning. In
  preprint arXiv:2112.08633, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08633.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
  Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti
  Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong,
  Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea
  Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Tali Bers, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf,
  and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In preprint
  arXiv:2110.08207, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.08207.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.

Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, and William Yang Wang. Large language models are implicitly topic models:
  Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. In preprint arXiv:2301.11916, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11916.

Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in downstream
  tasks? an analysis of head and prompt tuning. In preprint arXiv:2106.09226, 2022a. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.09226.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten
   Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff
   Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models. In preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022b.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07682.

Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning.                 In preprint
  arXiv:2303.07895, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07895.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context learning
  as implicit bayesian inference. In preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2111.02080.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are transformers
  universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ByxRM0Ntvr.


                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Appendix
A    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
For each massage x1 , x2 , we have
                                                                X Pr(x1 , θ1 )
                       Pr(θ1 = θ∗ |x1 ) ≥ 1 − ε1 =⇒                                 ≤ ε1
                                                                         Pr(x1 )
                                                               θ1 6=θ∗

                                                                X Pr(x2 , θ2 )
                       Pr(θ2 = θ∗ |x2 ) ≥ 1 − ε2 =⇒                                 ≤ ε2
                                                                         Pr(x2 )
                                                               θ2 6=θ∗

When we concatenate two independent messages x1 and x2 into a single composite message (x1 , x2 ).
We treat it as one message rather two separate ones, and meanwhile we only deduce a single intention
out of it (rather than two separate intentions). Therefore, this allows us to consider a sub-space in the
latent space where the intentions of these two messages are tied together.
When we deduce the common intention θ∗ from the composite message (x1 , x2 ), we have
                                             X
       Pr(θ1 = θ∗ , θ2 = θ∗ x1 , x2 ) = 1 −       Pr(θ1 = λ, θ2 = λ x1 , x2 )
                                                       λ6=θ∗
                                                        X Pr(x1 , θ1 = λ, x2 , θ2 = λ)
                                           =    1−
                                                                         Pr(x1 , x2 )
                                                       λ6=θ∗
                                                        X Pr(x1 , θ1 = λ) Pr(x2 , θ2 = λ)
                                           =    1−
                                                               Pr(x1 ) Pr(x2 )
                                                       λ6=θ∗
                                                         X Pr(x , θ )    X Pr(x , θ )
                                                                         1   1                  2   2
                                           ≥ 1−
                                                                     Pr(x1 )                 Pr(x2 )
                                                           θ1 6=θ∗                 θ2 6=θ∗
                                           ≥ 1 − ε1 ε2

B    T HE SPARSITY PROPERTY OF THE JOINT DISTRIBUTION OF LANGUAGES
For any unambiguous language, we have
                                                                     q(θ0 , x)
                       Pr(θ0 |x) = 1       =⇒          Pr(θ0 |x) =              =1
                                                                       q(x)
                                           =⇒         q(x) = q(θ0 , x)

                                                                    q(x) θ = θ0
                                           =⇒         q(θ, x) =
                                                                      0      θ 6= θ0

For an ε-ambiguous language, we have
                                                         q(θ0 , x)
           Pr(θ0 |x) ≥ 1 − ε(x)      =⇒     Pr(θ0 |x) =            ≥ 1 − ε(x)
                                                           q(x)

                                     =⇒      q(θ0 , x) ≥ 1 − ε(x) q(x)

                                     =⇒     q(θ0 , x) ≥ 1 − ε(x) q(θ0 , x) + q(Θ\θ0 , x)
                                             q(θ0 , x)    1 − ε(x)     1
                                     =⇒                 ≥          ≈
                                            q(Θ\θ0 , x)     ε(x)     ε(x)
where Θ\θ0 denotes a complement set containing all elements in Θ except θ0 , and q(Θ\θ0 , x) is
defined as the total residue after the contribution of the intention θ0 is taken out:
                                       ∆
                                            X
                          q(Θ\θ0 , x) =             q(θ, x) = q(x) − q(θ0 , x)
                                          θ∈Θ,θ6=θ0


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
As the consistency is a well-accepted property of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), the result
in Theorem 1 should not be too surprised.
Firstly, due to that the model pΛ (x) is a universal density approximator, for any given distribution
q(x), there exists a set of model parameters, denoted as Λ∗ , to make pΛ∗ (x) = q(x) hold for all x.
Secondly, we define an expected log-likelihood function as follows:
                              Z                      Z
                      l(Λ) =     q(x) ln pΛ (x)dx =     pΛ∗ (x) ln pΛ (x)dx
                                       x                        x

Based on Jensen’s inequality, for any Λ 6= Λ∗ , we have l(Λ) ≤ l(Λ∗ ) because of
                      Z                          Z
                         pΛ∗ (x) ln pΛ (x)dx − pΛ∗ (x) ln pΛ∗ (x)dx ≤ 0
                            x                           x
Therefore, Λ∗ is the maximum point of the above function l(Λ), i.e. l(Λ∗ ) = maxΛ l(Λ).
Thirdly, the maximum likelihood estimation Λn is the maximum point of the following empirical
log-likelihood function:
                                               n
                                            1X
                                   ln (Λ) =       ln pΛ (xi )
                                            n i=1
where {x1 , x2 , · · · , xn } are n i.i.d. samples randomly drawn from the distribution pΛ∗ (x). Accord-
ing to the law of large numbers, we have
                                                lim ln (Λ) = l(Λ)
                                                n→∞
As a result, the maximum value of ln (Λ) converges to the maximum value of l(Λ). That is
                                      lim max ln (Λ) = max l(Λ) = l(Λ∗ )
                                      n→∞   Λ               Λ

At last, because neural networks, including transformer models, usually do not satisfy the identifica-
tion requirement, we can not immediately conclude Λn → Λ∗ as n → ∞. Following the technique in
Jiang (2019), under the condition of over-parameterization, the model can be mapped to a canonical
model space where the identification requirement holds. By doing that, we conclude that if the model
is sufficiently large, some simple optimization methods, such as stochastic gradient descent, will
ensure that Λn converges to a point that achieves the same objective function values as l(Λ∗ ). In
other words, it converges to a model that is at least as good as Λ∗ .

D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
We first start with the conditional distribution of the LLM Λ∗ as:
                                          pΛ∗ (x, y)     q(x, y)
                        pΛ∗ (y|x) =                   =
                                           pΛ∗ (x)        q(x)
                                                         P
                                          q(x, θx , y) + θ6=θx q(x, θ, y)
                                    =                    P
                                            q(x, θx ) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)
                                                         P
                                          q(x, θx , y) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)q(y|x, θ)
                                    =                       P
                                                q(x, θx ) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)

Due to 0 ≤ q(y|x, θ)) ≤ 1, we have
                                                                     P
                      q(x, θx , y)                    q(x, θx , y) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)
                         P              ≤ pΛ∗ (y|x) ≤               P
              q(x, θx ) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)                q(x, θx ) + θ6=θx q(x, θ)
                   P
                       θ6=θx q(x,θ)
If we denote δ =       q(x,θx )       , then we have
                                  q(y|x, θx )               q(y|x, θx ) + δ
                                              ≤ pΛ∗ (y|x) ≤
                                    1+δ                         1+δ

                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


According to the sparsity property of ε-ambiguous languages, we have 0 ≤ δ ≤ ε(x). As a result, we
have
                             q(y|x, θx )
                                         ≤ pΛ∗ (y|x) ≤ q(y|x, θx ) + ε(x)
                              1 + ε(x)

        1
Due to 1+ε > 1 − ε, we have


                                      pΛ∗ (y|x) − q(y|x, θx ) ≤ ε(x)


E    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

Here we assume the language generation is unambiguous. Let’s consider how the LLMs will compute
the following conditional probability given the prompt x, all examples {ik , ok | k = 1, 2, · · · , m},
and an new input im+1 for the same task. Note that all these conditions are generated under the same
intention but they are independent as they are not generated by conditioning each other. However, the
reply y is not independent from these conditions because y is generated conditioning on all of them.



                   pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 )

                     pΛ∗ x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 , y
                   =
                      pΛ∗ x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1

                     q x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 , y
                   =
                      q x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1
                     P
                       θ0 ,θ1 ,··· ,θm q x, θ0 , i1 , o1 , θ1 , · · · , im , om , θm , im+1 , y
                   = P
                         θ0 ,θ1 ,··· ,θm q x, θ0 , i1 , o1 , θ1 , · · · , im , om , θm , im+1
                     P                            Qm
                       θ0 ,θ1 ,··· ,θm q(x, θ0 )     k=1 q(ik , ok , θk )q(im+1 , y|θ0 , · · · , θm )
                   = P                             Q   m
                         θ0 ,θ1 ,··· ,θm q(x, θ0 )     k=1 q(ik , ok , θk )q(im+1 |θ0 , · · · , θm )
                                Qm
                     q(x, θ∗ ) k=1 q(ik , ok , θ∗ )q(im+1 , y|θ∗ )                p(im+1 , y|θ∗ )
                   =               Qm                                          =
                      q(x, θ∗ ) k=1 q(ik , ok , θ∗ )q(im+1 |θ∗ )                    q(im+1 |θ∗ )
                   = q(y|im+1 , θ∗ )


At the above, we have applied the sparsity property of unambiguous languages in eq.(3) because the
prompt and all examples are generated under the same intention θ∗ . For all other intentions θ 6= θ∗ ,
we have q(x, θ) = 0, and q(ik , ok , θ) = 0, and q(ik+1 , θ) = 0.


F    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4

Under the ICL setting, we assume all provided examples are created independently for a common
intention θ∗ , which is the same as the initial instruction text x. As a result, we only need to consider
a subspace of the latent space, where all underlying intentions are tied together.



               q x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1
                 X
               =       q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
                  λ∈Θ


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For ε-ambiguous languages, as in Appendix E, we can derive:
     pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 )
       P
           λ∈Θ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ, y
     = P
            λ∈Θ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
                                                       P
       q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im+1 , θ∗ , y + λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ, y
     =                                                 P
           q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im+1 , θ∗ + λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
                                                                                                                                       (12)
                                                            P
       q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im+1 , θ∗ , y + λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
     ≤                                                P
        q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im+1 , θ∗ + λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
                                                                               =η
                                zP                                        }|                                      {
                             λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 =   λ, i 1 , o  ,
                                                          1 1θ  =   λ,  · · · , im , o ,
                                                                                      m mθ    = λ, i    , θ
                                                                                                     m+1 m+1  = λ
       q(y|im+1 , θ∗ ) +
                                             q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im , om , θ∗ , im+1
     =            P
                      λ6=θ∗ q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
             1+
                                     q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im , om , θ∗ , im+1
                  |                                             {z                                          }
                                                                       =η

At above, we have applied the following inequality:

      X
             q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ, y
     λ6=θ∗
         X
     =           q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ q(y|θ0 , · · · , θm+1 )
         λ6=θ∗
         X
     ≤           q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ             [ due to q(y|θ0 , · · · , θm+1 ) ≤ 1]
         λ6=θ∗

We further consider η:
                 P
                         λ6=θ∗ qx, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im , om , θm = λ, im+1 , θm+1 = λ
     0≤η         =
                                         q x, θ∗ , i1 , o1 , θ∗ , · · · , im , om , θ∗ , im+1
                      P                 Qm
                       λ6=θ∗ q(x, θ0 )         q(ik , ok , θk )q(im+1 , θm+1 )
                 =                   Qmk=1
                            q(x, θ∗ ) k q(ik , ok , θ∗ )q(im+1 , θ∗ )
                                          m P
                      P                                                      P
                       θ0 6=θ∗ q(x, θ0 )        θk 6=θ∗ q(ik , ok , θk )        θm+1 6=θ∗ q(im+1 , θm+1 )
                                         Y
                 ≤
                           q(x, θ∗ )                     q(ik , ok , θ∗ )             q(im+1 , θ∗ )
                                              k=1
                                        m
                                        Y
                 ≤    ε(x)ε(im+1 )            ε(ik , ok ) ≤ εm+2
                                                             0
                                        k=1
where ε0 denotes the maximum ambiguity among the prompt and all examples.
On the other hand, due to
                  X
                       q x, θ0 = λ, i1 , o1 , θ1 = λ, · · · , im+1 , θm+1 = λ, y ≥ 0
                      λ6=θ∗

we can derive the lower bound of eq.(12) as follows:
                                                                               q(y|im+1 , θ∗ )
                              pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 ) ≥
                                                                                   1+η
Similar to the last step in Appendix D, for ε-ambiguous languages, we finally have
                                                                                 m
                                                                                 Y
   pΛ∗ (y|x, i1 , o1 , · · · , im , om , im+1 ) − q(y|im+1 , θ∗ ) ≤ ε(x)ε(im+1 )   ε(ik , ok ) ≤ εm+2
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                            k=1


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: A 6-state circular Markov chain model is used to simulate the prior intention distribution q(θ) in the
latent space model for language generation.


G     M ORE D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
G.1    DATA G ENERATION

We use a 6-state circular Markov chain, as shown in Figure 3, to model the prior distribution of
intentions, i.e. q(θ), in the step one of the latent space model for language generation. Each state
corresponds to a distinct intention. As a result, the latent space Θ consists of only 6 elements.
Given each intention, we use another intention-specific Markov chain to generate a message for it.
These intention-dependent Markov chains consists of 18 states, corresponding to 18 alphabetic letters
(from a to r). To generate unambiguous languages, we use only three distinct letters to construct a
message for each intention, i.e. only using {a, b, c} for θ0 , {d, e, f } for θ1 , {g, h, i} for θ2 , {j, k, l}
for θ3 , {m, n, o} for θ4 , and {p, q, r} for θ5 . In this case, each intention-dependent Markov chain has
only 3 × 3 nonzero probabilities (corresponding to the three selected letters) in its 18 × 18 transition
matrix. On the other hand, to generate ε-ambiguous languages, we inject small amounts of noise
into these sparse transition matrices so that each letter has a small probability of jumping to other
letters rather than those dedicated to the same intention. By varying the amount of noise added to
the transition matrices, we can simulate different levels of ambiguity. After generating a message
for a given intention using an intention-dependent Markov chain, a newline character is appended to
signify the message’s end. For the sake of simplicity, we generate all messages under the assumption
that every message has a consistent length, comprised of 20 letters and one newline character. After
each message is generated, using the circular Markov chain, the next intention will be selected, and
another message will be generated for that intention in the same way. This process can be repeated as
many times as desired to generate any number of messages.
Some unambiguous messages generated in this way are shown below as an example:

...
qqpqrqrqqqqrrqprqqqqq
abccbacbaabbbbcaaacba
effeffeeffffffffeffff
fefffffeddddfeeffffff
deeedfedeffeedfffffff
hgiiiiiiigihgihgiihih
jjjklkjjkjkjkjkllkkkk
kjkkkllkjkjjjkllljkkk
omnoononmnononommonom
nonoonomnnoonomnononm
rrqprrrqpqrqqprqrrrqp
baaabaaacacaabaaaaaac
baacaacbaaaaabaabbaca
caaacbabbacaaccaaabca


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cabacbcabbaaccccacaaa
...

Some generated ambiguous messages (ε = 0.06) are shown below as an example:

...
qqqqqqafdrqqqppribmmf
aagaaaraaojogikfdjone
aaahdnbabcadnkdggkkep
cmjjfdiqhaacmbcnpaajr
deeffedelokhhhdffemef
iiiiihhghcoqqcpbliiig
ghigkabkecemgjkeefbii
iihqbrghghhhghghkmnpn
kfgoaqdgholkljkhondjc
oblohjfnnmnanhjbhonom
nfkpjgqoomaibpragedak
qrqrrprqhehdloajilopq
rlljmprrqqrrhgrrqqqpr
rqhijkpjmkcmlfeicopnr
...

Finally, some more ambiguous messages (ε = 0.11) are shown below as an example:

...
diporcqddofiffeffdqnc
fafnakjcdmcdbfeoqaeff
dedfepnddedenpaghceer
ededlapbnpipnirkpqqan
eialkcpfefopqojpmrffe
ffeddefcaaffipkbcohak
dffederonkqldeemkaclp
djhfpbrbjpkpcgnjhamke
efjnhlhdeddeffeeeffoi
ebchiqcjfbrihlqipdedd
gholgghgilchgjrobmrrk
lkqdhfdriqjklkkjlfbmm
lcjkjkllljlllkkjlkihn
lklnkepaojjjpqaarbrpa
lnrhmpbpmchhhdampekjj
llklkkjkrcpbliqhaaqgh
jbbklkjjllcbijkkkerge
...

G.2      M ODEL T RAINING

In our experiments, we train a character-level GPT-like model (Radford et al., 2018), similar to the
nanoGPT model2 , on the generated synthetic languages using the ADAM algorithm on a GTX1080
Ti GPU with 12GB memory. During the training process, the learning rates are automatically decayed
according to a preset annealing schedule. All training hyper-parameters for the GPT model structure
and the optimizer settings are given in Table 1.

H        L IMITATIONS
The paper’s primary theoretical findings hinge on two fundamental assumptions about languages: i)
they are not developed haphazardly but rather serve the purpose of conveying information; and ii) all
languages are generated from a unified latent intention space, even though the explicit construction
    2
        nanoGPT: https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          model structure
                               number of layers                  3
                                number of head                  12
                                    head size                   64
                                   block size             32, 64, or 128
                           number of model parameters 21.25 million
                                             optimizer
                              initial learning rate        6.0 × 10−4
                                minibatch size                  12
                                        β1                      0.9
                                        β2                     0.95
                              maximum iterations               5000

    Table 1: All hyperparameters used in the training process for a GPT-like language model.


of this intention space is unknown. Compared to prior research on similar topics, such as Xie et al.
(2022); Wang et al. (2023); Wies et al. (2023), our theoretical results require fewer assumptions
while also offering a more comprehensive explanation of the emergent capabilities of large language
models (LLMs), beyond just in-context learning.
The simulation experiments in this paper are somewhat constrained in that they only utilize a single
type of ε-language, which is synthesized using a doubly-embedded Markov chain model. While the
simulation results for this synthetic language do confirm the theoretical findings outlined in the paper,
it would be worthwhile to explore other types of ε-languages in order to further evaluate the proposed
theory.


                                                  18
