Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H ABITAT 3.0: A C O -H ABITAT FOR H UMANS , AVATARS
AND ROBOTS

 Xavi PuigвҲ— , Eric UndersanderвҲ— , Andrew SzotвҲ— , Mikael Dallaire CoteвҲ— ,
 Tsung-Yen YangвҲ— , Ruslan PartseyвҲ— , Ruta DesaiвҲ— , Alexander William CleggвҲ— ,
 Michal Hlavac, So Yeon Min, VladimГӯr VondruЕЎ, Theophile Gervet,
 Vincent-Pierre Berges, John M. Turner, Oleksandr Maksymets, Zsolt Kira,
 Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Jitendra Malik, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Unnat Jain,
 Dhruv Batra, Akshara RaiвҖ  , Roozbeh MottaghiвҖ 

                             http://aihabitat.org/habitat3


                                              A BSTRACT

          We present Habitat 3.0: a simulation platform for studying collaborative human-
          robot tasks in home environments. Habitat 3.0 offers contributions across three
          dimensions: (1) Accurate humanoid1 simulation: addressing challenges in mod-
          eling complex deformable bodies and diversity in appearance and motion, all while
          ensuring high simulation speed. (2) Human-in-the-loop infrastructure: enabling
          real human interaction with simulated robots via mouse/keyboard or a VR interface,
          facilitating evaluation of robot policies with human input. (3) Collaborative tasks:
          studying two collaborative tasks, Social Navigation and Social Rearrangement. So-
          cial Navigation investigates a robotвҖҷs ability to locate and follow humanoid avatars
          in unseen environments, whereas Social Rearrangement addresses collaboration be-
          tween a humanoid and robot while rearranging a scene. These contributions allow
          us to study end-to-end learned and heuristic baselines for human-robot collabora-
          tion in-depth, as well as evaluate them with humans in the loop. Our experiments
          demonstrate that learned robot policies lead to efficient task completion when
          collaborating with unseen humanoid agents and human partners that might exhibit
          behaviors that the robot has not seen before. Additionally, we observe emergent be-
          haviors during collaborative task execution, such as the robot yielding space when
          obstructing a humanoid agent, thereby allowing the effective completion of the task
          by the humanoid agent. Furthermore, our experiments using the human-in-the-loop
          tool demonstrate that our automated evaluation with humanoids can provide an
          indication of the relative ordering of different policies when evaluated with real
          human collaborators. Habitat 3.0 unlocks interesting new features in simulators
          for Embodied AI, and we hope it paves the way for a new frontier of embodied
          human-AI interaction capabilities. The following video provides an overview of
          the framework: https://tinyurl.com/msywvsnz.


1       I NTRODUCTION
TodayвҖҷs embodied AI agents are largely hermits вҖ“ existing within and navigating through virtual
worlds as solitary occupants (Batra et al., 2020; Anderson et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2020; Krantz et al., 2020; Ku et al., 2020; Wani et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2020; Deitke et al., 2020;
Gervet et al., 2023)2 . Even in virtual worlds that feature interactivity (Deitke et al., 2022; Szot et al.,
2021; Gan et al., 2021; Mu et al., 2021), where agents manipulate and move objects, the underlying
assumption is that changes to the environment occur solely due to the actions of this one agent.
These scenarios have formed a solid foundation for embodied AI and have led to the development of
new architectures (Chaplot et al., 2020; Brohan et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023; Kotar et al., 2023),
algorithms (Wijmans et al., 2019; Wortsman et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2022), and
      вҲ— core team, вҖ  project leads. Work done at FAIR, Meta.
    1
      Throughout this paper, we use avatar or humanoid to refer to virtual people in simulation and human to
refer to real people in the world.
    2
      With a few exceptions such as Li et al. (2021a).


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Habitat 3.0: An Embodied AI framework designed to facilitate simulation of human
avatars and robotic agents within a wide array of indoor environments.

compelling simulation-to-reality results (Anderson et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2021; Truong et al.,
2022; Chebotar et al., 2018). However, they stand in stark contrast to the motivation behind the
development of assistive robots, where the goal is to share the environment with human collaborators
capable of modifying and dynamically altering it. We believe it is now time to more comprehensively
study and develop social embodied agents that assist and cooperate with humans.
Consider the social robot shown in Fig. 1 вҖ“ a Boston Dynamics Spot robot collaborating with a
humanoid in a household setting, rearranging objects while cleaning up the house. To succeed in
such tasks, the two agents need to efficiently divide the task based on their abilities and preferences
while avoiding interference and respecting each otherвҖҷs space. For instance, the robot yields space to
the humanoid by moving backward when passing through a door (Fig. 1, right).
Training and testing such social agents on hardware with real humans poses inherent challenges,
including safety concerns, scalability limitations, substantial cost implications, and the complexity
of establishing standardized benchmarking procedures. A simulation platform can overcome these
challenges; however, the development of a collaborative human-robot simulation platform also
comes with its own complexities. First, a major challenge is the modeling of deformable human
bodies to synthesize realistic motion and appearance of the body parts. Second, to ensure the
generalizability of human interaction models, it is crucial to incorporate diverse human behaviors and
motions within the simulator. Finally, current state-of-the-art learning algorithms in Embodied AI
often require a significant number of iterations to converge, leading to long training times. Hence,
optimization techniques in human motion generation and rendering become crucial for achieving
learning convergence within manageable wall-clock times.
In this paper, we introduce Habitat 3.0 вҖ” a simulator that supports both humanoid avatars and robots
for the study of collaborative human-robot tasks in home-like environments.
 Human simulation вҖ“ Habitat 3.0 enables the following features for human simulation: (1) articulated
 skeletons with bones connected with rotational joints, facilitating fast collision testing, (2) a surface
вҖҳskinвҖҷ mesh for high-fidelity rendering of the body, enhancing visual realism, (3) parameterized body
 models (by Pavlakos et al. (2019)) to generate realistic body shapes and poses, (4) a library of avatars
 made from 12 base models with multiple gender representations, body shapes, and appearances, (5) a
 motion and behavior generation policy, enabling the programmatic control of avatars for navigation,
 object interaction, and various other motions. Despite the emphasis on realism and diversity, the speed
 of our simulation remains comparable to scenarios involving non-humanoid agents (1190 FPS with a
 humanoid and a robot compared to 1345 FPS with two robots). This is achieved through optimization
 techniques that involve caching human motion data collected from diverse human shapes. This data
 is subsequently adapted to new environments using projection techniques, resulting in a simulation
 that is both fast and accurate, while respecting the geometry of the environment.
Human-in-the-loop tool вҖ“ Beyond humanoid simulation, a pivotal feature of our system is a human-
in-the-loop tool, an interactive interface, facilitating the evaluation of AI agents with real human
collaborators. Through this tool, humans can collaborate with an autonomous robot using mouse and
keyboard inputs or a virtual reality (VR) interface. This interactive setup enables us to evaluate the
performance of learned AI agents within scenarios that closely resemble real-world interactions.
Social tasks вҖ“ Aiming at reproducible and standardized benchmarking, we present two collaborative
human-robot interaction tasks and a suite of baselines for each. We вҖҳliftвҖҷ the well-studied tasks of


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


navigation and rearrangement from the single-agent setting to a human-assistive setting. The first
task, Social Navigation, involves the robot finding and following a humanoid while maintaining
a safe distance. The second task, Social Rearrangement, involves a robot and a humanoid avatar
working collaboratively to rearrange a set of objects from their initial locations to desired locations,
using a series of pick-and-place actions (emulating the cleaning of a house). In social navigation,
the robotвҖҷs objective is independent of the humanoidвҖҷs goal, while in social rearrangement the robot
and the human must coordinate their actions to achieve a common goal as efficiently as possible. We
evaluate these tasks within an automated setting, where both humanoid avatars and robots operate
based on their learned/scripted policies. Furthermore, we evaluate social rearrangement in the human-
in-the-loop framework using a subset of baselines, allowing real humans to control the humanoid
avatar while the robot is controlled using a learned policy.
We conduct an in-depth study of learned and heuristic baselines on both tasks, with a focus on
generalization to new scenes, layouts and collaboration partners. In social navigation, we find that
end-to-end RL learns collaborative behaviors such as yielding space to the humanoid, ensuring their
unobstructed movement. In social rearrangement, learned policies efficiently split the task between
the robot and the humanoid, even for unseen collaborators, improving efficiency over the humanoid
operating alone. These findings extend to our human-in-the-loop study, where social rearrangement
baselines enhance humansвҖҷ efficiency over performing the task alone.
In summary, we provide a platform for simulating humanoids and robots, thereby providing an
environment for in-depth studies of social human-robot tasks. We hope that this platform will
encourage greater engagement from the Embodied AI community in this important research direction.
Our framework is open-sourced, for more details see Appendix A.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Embodied AI Simulators. Several simulators have been developed recently to support embodied
tasks (Savva et al., 2019; Xia et al., 2018; Wani et al., 2020; Ramakrishnan et al., 2021; Deitke
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; James et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019; Mu et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020;
Kolve et al., 2017; Ehsani et al., 2021; Weihs et al., 2020; Szot et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021; Gan
et al., 2021; Xiang et al., 2020; Deitke et al., 2022). In contrast to these works, we simulate human
movements and interactions in addition to robot simulation. iGibson 2.0 (Li et al., 2021b) simulates
humanoids in the context of a social navigation task. However, humanoids are treated as rigid bodies
that move on pre-defined tracks or rails. Building on iGibson 2.0, Srivastava et al. (2021) collect
human demonstrations using a VR interface. VRKitchen (Gao et al., 2019) also provides such a VR
interface to collect demonstrations and a benchmark to evaluate agents. These simulators focus on
human teleoperation rather than humanoid simulation. Habitat 3.0 supports both humanoid simulation
and human teleoperation. Overcooked-AI (Carroll et al., 2019) is a cooking simulator that is designed
for coordination with humans, but their environments are simplified grid-like 2D environments.
VirtualHome (Puig et al., 2018; 2021) is a simulator which supports humanoid avatars interacting in
3D environments, but does not support interactions with robots. In contrast, we simulate and model
both robot and humanoid agents together and allow interactions between them. SEAN (Tsoi et al.,
2022) supports both humanoid and robot simulation in 3D environments. However, it is limited to
3 scenes and primarily focused on social navigation. In contrast, we support object interaction in a
wide range of indoor environments. Moreover, our simulator is an order of magnitude faster than
existing humanoid simulators (detailed comparison in Table 4 in the Appendix).
Human-in-the-Loop Training & Evaluation. Human-in-the-loop (HITL) training (Fan et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2021; MacGlashan et al., 2017) and evaluation (Hu et al., 2020; Puig et al., 2021; Carroll
et al., 2019; Puig et al., 2023) have been studied in many different contexts such as NLP, computer
vision, and robotics. Such studies in the Embodied AI domain are challenging, since they require an
environment where both users and agents can interact. Prior works have focused on simplified grid or
symbolic state environments (Carroll et al., 2019; Puig et al., 2021). A few works (Ramrakhya et al.,
2022; Padmakumar et al., 2021; Das et al., 2018) collect user data in 3D environments at scale, but
focus on data collection and offline evaluation rather than interactive evaluation. We present a HITL
framework capable of interactive evaluation and data-collection.
Embodied Multi-agent Environments & Tasks. Most multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
works operate in a low-dimensional state space (e.g., grid-like mazes, tabular tasks, or Markov
games) (Jaderberg et al., 2019; Samvelyan et al., 2019; oai; Resnick et al., 2018; Suarez et al., 2019;


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a)                       (b)                           (c)                        (d)
Figure 2: Humanoid Avatars. Visualization of the skeleton rig and skinned mesh (a). A subset
of the sampled avatars featuring distinct genders, body shapes, and appearances (b). Simulation of
realistic walking and reaching behaviors, which can adapt to different environment layouts (c,d).

Baker et al., 2020; Giles & Jim, 2002; Lazaridou et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Sukhbaatar
et al., 2016; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018). Different from these frameworks, Habitat 3.0 environments
capture the realism necessary for household tasks. Closer to our work is prior work in visual
MARL in 3D embodied settings: (Jain et al., 2019; 2020) introduce multiple agents in embodied
simulation for moving furniture; Szot et al. (2023) study collaborative rearrangement in simulated
home environments, where two robots perform tasks such as tidying up, and setting a dinner table.
Thomason et al. (2020); Roman et al. (2020); Patel et al. (2021); Jain et al. (2021) study heterogeneous
agents with different capabilities towards solving a shared task. In other visual MARL work such as
(Chen et al., 2019; Juliani et al., 2018; Weihs et al., 2021b;a; Kurach et al., 2020) agents compete (e.g.,
hide-and-seek) in teams or individually. However, none of these prior works simulate humanoids.
Wang et al. (2022) simulate humanoids and learn to generate human-robot collaborative behavior.
In comparison, we scale each axis of simulation вҖ“ scene and environment variations, and realism,
fidelity and diversity of humanoid models.

3     H ABITAT 3.0 F RAMEWORK
We first explain the intricacies of humanoid simulation and how we address key challenges such as
efficiency, realism, and diversity. In particular, we focus on a caching strategy, the key element for
achieving high speeds in appearance and motion generation. Then, we present our human-in-the-loop
tool that enables evaluating robot policies with real humans in simulation.

3.1   H UMAN S IMULATION
To enable robots that learn to effectively interact with humans, we need to build fast, diverse, and
realistic human models that can be deployed and used to train agents in simulation. We describe
here how we design these humanoid agents, considering two components: their appearance and
motion/behavior.
Humanoid Appearance: Following the traditional graphics approaches (Kavan & ЕҪГЎra, 2005; Kavan
et al., 2007), we represent humanoids as an articulated skeleton, with bones connected via rotational
joints (Fig. 2(a)). Additionally, a surface mesh is attached to the skeleton, and its vertices are updated
based on the pose and shape of the skeleton using linear blend skinning (LBS) (Fig. 2(a)). The
skeleton is used to represent poses and check for collisions with the environment, whereas the skinned
mesh provides visual fidelity without affecting physics. The choice of an articulated skeleton for
physics and a skinned mesh for appearance enhances the simulation speed without compromising
fidelity. To generate realistic skeletons and meshes, we rely on SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019), a
data-driven parametric human body model that provides a compact representation of 3D human shape
and pose. In particular, SMPL-X represents a humanвҖҷs pose and shape into two sets of parameters
J, ОІ for each gender. J вҲҲ R109 encodes a subjectвҖҷs pose via the hands, body and face joint rotations,
and ОІ вҲҲ R10 captures variations in body shape through the principle components of mesh vertex
displacements. This allows us to create realistic body shapes by randomly sampling ОІ. To encode
body deformations in different poses, SMPL-X uses pose-dependent blend shapes, changing the
relationship between the humanoid joints and skin mesh based on the pose. To enable fast humanoid
simulation, we cache 4 male, 4 female and 4 neutral body shapes and store their corresponding
skeleton and skinned meshes. This allows us to compute the model rig and blend shapes offline, only
requiring LBS during simulation. Since the blend shapes are constant, we lose the ability to create
pose-dependent skin deformations, resulting in a loss of some visual fidelity. However, this trade-off
allows for the efficient loading and reposing of humanoid models. Fig. 2(b) and the supplemental
video show some of the generated humanoids.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Humanoid Motion and Behavior: Our humanoid avatars are capable of realistic, long-range motion
and behavior that can adapt to different tasks and environments. To achieve this, we design a
hierarchical behavior model, in which a learned policy or planner executes a sequence of low-level
skills to move the humanoid, generating long-range behaviors. Since our objective is to enable
humanoid models to perform rearrangement and navigation tasks, we specifically consider two
essential low-level skills: navigating around the environment and picking and placing objects3 .
For navigating, we first use a path planner to generate waypoints that reach the goal location without
colliding with the environment. The humanoid then transitions between these waypoints by first
rigidly rotating its base to face the next waypoint, and then moving forward. For animating the
forward motion, we use a walking motion clip from the AMASS dataset (Mahmood et al., 2019),
trim it to contain a single walking cycle (after both the left and right foot have moved) and play it
cyclically until reaching the next waypoint (Fig. 2 (c)). For generating a picking motion, we use
VPoser (Pavlakos et al., 2019) to pre-compute a set of humanoid poses for each body model, with
one of the hands reaching a set of 3D positions around the human, while constraining the feet to be in
a fixed location. We then store these poses offline, indexed by the 3D positions of the hand relative
to the humanoid root. At evaluation time, we get humanoid poses for reaching arbitrary 3D points
by interpolating over the closest stored poses, without requiring to query VPoser. This allows fast
simulation of pick/place motions. A continuous picking and placing motion is obtained by drawing
a 3D line from the current position of the hand to the target 3D position, and retrieving poses for
intermediate points on the line. Once the hand reaches the object position, we kinematically attach or
detach the object to or from the hand A resulting motion can be seen in Fig. 2(d). While this approach
generates smooth motions for the range of positions computed on VPoser, it fails for positions out of
this range, which happens when the hand is either too close or too far from the body.
Benchmarking: Our simulation design enables efficient humanoid simulation with minimal perfor-
mance impact compared to simulating a robot. In our simulator, a robot operates at 245Вұ19 frames
per second (FPS) in a single environment, while the humanoid achieves 188Вұ2 FPS. The difference
in FPS is primarily due to the larger number of joints in the humanoid model, as compared to the
robot. Removing skinning or motion capture data does not notably affect performance, implying that
our simulation scales well to realistic visuals and animations. When using two agents, robot-robot
achieves a frame rate of 150Вұ13, while robot-humanoid achieves 136Вұ8. Increasing the number of
environments leads to substantial speed improvements, with robot-humanoid reaching 1191Вұ3 FPS
across 16 environments on a single GPU. Further details are in Appendix F.1.
3.2 H UMAN - IN - THE -L OOP I NFRASTRUCTURE
We aim to study the generalization capabilities of our robot policies when interacting with collabora-
tors that exhibit diverse behaviors, including real human collaborators. To facilitate human-robot
interaction, we have developed a Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) evaluation platform. This tool allows
human operators to control the humanoids within the simulated environment, using a mouse/keyboard
or VR interface, enabling online human-robot interaction evaluations and data-collection. Below, we
highlight some of key features:
Ease-of-Development. Our HITL tool leverages the infrastructure of AI Habitat simulator (Savva
et al., 2019; Szot et al., 2021), enabling seamless integration and utilization of existing datasets and
simulation capabilities. Further, we implement end-user logic in Python and provide convenient
wrappers for the low-level simulation logic for ease of development.
Portability to Other OS/Hardware Platforms. We adopt a client-server architecture for our
HITL tool that enables portability to other OS/hardware platforms. The server handles all logic
(e.g., simulation, agent inference, and avatar keyboard controls), while the client handles only
platform-specific rendering and input-device handling. This allows running the compute-heavy
server component on a powerful machine while porting the client to other platforms, e.g., resource-
constrained web browsers and VR devices. Hence, users can use this tool for a range of tasks:
small-scale local evaluations using mouse and keyboard, large-scale data-collection on a browser, or
high-fidelity human-robot interaction in VR.
Replayability. To support data collection and reproducibility, our platform provides functionalities
for recording and replaying of HITL episodes. The playback functionality supports different levels of
  3
    While our focus is on a restricted set of motions, the SMPL-X format allows us to add a wide range of
motions, such as MoCap data, or the ones generated by motion generation models (e.g., Tevet et al. (2023)).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


abstraction, ranging from high-level navigate/pick/place actions to precise trajectories of humanoid
poses and rigid objects. Additionally, the platform provides the capability to re-render the entire
episode from the viewpoints of different egocentric or exocentric cameras.

4     I NTERACTIVE H UMAN -ROBOT TASKS
We study two tasks in Habitat 3.0: social navigation and social rearrangement. In social navigation,
a robot must find and follow a humanoid, while maintaining a safe distance. In social rearrangement,
a humanoid and a robot collaborate to move objects from their initial to target locations in a scene.
Social navigation requires the robot to achieve its objective without interfering with the humanoid,
while in social rearrangement, the two agents must collaborate to achieve a shared goal.

4.1   S OCIAL NAVIGATION : F IND & F OLLOW P EOPLE
Task description. An assistive robot should be able to execute commands such as вҖңBring me my
mug", or вҖңFollow Alex and help him in collecting the dishes", which require finding and following
humans at a safe distance. With this in mind, we design a social navigation task (Francis et al.,
2023), where a humanoid walks in a scene, and the robot must locate and follow the humanoid while
maintaining a safety distance ranging from 1m to 2m. Our task is different from prior work on social
navigation such as Li et al. (2021a); Biswas et al. (2021) as they focus primarily on avoiding humans.
It also differs from Luo et al. (2018), which focuses on following and tracking humans, but does not
consider exploration to locate the humans, or constraints of the robot embodiment.
Fig. 3 (left) illustrates the social navigation task. The robot is placed in an unseen environment, and
tasked with locating and following the humanoid, using a depth camera on its arm (arm depth), a
binary humanoid detector that detects if the humanoid is in the frame (humanoid detector), and the
humanoidвҖҷs relative distance and heading to the robot (humanoid GPS), available to the robot at
all times. This task is different from other navigation tasks such as image-goal (Zhu et al., 2017),
point-goal (Anderson et al., 2018), and object-goal (Batra et al., 2020) navigation since it requires
reasoning about a dynamic goal and dynamic obstacles. The robot must adapt its path based on the
position of the humanoid and anticipate the humanoidвҖҷs future motion to avoid colliding with it. The
episode terminates if the robot collides with the humanoid or reaches maximum episode length. The
humanoid follows the shortest path to a sequence of randomly sampled points in the environment.
Metrics. We define 3 metrics for this task: (1) Finding Success (S): Did the robot find the humanoid
within the maximum episode steps (reach within 1-2m while facing the humanoid)? (2) Finding
Success Weighted by Path Steps (SPS): How efficient was the robot at finding the humanoid, relative to
an oracle with ground-truth knowledge of the full humanoid trajectory and a map of the environment?
Let l be the minimum steps that such an oracle would take to find the humanoid, and p be the agentвҖҷs
                             l
path steps, SPS = S В· max(l,p)   . (3) Following Rate (F): Ratio of steps that the robot maintains a
distance of 1-2m from the humanoid while facing towards it, relative to the maximum possible
following steps. For an episode of maximum duration E, we assume that an oracle with ground-truth
knowledge of humanoid path and the environment map can always follow the humanoid, once found.
Thus, the following steps for such an oracle are E вҲ’ l, where l is the minimum number of steps
needed to find the humanoid. Let w denote the number of steps that the agent follows the humanoid,
                               w
then following rate F = max(EвҲ’l,w)   . (4) Collision Rate (CR): Finally, we report the ratio of episodes
that end in the agent colliding with the humanoid. More details about the metrics are in Appendix A.
Baselines. We compare two approaches in the social navigation task:
вҖў Heuristic Expert: We create a heuristic baseline with access to the environment map that uses a
   shortest path planner to generate a path to the humanoidвҖҷs current location. The heuristic expert
   follows the following logic: When the agent is farther than 1.5m from the humanoid, it uses the
  вҖҳfindвҖҷ behavior, i.e., uses a path planner to approach the humanoid. If the humanoid is within 1.5m,
   it uses a backup motion to avoid colliding with the humanoid.
вҖў End-to-end RL: A вҖҳsensors-to-actionвҖҷ recurrent neural network policy, trained using DDPPO (Wi-
   jmans et al., 2019). Inputs to the policy are egocentric arm depth, a humanoid detector, and a
   humanoid GPS, and outputs are velocity commands in the robotвҖҷs local frame. This policy does not
   have access to a map of the environment. Architecture and training details are in Appendix A. We
   also provide ablations where we study the impact of the different sensors input to the policy.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Humanoid
                                      start pos.


                           Depth
                                                                                SвҶ‘         SPSвҶ‘         FвҶ‘         CRвҶ“
                                      Humanoid
                                      path           Heuristic Expert           1.00        0.97        0.51        0.52


                           Detector
                                      Robot          End-to-end RL           0.97Вұ0.00   0.65Вұ0.00   0.44Вұ0.01   0.51Вұ0.03
                                      start pos.
                                      Find Phase     - humanoid GPS          0.76Вұ0.02   0.34Вұ0.01   0.29Вұ0.01   0.48Вұ0.03
                                                     - humanoid detector     0.98Вұ0.00   0.68Вұ0.00   0.37Вұ0.01   0.64Вұ0.05
                                      Humanoid


                           H-GPS
                                      Found          - arm depth             0.94Вұ0.01   0.54Вұ0.01   0.19Вұ0.01   0.71Вұ0.08
                                      Follow Phase
                                                     - arm depth + arm RGB   0.96Вұ0.00   0.61Вұ0.01   0.38Вұ0.02   0.55Вұ0.04

Figure 3: Social Navigation. Overview of the Social Navigation task and sensors used (left). Baseline
Results (right). The bottom rows show different variations of removing sensors.
Scenes and Robot. We incorporate the Habitat Synthetic Scenes Dataset (HSSD) (Khanna et al.,
2023) in Habitat 3.0, and use the Boston Dynamics (BD) Spot robot. We use 37 train, 12 validation
and 10 test scenes. For details on the robot and scenes, refer to Appendix D and E.
Results. Fig. 3 shows the performance of different baselines. The heuristic expert achieves 100%
finding success (S) vs 97% for the RL policy. This is expected as the heuristic has privileged access
to a map of the environment, and can compute the shortest path to the humanoid while the RL policy
has to explore the environment. As a result, the heuristic expert finding SPS is also higher than the
RL policy. However, even without access to a map, the RL policy learns to follow the humanoid by
anticipating their motion, backing up to avoid collisions, and making way in narrow spaces, resulting
in a similar success (S) and collision rate (CR) as the heuristic expert (0.52 for heuristic vs 0.51Вұ0.03
for RL policy), and a competitive SPS and following rate F (0.51 for heuristic expert vs 0.44Вұ0.01 for
the RL policy). For qualitative results, refer to the supplementary video and Appendix C.1.
Ablations. We analyze the impact of individual sensors on the end-to-end RL policyвҖҷs performance
(bottom rows in Fig. 3). In general, the results can be grouped into two cases: before and after finding
the humanoid. Before finding the humanoid, the humanoid GPS is the most important sensor since it
enables agents to locate the humanoid. As a result, the baseline without the humanoid GPS has the
lowest finding success and SPS. However, after finding the humanoid, arm perception (either RGB or
depth) becomes important since the agent uses this information to avoid collision while following
the humanoid. As a result, the baseline without arm cameras tends to have higher collision rate and
lower following rate than the baselines with either a depth or RGB sensor.

4.2   S OCIAL R EARRANGEMENT
Task Description. In this task (Fig. 4, left), the robotвҖҷs goal is to efficiently assist a humanoid
collaborator in rearranging two objects from known initial positions to designated goals. Object
positions and goals are specified as 3D coordinates in the robotвҖҷs start coordinate frame. We modify
Social Rearrangement from Szot et al. (2023), generalizing it to heterogeneous agents (a humanoid
and a robot) and dealing with more diverse, unseen environments and humanoid collaborators. The
objects are spawned on open receptacles throughout an unseen house, with multiple rooms, and
assigned a goal on another open receptacle within the house. The robot has access to its own
egocentric depth cameras, proprioceptive state information (arm joint angles and base egomotion),
and the humanoidвҖҷs relative distance and heading. However, it does not have access to the humanoidвҖҷs
actions, intents, or complete states. Episodes end when all objects are placed in their desired locations
or the maximum allowed steps are reached. During evaluation, the trained robot collaborates with
new human or humanoid partners in diverse, unseen homes, as described later in this section.
Metrics. We evaluate all approaches on two metrics: (1) Success Rate (SR) at completing the task
in an unseen home, with an unseen configuration of objects. An episode is considered successful
(SR = 1) if both objects are placed at their target locations, within the maximum number of allowed
episode steps. (2) Relative Efficiency (RE) at task completion, relative to the humanoid doing the
task alone. For an episode with maximum allowed steps E, if the humanoid alone takes Lhuman
                                                                                   Lhuman
steps, and the humanoid-robot team takes Ljoint steps to finish the task, RE = max(L joint ,E) . If the

humanoid-robot team finishes the task in half the steps as humanoid alone, RE will be 200%.
Policy architecture. We adopt a two-layer policy architecture for all baselines, where a learned
high-level policy selects a low-level skill from a pre-defined library of skills to execute based on
observations. We consider 2 variants of low-level skills for the robot вҖ“ oracle and learned low-level
skills. Oracle skills use privileged information, i.e., a map of the environment for navigation and
perfect, вҖҳinstantaneousвҖҷ pick/place skills. Learned low-level skills are pre-trained and frozen, but
are realistic and do not assume privileged information, resulting in more low-level failures. Refer to
Appendix A for more details. All humanoid low-level skills are as described in Section 3.1.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baselines. We study 3 different population-based approaches (Jaderberg et al., 2019) at the social
rearrangement task, where a single high-level robot policy is trained to coordinate with collaborators
within a вҖҳpopulationвҖҷ. During training, for each episode, one collaborator is randomly selected
from the population, and the robot is trained to collaborate with it. The robot policy is trained
using end-to-end RL, using the same policy architecture, training parameters and scenes across all
approaches. The approaches differ only in the training population.
вҖў Learn-Single: In this baseline, we jointly learn a humanoid and a robot policy; the population
  consists of a single humanoid policy, resulting in low training collaborator diversity.
вҖў Plan-Popp : We consider four different population sizes, with collaborators driven by privileged
  task planners. This results in four baselines (indexed by p), consisting of population sizes of 1 to
  4. (1) p = 1 is a population of size 1, with a humanoid collaborator consistently rearranging the
  same object across all episodes. (2) p = 2 is a population of size 2, where each collaborator is
  responsible for one of the two objects. (3) p = 3 is a population of size 3, where collaborators
  rearrange either one or both objects. (4) p = 4 is a size 4 population where collaborators rearrange
  either one, both or none of the objects. Note that in all baselines, there is only one humanoid in the
  scene with the robot at a time, randomly sampled from the population. We train a different robot
  policy per population, and present results on all four baselines.
вҖў Learn-Pop: In this baseline, instead of relying on a privileged planner to form the population, we
  learn a population of collaborators, following the approach of population-play (Jaderberg et al.,
  2019). We randomly initialize 8 humanoid policies, considering that different initializations may
  lead to diverse final behaviors. During training, each episode pairs a randomly chosen humanoid
  policy from this population with the robot, and both are jointly trained at the collaborative task.
  This baseline examines the efficacy of random initialization at learning populations.
Evaluation population. We use the same agent embodiment and train/evaluation dataset as in Social
Navigation. However, social rearrangement evaluation also considers different collaborators, with
different high-level behaviors. We create a population of 10 collaborators for zero-shot coordination
(ZSC-pop-eval) by combining a subset of training collaborators from all baselines. Specifically, we
collect 3 learned humanoid policies from the Learn-Single and Learn-Pop baselines, and 4 planner-
based collaborators (one from each population p in Plan-Popp ). As a result, each baseline sees
about 1/3 of the ZSC-eval collaborators during learning and needs to generalize to the remaining 2/3
of the population. We also evaluate each approach against its training population (train-pop-eval)
but in unseen scenes and environment configurations. This lets us study the difference between
collaborating with known collaborators (train-pop-eval) and unseen collaborators (ZSC-pop-eval).
Results. Fig. 4 shows the results of train-pop and ZSC-pop evaluation of the different baselines.
Learn-Single and Plan-Pop1 result in the highest success rate when evaluated against their training
population. This is expected since both are trained with only one partner, and hence have the simplest
training setting. However, their SR significantly drops during ZSC-pop-eval (98.50% вҶ’ 50.9%
and 91.2% вҶ’ 50.4%). This is because these baselines are trained to coordinate with just a single
partner, and hence have poor adaptability to partners that are different from their training partner.
Amongst approaches trained with a population > 1, Learn-pop has the highest train-pop SR but
poor ZSC-eval performance (92.2% вҶ’ 48.5%), because of low emergent diversity in the learned
population. In contrast, Plan-pop2,3,4 have a smaller drop in performance between train-pop and
ZSC-pop, signifying their ability to adapt to unseen partners. In particular, Plan-pop3,4 perform
similarly, with the highest ZSC-pop-eval SR of 71.7%. We observe similar trends in RE, where
Learn-Single has the highest RE with train-pop, and a drop with ZSC-pop (159.2 вҶ’ 106.0). Plan-
pop3,4 have a lower drop (105.49 вҶ’ 101.99 for Plan-pop4 ) but on average result in similar RE as
Learn-Single and Plan-Pop1 in ZSC-pop-eval. This is because on average over the 10 ZSC partners,
Learn-Single significantly improves efficiency for some, while making others inefficient, as seen by
its large variance. On the other hand, Plan-pop3,4 are able to adapt and make most partners slightly
more efficient, as shown by their lower variance, but on average perform similar to Learn-Single. For
more details and additional analysis, refer to Appendix C.
Ablations. We conduct ablation experiments over inputs to the robot policy, trained with a Plan-Pop3
population (Fig. 4 (right), bottom rows). We replace вҖҳoracleвҖҷ skills with non-privileged learned
low-level skills without re-training the high-level policy. We find a notable drop in performance,
stemming from low-level execution failures (77.79% вҶ’ 41.96% in train-pop-eval SR), indicating
that the performance can be improved by training the high-level policy with learned skills to better
adapt to such failures. We also retrain our policies with RGB instead of depth, and do not observe a


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Humanoid           Method                           Train-pop-eval                  ZSC-pop-eval
                        start pos.
                                                                          SRвҶ‘           REвҶ‘           SRвҶ‘              REвҶ‘
                        Humanoid path      Learn-Single                98.50Вұ0.48   159.2Вұ1.0      50.94Вұ39.55     106.02Вұ34.32
                        Robot start pos.   Plan-Pop1                    91.2Вұ2.63    152.4Вұ5.4     50.44Вұ39.02    109.75Вұ34.63
                                           Plan-Pop2                   66.89Вұ1.47   110.06Вұ6.83    70.23Вұ7.02      102.13Вұ11.10
                        Robot path         Plan-Pop3                   77.79Вұ2.86   118.95Вұ6.04    71.79Вұ7.38      101.99Вұ15.18
                                           Plan-Pop4                   72.42Вұ1.32   105.49Вұ1.7     71.32Вұ6.47       103.53Вұ9.8
                        Object             Learn-Pop                   92.20Вұ2.21   135.32Вұ3.43    48.52Вұ35.51      99.80Вұ31.02
                        start pos.
                                           - oracle + learned skills   41.09Вұ21.5    79.62Вұ1.76    21.44Вұ18.16     76.45Вұ9.23
                        Target pos.        - depth + RGB               76.70Вұ3.15   110.04Вұ3.05    70.89Вұ8.18     100.16Вұ14.79
                                           - Humanoid-GPS              76.45Вұ1.85   108.96Вұ2.66    68.70Вұ6.75      98.58Вұ10.32

Figure 4: Overview of social rearrangement (left). Baseline results, averaged over 3 seeds (right).
           Method              CR вҶ“                            TS вҶ“                          RC вҶ‘              RE вҶ‘
                        Mean      95% CI         Mean              95% CI           Mean        95% CI
             Solo        0.0         -          1253.17       [1020.90 1533.26]       -            -          100.0
         Learn-Single   0.12    [0.19 0.08]      936.60        [762.50 1146.62]     0.36      [0.33 0.39]     133.80
          Plan-Pop3     0.13    [0.20 0.08]     1015.05        [826.42 1242.60]     0.44      [0.41 0.46]     123.46

Table 1: Human-in-the-Loop Coordination Results. We report estimated mean and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) across 30 participants.
drop in performance. Removing the humanoid-GPS results in a slight drop in SR and RE, indicating
that this sensor is useful for collaboration, especially in the ZSC setting, though not essential.
4.3 H UMAN - IN - THE - LOOP E VALUATION
We test trained robotic agentsвҖҷ ability to coordinate with real humans via our human-in-the-loop
(HITL) tool across 30 participants. After a brief keyboard/mouse control training, we ask the
participants to perform the social rearrangement task in the test scenes from our dataset. Particularly,
the study operates under 3 conditions: performing the task alone (solo), paired with a robot operating
with Learn-Single, or paired with a Plan-Pop3 agent. Each participant performs the task for 10
episodes per condition in one of the test scenes. We measure the collision rate (CR), task completion
steps (TS), ratio of task completed by the robot (RC), and Relative Efficiency (RE) across all episodes.
RE is the same as in Sec 4.2. CR is the ratio of episodes where the robot collides with the humanoid.
RC is the proportion of objects that were rearranged by the robot per episode.
Both Plan-Pop3 and Learn-Single improve RE to 123% and 134% respectively (Tab. 1). This shows
that the robot makes the human more efficient than the human operating alone, even for completely
unseen real human partners. Our analysis shows that pairwise difference of the estimated mean for TS
between solo and Learn-Single, and solo and Plan-Pop3 was significant, but the difference between
estimated mean TS of Learn-Single and Plan-Pop3 was not (details in Appendix G). Plan-Pop3 leads
to higher task offloading as measured by RC despite having lower RE than Learn-single.
In general, we observe that humans are more reactive to robot behavior than ZSC agents, which leads
to a success rate of 1 across all episodes and high RE. For example, humans quickly adapt their plan
based on their inferred goal of the robot, or move out of the way to let the robot pass. However, the
relative order of average RE and RC between our automated and HITL evaluations holds, wherein
Learn-Single makes the partner more efficient than Plan-Pop3 , but Plan-Pop3 has higher RC than
Learn-Single. This reveals a few interesting insights: (1) The automated evaluation pipeline can
give an indication of the relative ordering of different approaches when evaluated with real human
partners. (2) Our ZSC agents do not accurately capture the dynamics of human-robot interaction,
and there is room for improvement. (3) Even approaches such as Learn-Single, which do not use a
diverse training population, can enhance human efficiency compared to performing a task alone.

5    C ONCLUSION
We introduce Habitat 3.0, an Embodied AI simulator designed to efficiently simulate humanoids and
robots within rich and diverse indoor scenes. Habitat 3.0 supports a diverse range of appearances
and motions for humanoid avatars, while ensuring realism and fast simulation speeds. In addition
to humanoid simulation, we provide an infrastructure for human-in-the-loop (HITL) control of
humanoid avatars, via a mouse/keyboard or VR interface. This interface allows us to collect real
human-robot interaction data in simulation and evaluate robot policies with real humans. These
capabilities allow us to study two collaborative tasks - social navigation and social rearrangement
in both automated and human-in-the-loop evaluation settings. We observe emergent collaborative
behaviors in our learned policies, such as safely following humanoids, or making them more efficient
by splitting tasks. Our HITL analysis reveals avenues for enhancing social embodied agents, and we
hope that Habitat 3.0 will accelerate future research in this domain.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the reviewers for their helpful suggestions. We would also like to thank Manolis Savva and
Angel Chang for their support in developing and curating the HSSD scenes used in this work. We
are also grateful to Meshcapade GmbH for their support in incorporating and releasing the SMPL-X
body models and sample motions to represent humanoids in Habitat.

R EFERENCES
Openai five. https://openai.com/research/openai-five. 3
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko SГјnderhauf, Ian D. Reid,
  Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-
  grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In CVPR, 2017. 1
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen
  Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, et al. On evaluation of
  embodied navigation agents. arXiv, 2018. 6, 16, 19
Peter Anderson, Ayush Shrivastava, Joanne Truong, Arjun Majumdar, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, and
  Stefan Lee. Sim-to-real transfer for vision-and-language navigation. In CoRL, 2020. 2
Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and Igor
  Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. In ICLR, 2020. 4
Douglas Bates, Martin MГӨchler, Ben Bolker, and Steve Walker. Fitting linear mixed-effects models
  using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 2015. 30
Dhruv Batra, Aaron Gokaslan, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Oleksandr Maksymets, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
  Manolis Savva, Alexander Toshev, and Erik Wijmans. Objectnav revisited: On evaluation of
  embodied agents navigating to objects. arXiv, 2020. 1, 6, 16
Abhijat Biswas, Allan Wang, Gustavo Silvera, Aaron Steinfeld, and Henny Admoni. Socnavbench:
 A grounded simulation testing framework for evaluating social navigation. THRI, 2021. 6
James V Bradley. Complete counterbalancing of immediate sequential effects in a latin square design.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1958. 29
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
  Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Ryan C. Julian, Dmitry
  Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla,
  Deeksha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez,
  Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael S. Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag R.
  Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Anand Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong
 Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Ho Vuong, F. Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu,
 Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. In
 RSS, 2023. 1
Berk Calli, Arjun Singh, James Bruce, Aaron Walsman, Kurt Konolige, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Aaron M Dollar. Yale-cmu-berkeley dataset for robotic manipulation research. IJRR,
  2017. 26
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. In NeurIPS, 2019. 3
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Object goal
  navigation using goal-oriented semantic exploration. In NeurIPS, 2020. 1
Yevgen Chebotar, Ankur Handa, Viktor Makoviychuk, Miles Macklin, Jan Issac, Nathan D. Ratliff,
  and Dieter Fox. Closing the sim-to-real loop: Adapting simulation randomization with real world
  experience. In ICRA, 2018. 2


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Boyuan Chen, Shuran Song, Hod Lipson, and Carl Vondrick. Visual hide and seek. arXiv, 2019. 4

Changan Chen, Unnat Jain, Carl Schissler, Sebastia Vicenc Amengual Gari, Ziad Al-Halah, Vamsi Kr-
  ishna Ithapu, Philip Robinson, and Kristen Grauman. SoundSpaces: Audio-visual navigation in 3d
  environments. In ECCV, 2020. 1, 3

Abhishek Das, Samyak Datta, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Embodied
  question answering. In CVPR, 2018. 3

Matt Deitke, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Jordi Salvador, Dustin Schwenk, Eli VanderBilt, Matthew Wallingford, Luca Weihs, Mark Yatskar,
 and Ali Farhadi. Robothor: An open simulation-to-real embodied ai platform. In CVPR, 2020. 1, 3

Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Kiana Ehsani, Winson Han,
 Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. ProcTHOR: Large-Scale
 Embodied AI Using Procedural Generation. In NeurIPS, 2022. 1, 3

Kiana Ehsani, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Aniruddha
  Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. ManipulaTHOR: A Framework for Visual Object Manipulation.
  In CVPR, 2021. 3

Xiang Fan, Yiwei Lyu, Paul Pu Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Nano:
  Nested human-in-the-loop reward learning for few-shot language model control. arXiv, 2022. 3

J. N. Foerster, Y. M. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson. Learning to Communicate with Deep
   Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In NeurIPS, 2016. 4

Anthony Francis, Claudia PГ©rez-dвҖҷArpino, Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Alexandre Alahi, Rachid Alami,
 Aniket Bera, Abhijat Biswas, Joydeep Biswas, Rohan Chandra, et al. Principles and guidelines for
  evaluating social robot navigation algorithms. arXiv, 2023. 6

Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Julian De Freitas, Jonas
  Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, Kuno Kim, Elias Wang, Damian
  Mrowca, Michael Lingelbach, Aidan Curtis, Kevin T. Feigelis, Daniel Bear, Dan Gutfreund, David
  Cox, James J. DiCarlo, Josh H. McDermott, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Daniel L. K. Yamins.
  Threedworld: A platform for interactive multi-modal physical simulation. In NeurIPS Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2021. 1, 3

Xiaofeng Gao, Ran Gong, Tianmin Shu, Xu Xie, Shu Wang, and Song-Chun Zhu. Vrkitchen: an
  interactive 3d virtual environment for task-oriented learning. arXiv, 2019. 3

Theophile Gervet, Soumith Chintala, Dhruv Batra, Jitendra Malik, and Devendra Singh Chaplot.
  Navigating to objects in the real world. Science Robotics, 2023. 1

C. L. Giles and K. C. Jim. Learning communication for multi-agent systems. In Proc. Innovative
  Concepts for Agent-Based Systems, 2002. 4

Jiayuan Gu, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Hao Su, and Jitendra Malik. Multi-skill mobile manipulation
   for object rearrangement. In ICLR, 2023. 20

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In CVPR, 2016. 17, 20

Sepp Hochreiter and JГјrgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 1997. 16

Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. вҖңother-playвҖқ for zero-shot
  coordination. In ICML, 2020. 3

Wenlong Huang, F. Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Peter R. Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In CoRL, 2022. 1


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio GarcГӯa Cas-
 taГұeda, Charlie Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nicolas Sonnerat,
 Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
 and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based
 reinforcement learning. Science, 2019. 3, 8
Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Mohammad Rastegari, Svetlana Lazebnik, Ali Farhadi, Alexan-
  der G. Schwing, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Two body problem: Collaborative visual task comple-
  tion. In CVPR, 2019. 4
Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and
 Alexander Schwing. A cordial sync: Going beyond marginal policies for multi-agent embodied
  tasks. In ECCV, 2020. 4
Unnat Jain, Iou-Jen Liu, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Luca Weihs, and Alexander G
  Schwing. Gridtopix: Training embodied agents with minimal supervision. In ICCV, 2021. 4
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2020. 3
Arthur Juliani, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Ervin Teng, Andrew Cohen, Jonathan Harper, Chris Elion,
  Chris Goy, Yuan Gao, Hunter Henry, Marwan Mattar, et al. Unity: A general platform for intelligent
  agents. arXiv, 2018. 4
Maurits Kaptein. Using generalized linear (mixed) models in hci. Modern Statistical Methods for
 HCI, 2016. 29
Ladislav Kavan and JirМҢГӯ ЕҪГЎra. Spherical blend skinning: a real-time deformation of articulated models.
  In Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games, 2005. 4

Ladislav Kavan, Steven Collins, JirМҢГӯ ЕҪГЎra, and Carol OвҖҷSullivan. Skinning with dual quaternions. In
  Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games, 2007. 4
Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra,
 Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. Habitat synthetic scenes
 dataset (hssd-200): An analysis of 3d scene scale and realism tradeoffs for objectgoal navigation.
 arXiv, 2023. 7, 26, 28
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv, 2014. 17
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for
  visual ai. arXiv, 2017. 3
Klemen Kotar, Aaron Walsman, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Entl: Embodied navigation trajectory learner.
  In ICCV, 2023. 1
Jacob Krantz, Erik Wijmans, Arjun Majundar, Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. Beyond the nav-graph:
  Vision and language navigation in continuous environments. In ECCV, 2020. 1
Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. Room-across-room:
  Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. In EMNLP,
  2020. 1
Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for
  legged robots. In RSS, 2021. 2
Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr StanМҒczyk, MichaЕӮ Zajkac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
  Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
  football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In AAAI, 2020. 4
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and the
  emergence of (natural) language. arXiv, 2016. 4


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Roberto Martin Martin, and Silvio Savarese. Hrl4in: Hierarchical reinforcement
  learning for interactive navigation with mobile manipulators. In CoRL, 2019. 1

Chengshu Li, Jaewoo Jang, Fei Xia, Roberto MartГӯn-MartГӯn, Claudia DвҖҷArpino, Alexander Toshev,
  Anthony Francis, Edward Lee, and Silvio Savarese. iGibson Challenge 2021. https://svl.
  stanford.edu/igibson/challenge.html, 2021a. 1, 6

Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Roberto MartвҖҷin-MartвҖҷin, Michael Lingelbach, Sanjana Srivastava, Bokui Shen,
  Kent Vainio, Cem Gokmen, Gokul Dharan, Tanish Jain, Andrey Kurenkov, Karen Liu, Hyowon
  Gweon, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson 2.0: Object-centric simulation for
  robot learning of everyday household tasks. In CoRL, 2021b. 3

Wenhan Luo, Peng Sun, Fangwei Zhong, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. End-to-end active
 object tracking via reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
 3286вҖ“3295. PMLR, 2018. 6

James MacGlashan, Mark K. Ho, Robert Loftin, Bei Peng, Guan Wang, David L. Roberts, Matthew E.
  Taylor, and Michael L. Littman. Interactive learning from policy-dependent human feedback. In
  ICML, 2017. 3

Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F. Troje, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black.
  Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In ICCV, 2019. 5

Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of Grounded Compositional Language in Multi-Agent
  Populations. In AAAI, 2018. 4

Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang, Zhiwei
  Jia, and Hao Su. ManiSkill: Generalizable Manipulation Skill Benchmark with Large-Scale
  Demonstrations. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021. 1, 3

Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen,
  Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramithu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Z. Hakkani-TГјr. Teach: Task-driven
  embodied agents that chat. In AAAI, 2021. 3

Shivansh Patel, Saim Wani, Unnat Jain, Alexander G. Schwing, Svetlana Lazebnik, Manolis Savva,
  and Angel X. Chang. Interpretation of emergent communication in heterogeneous collaborative
  embodied agents. In ICCV, 2021. 4

Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios
  Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face, and body from a single
  image. In CVPR, 2019. 2, 4, 5, 29

Xavier Puig, Kevin Kyunghwan Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and
  Antonio Torralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In CVPR, 2018. 3

Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-AI
  collaboration. In ICLR, 2021. 3

Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Nopa: Neurally-guided
  online probabilistic assistance for building socially intelligent home assistants. In ICRA, 2023. 3

Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan, Aaron Gokaslan, Erik Wijmans, Oleksandr Maksymets, Alexander Clegg,
  John Turner, Eric Undersander, Wojciech Galuba, Andrew Westbury, Angel Xuan Chang, Manolis
  Savva, Yili Zhao, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000 large-scale 3d
  environments for embodied ai. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021. 3

Ram Ramrakhya, Eric Undersander, Dhruv Batra, and Abhishek Das. Habitat-web: Learning
  embodied object-search strategies from human demonstrations at scale. In CVPR, 2022. 3

Cinjon Resnick, Wes Eldridge, David Ha, Denny Britz, Jakob Foerster, Julian Togelius, Kyunghyun
  Cho, and Joan Bruna. Pommerman: A multi-agent playground. arXiv, 2018. 3


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Homero Roman Roman, Yonatan Bisk, Jesse Thomason, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Jianfeng Gao. Rmm:
  A recursive mental model for dialog navigation. In EMNLP Findings, 2020. 4
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
 Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. The
 starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv, 2019. 3
Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
 Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai
 research. In ICCV, 2019. 3, 5
Dhruv Shah, Ajay Kumar Sridhar, Nitish Dashora, Kyle Stachowicz, Kevin Black, Noriaki Hirose,
  and Sergey Levine. Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation. arXiv, 2023. 1
Bokui Shen, Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto MartвҖҷin-MartвҖҷin, Linxi (Jim) Fan, Guanzhi Wang,
  S. Buch, Claudia. PГ©rez DвҖҷArpino, Sanjana Srivastava, Lyne P. Tchapmi, Micael Edmond Tchapmi,
  Kent Vainio, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson, a simulation environment for interactive
  tasks in large realistic scenes. In IROS, 2021. 3
Spot. Spot robot. https://www.bostondynamics.com/products/spot. 7, 26
Sanjana Srivastava, Chengshu Li, Michael Lingelbach, Roberto MartвҖҷin-MartвҖҷin, Fei Xia, Kent
  Vainio, Zheng Lian, Cem Gokmen, S. Buch, C. Karen Liu, Silvio Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, Jiajun
  Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior: Benchmark for everyday household activities in virtual, interactive,
  and ecological environments. In CoRL, 2021. 3
Joseph Suarez, Yilun Du, Phillip Isola, and Igor Mordatch. Neural mmo: A massively multiagent
  game environment for training and evaluating intelligent agents. arXiv, 2019. 3
S. Sukhbaatar, A. Szlam, and R. Fergus. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation.
   In NeurIPS, 2016. 4
Andrew Szot, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah
  Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan,
 Vladimir Vondrus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech Galuba, Angel Xuan Chang, Zsolt
  Kira, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training
  home assistants to rearrange their habitat. In NeurIPS, 2021. 1, 3, 5
Andrew Szot, Unnat Jain, Dhruv Batra, Zsolt Kira, Ruta Desai, and Akshara Rai. Adaptive coordina-
  tion for social embodied rearrangement. In ICML, 2023. 4, 7
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. In ICLR, 2023. 5
Jesse Thomason, Michael Murray, Maya Cakmak, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Vision-and-dialog naviga-
  tion. In CoRL, 2020. 4
Joanne Truong, Max Gustav Rudolph, Naoki Yokoyama, S. Chernova, Dhruv Batra, and Akshara Rai.
  Rethinking sim2real: Lower fidelity simulation leads to higher sim2real transfer in navigation. In
  CoRL, 2022. 2
Nathan Tsoi, Alec Xiang, Peter Yu, Samuel S. Sohn, Greg Schwartz, Subashri Ramesh, Mohamed
  Hussein, Anjali W. Gupta, Mubbasir Kapadia, and Marynel VГЎzquez. Sean 2.0: Formalizing and
  generating social situations for robot navigation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022. 3
Chen Wang, Claudia PГ©rez-DвҖҷArpino, Danfei Xu, Li Fei-Fei, Karen Liu, and Silvio Savarese. Co-gail:
  Learning diverse strategies for human-robot collaboration. In CoRL, 2022. 4
Saim Wani, Shivansh Patel, Unnat Jain, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. Multi-ON: Benchmark-
  ing Semantic Map Memory using Multi-Object Navigation. In NeurIPS, 2020. 1, 3
Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Klemen Kotar, Unnat Jain, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and
  Aniruddha Kembhavi. Allenact: A framework for embodied ai research. arXiv, 2020. 3


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Luca Weihs, Unnat Jain, Jordi Salvador, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Alexander
  Schwing. Bridging the imitation gap by adaptive insubordination. In NeurIPS, 2021a. 4
Luca Weihs, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Kiana Ehsani, Sarah M Pratt, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti,
  Eric Kolve, Dustin Schwenk, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Ali Farhadi. Learning generalizable visual
  representations via interactive gameplay. In ICLR, 2021b. 4
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames. In
  ICLR, 2019. 1, 6, 16, 17
Mitchell Wortsman, Kiana Ehsani, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
 Learning to learn how to learn: Self-adaptive visual navigation using meta-learning. In CVPR,
 2019. 1
Fei Xia, Amir R Zamir, Zhiyang He, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. Gibson
  env: Real-world perception for embodied agents. In CVPR, 2018. 3
Fei Xia, William B Shen, Chengshu Li, Priya Kasimbeg, Micael Edmond Tchapmi, Alexander Toshev,
  Roberto MartГӯn-MartГӯn, and Silvio Savarese. Interactive gibson benchmark: A benchmark for
  interactive navigation in cluttered environments. RA-L, 2020. 1
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao
  Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X.Chang, Leonidas Guibas, and Hao Su. SAPIEN: A
  SimulAted Part-based Interactive ENvironment. In CVPR, 2020. 3
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In CoRL, 2019. 3
Lvmin Zhang, Xinrui Wang, Qingnan Fan, Yi Ji, and Chunping Liu. Generating manga from
  illustrations via mimicking manga creation workflow. In CVPR, 2021. 3
Yuke Zhu, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Eric Kolve, Joseph J Lim, Abhinav Gupta, Li Fei-Fei, and Ali Farhadi.
  Target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes using deep reinforcement learning. In ICRA, 2017.
  1, 6
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto MartГӯn-MartГӯn, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush Nasiriany,
  and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning.
  In arXiv, 2020. 3


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We include the implementation details necessary for reproducing results for the tasks de-
scribed in Section 4.  Code for reproducing experimental results can be found here:
https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-lab/tree/v0.3.0/
habitat-baselines#habitat-30-multi-agent-training.

A.1    S OCIAL NAVIGATION

The robot uses neural network policies to find the humanoid, and the humanoid is scripted to navigate
to random waypoints using a shortest path planner. We train all the end-to-end RL social navigation
baselines using DD-PPO (Wijmans et al., 2019), distributing training across 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
Each GPU runs 24 parallel environments, and collects 128 steps for each update. We use a long
short-term memory networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) policy with ResNet18 as
the visual backbone and two recurrent layers, resulting nearly 8517k parameters. We use a learning
rate of 1 Г— 10вҲ’4 and the maximum gradient norm of 0.2. It takes about 200 million environment
steps (roughly 4 days of training) to saturate. All baselines are trained with 3 different random
seeds, and results are reported averaged across those seeds. Inspired by the reward design in training
point-goal (Anderson et al., 2018), and object-goal policies (Batra et al., 2020), the social navigation
reward is based on the distance to the humanoid at time t, and defined as follows:

                              пЈұ
                              пЈІвҲҶ(bt , ht ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(btвҲ’1 , htвҲ’1 ), if вҲҶ(bt , ht ) вүӨ 1
                  rtdistance = 2,                              if 1 < вҲҶ(bt , ht ) вүӨ 2
                                вҲҶ(btвҲ’1 , htвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(bt , ht ), otherwise
                              пЈі

where вҲҶ(bt , ht ) is the geodesic distance between the robot location bt and the humanoid location
ht at time t. The first condition encourages the robot to move away from the humanoid when it is
closer than 1m, ensuring that the agent maintains a safe distance from the humanoid. The second
condition gives a constant reward for reaching within 1-2m, and the last condition rewards the robot
to get closer to the humanoid.
To make sure the robot can face toward the humanoid, we further add an orientation reward when the
robot is approaching the humanoid:
                                          (ht вҲ’ bt ) В· vtforward , if вҲҶ(bt , ht ) вүӨ 3

                        rtorientation =
                                          0,                       otherwise

where vtforward is the robot normalized forward vector in the world frame, and the vector (ht вҲ’ bt ) is
also normalized.
During training, the episode terminates if there is a collision between the humanoid and the robot. The
robot receives a bonus reward of +10 if the robot successfully maintains a safety distance between
1m and 2m to the humanoid and points to the humanoid for at least 400 simulation steps. The criteria
for вҖҳfacing the humanoidвҖҷ is computed by the dot product of the robotвҖҷs forward vector and the vector
pointing from the robot to the humanoid, with the threshold of > 0.5. We assume the robot has
access to an arm depth camera (224 Г— 171 with the horizontal field of view (hFOV) of 55), an arm
RGB camera (480 Г— 640 with hFOV of 47), a binary human detector (1-dim), and the relative pose
of the humanoid in polar coordinate system (2-dim). In addition, a slack reward of вҲ’0.1 is given
to encourage the agent to find the humanoid as soon as possible. In all episodes, to make sure that
the robot learns to find the humanoid, the robot location is initialized at least 3m away from the
humanoid. The final social navigation reward is as follows:
                        rtsocial-nav = 10вҠ®success + rtdistance + 3rtorientation вҲ’ 0.1.

During evaluation, the total episode length is 1500 steps and the episode terminates if there is a
collision between the humanoid and the robot. In addition, the robot location is initialized at least 5m
away from the humanoid, and the initial locations of the robot and the humanoid, and the humanoid


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         6                                                               1750
                         5                                                               1500
 Avg. Dis. to Humanoid                                                                   1250
                         4


                                                                                Reward
                                                                                         1000
                         3
                                                       End-to-end RL                     750                      End-to-end RL
                         2                             - humanoid GPS                                             - humanoid GPS
                                                       - humanoid detector               500                      - humanoid detector
                         1                             - arm depth                       250                      - arm depth
                                                       - arm depth + arm RGB                                      - arm depth + arm RGB
                         0 0         50M     100M     150M      200M     250M              0 0   50M    100M     150M      200M     250M
                                                 Steps                                                      Steps
                               (a) Training avg. dis. to the humanoid                            (b) Training reward

Figure 5: Social Navigation training curves. We plot the training average distance to the humanoid
and reward for the social navigation baselines and ablations. We use 3 seeds for each model.


path are fixed across the baselines. This ensures that we have a fair comparison across different
baselines.
For the social navigation task, the output space of the policy is the linear and angular velocities with
the range of вҲ’1 and +1 (2-dim), followed by scaling it to вҲ’10 and +10, which is equivalent to
2.5m/s in the real world. We use the same maximum linear and angular velocities of 2.5m/s (rad/s)
for both humanoid and robot. Since the Spot robot has a long body shape and cannot be represented
by a single cylinder, we use a 2-cylinder representation, placed in the center and the front of the robot
for collision detection. This ensures that the robot arm camera does not penetrate walls or obstacles
while allowing the robot to navigate in a cluttered scene.
Fig. 5 shows the average distance between the humanoid and the robot and reward learning curve
over the number of simulation steps for the end-to-end RL policy and its ablations. We see that the
agent is able to improve the reward while minimizing the distance to the humanoid for finding and
following the humanoid over training.
Oracle for the Minimum Steps. To compute the Finding Success Weighted by Path Steps and
Following rate, we need to measure the optimal finding time l. This measure is similar to the optimal
path length in navigation tasks, but in this case the target to navigate to is dynamic. We thus define
the optimal path length l as the minimum time that it would take for an agent to reach the humanoid
if it knew the humanoidвҖҷs trajectory in advance. Formally, let hi be the humanoid position at step i
and ri the minimum number of steps to go from the robot starting position to hi , we define l as:
                                                                  l = arg min(ri < i),                                              (1)
                                                                           i
measuring the earliest time where the robot will be able to find the humanoid. To compute this
measure, we split the humanoid trajectory into equally spaced waypoints, we then use a path planner
to measure the number of steps it would take to reach each waypoint from the robot starting position
and take the earliest waypoint satisying Eq. 1. Given this measure, the optimal following time
corresponds to that of a robot which can find the humanoid in l and follow it until the end of the
episode, i.e. E вҲ’ l, with E being the episode length.

A.2                          S OCIAL R EARRANGEMENT

We train all the rearrangement baselines using DD-PPO (Wijmans et al., 2019), distributing training
across 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Each GPU runs 24 parallel environments, and collects 128 steps for
each update. We train with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) using a learning rate of 2.5eвҲ’4 . We use
2 PPO minibatches and 1 epoch per update, an entropy loss of 1eвҲ’4 , and clip the gradient norm to
0.2. All policies are trained for 100M environment steps. The policy uses a ResNet-18 (He et al.,
2016) visual encoder to embed the 256 Г— 256 depth input image into a 512 dimension embedding.
The visual embedding is then concatenated with the state sensor values and passed through a 2-layer
LSTM network with hidden dimension 512. The LSTM output is then set to an action and value
prediction network. All methods use the same reward function specified as +10 for succeeding in the


                                                                                17
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               0.8                                                                 25
                                                                                   20
               0.6
Success Rate
                                                                                   15


                                                                          Reward
                                                       Learn-Single                                                            Learn-Single
               0.4                                     Plan-Pop1                                                               Plan-Pop1
                                                                                   10
                                                       Plan-Pop2                                                               Plan-Pop2
               0.2                                     Plan-Pop3                    5                                          Plan-Pop3
                                                       Plan-Pop4                                                               Plan-Pop4
                                                       Learn-Pop                    0                                          Learn-Pop
               0.0
                     0        20M         40M        60M        80M                       0           20M         40M       60M         80M
                                         Steps                                                                   Steps
                     (a) Baselines training success over time                             (b) Baselines training reward over time
               0.6
                                                                                   17.5
               0.5                                                                 15.0
               0.4                                                                 12.5
Success Rate


                                                                          Reward
                                                                                   10.0
               0.3
                                                                                    7.5
               0.2                                 Plan-Pop3                                                              Plan-Pop3
                                                   - Depth + RGB                    5.0                                   - Depth + RGB
               0.1                                 - Humanoid-GPS                   2.5                                   - Humanoid-GPS
                                                   - Primitive actions                                                    - Primitive actions
                                                                                    0.0
                     0        20M         40M         60M           80M                       0        20M        40M        60M           80M
                                         Steps                                                                   Steps
                     (c) Ablations training success over time                                     (d) Ablations reward over time

  Figure 6: Social Rearrangement training curves. We plot the training success and reward for the
  social rearrangement baselines (top) and ablations (bottom). We use 3 seeds for each model.


  overall task, +5 for completing any subgoal consisting of picking one of the target objects or placing
  an object at its goal, вҲ’0.005 penalty per simulator timestep to encourage faster completion, and a вҲ’5
  penalty and episode termination if the agents collide. All baselines are trained with three different
  random seeds, and results are reported averaged across those seeds.
  The final social rearrangement reward is as follows:

                                rtsocial-rearrange = 10 В· вҠ®success + 5 В· вҠ®subgoal вҲ’ 5 В· вҠ®collision вҲ’ 0.005.


  Fig. 6 shows learning curves for all baselines and ablations on the social rearrangement task. We
  present the overall task success as well as the training reward for all approaches, averaged over 3
  seeds. We observe that some baselines like Learn-Single and Plan-pop1 are able to learn the task
  much faster than other baselines like Plan-pop2,3,4 due to a simpler training setting. Among the
  ablations, removing the sensors used in original training make learning slower, with primitive actions
  having the most effect.
  Learned and Oracle skills. For ease of learning, we adopt a two-layer policy architecture for all
  baselines, where a learned high-level policy selects a low-level skill to execute based on observations.
  The action space of the learned high-level policy consists of discrete selections from all possible
  combinations of skills and objects/receptacles allowed at each step. We work with a known, fixed
  library of low-level skills that can accomplish instructions like вҖңnavigate to the fridge" or вҖңpick an
  apple." For the robot, we consider both learned skills and oracle skills that use privileged information
  from the environment. Additionally, we provide 4 вҖҳprimitiveвҖҷ actions to the high-level policy that
  move the robot forward/backward or turn it left/right by a fixed amount. During training, we use
  the oracle low-level skills to train the high-level policies due to faster training speed, but present
  evaluation results with both oracle and learned skills. For the humanoid, low-level skills are always
  oracle, as described in Section 3.1.


                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The oracle navigation skill has access to a map of the environment, and plans a shortest path to the
agentвҖҷs destination. Manipulation oracle skills like вҖңpick or place an appleвҖқ instantaneously attach
the apple to the gripper, or place it at the target location. If the high-level policy chooses to execute
an infeasible low-level action, such as attempting to pick an object that is out of reach (based on
predefined pre-conditions), the action results in a no-op with no changes to the environment. If the
robot approaches the humanoid within a short distance (< 1.5m) while executing a skill, the current
skill is aborted, and the high-level policy replans its next action. This results in reactive behaviors,
like the high-level policy commanding the robot to move backwards to give way to the humanoid in
narrow corridors, or choosing to pick the second object after realizing that the humanoid is picking
the first.
When using learned skills, we use the same 2-layer policy architecture, except use learned navigation,
and learned pick/place skills, which operate entirely using robot depth and onboard sensors. These
skills do not use privileged information, and hence are more prone to failures in the diverse set of
scenes considered in our tasks. Refer to Section B for more detail on training and design of low-level
skills.
When evaluating social rearrangement with learned low-level skills, we keep the high-level policy
frozen, after training it with oracle skills. Hence the high-level policy is not robust to low-level
execution failures. As a result we observe a considerable drop in the overall performance, when using
learned skills (Table 3). This performance can potentially be improved by training the high-level
policy with learned low-level skills in-the-loop, or by fine-tuning in this setting. We leave this to
future work.

B     L OW- LEVEL S KILL T RAINING
We include the implementation details for training the low-level skills: navigation, pick, and place
skills, which are coordinated by the high level policy described in Section 4.2.
Navigation Skill. Given the location of the target object, the robot uses neural network policies4 to
find the object, similar to PointNav (Anderson et al., 2018). This navigation skill is different from
the social navigation policy since the former does not require the robot to continuously follow the
humanoid while avoiding collision. The robot has access to an arm depth camera (224 Г— 171 with
hFOV of 55), and the relative pose of the target object in polar coordinate system (2-dim). Similar to
the policy used in the social navigation task, the output space of the navigation skill is the linear and
angular velocities with the range of вҲ’1 and +1 (2-dim), followed by scaling to вҲ’10 and +10. We
also use the same 2-cylinder collision shape representation as the one in the social navigation task to
ensure that the robot arm camera does not penetrate walls or obstacles while allowing the robot to
navigate in a cluttered scene.
During training, the object navigation reward that encourages moving forward the target object
rtdistance at time t is defined as вҲҶ(btвҲ’1 , etвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(bt , et ), where вҲҶ(bt , et ) is the shortest path distance
between the robot location bt and the object et at time t. To encourage the robot to orient itself toward
the target object for improving grasping, it receives an additional вҖҳorientationвҖҷ reward rtorientation when
вҲҶ(btвҲ’1 , etвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(bt , et ) вүӨ 3, in which the orientation reward penalizes the dot product of the robot
forward vector and the robot to target object vector weighted by the scale of 5 Г— 10вҲ’2 . A navigation
success reward of +10 is given if (1) the distance between the agent and the target object is less than
1.5m, and (2) the dot product of the robot forward vector and the robot to target object vector > 0.5.
To reduce the collision between the robot and the scene, a penalty of вҲ’5 Г— 10вҲ’3 is given if there is
a collision. Finally, a slack reward of вҲ’1 Г— 10вҲ’2 is given to encourage the robot to find the target
object as soon as possible. The final navigation reward is as follows:
                 rtnav = 10вҠ®success + rtdistance + 0.05rtorientation вҲ’ 0.005вҠ®collision
                                                                             t         вҲ’ 0.01.

During training, the episode terminates if the robot finds the object or reaches the maximum episode
simulation step of 1500. In addition, the episode also terminates if the robot collides with a humanoid
that walks randomly, similar to the setup in training social navigation policies. To make sure that the
robot learns to navigate in complex scenes, the robot is placed at least 4m away from the target object
   4
     In this section, we use вҖҳpolicyвҖҷ and вҖҳskillвҖҷ interchangeably to refer to a controller parameterized by neural
networks. In addition, we use вҖҳrobotвҖҷ and вҖҳagentвҖҷ interchangeably to refer to a reinforcement learning agent.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


location. We train the navigation skill using DD-PPO, distributing training across 4 NVIDIA A100
GPUs, and with learning rate of 1 Г— 10вҲ’4 and the maximum gradient norm of 0.2. Each GPU runs
24 parallel environments, and collects 128 steps for each update. We use a long short-term memory
networks (LSTM) policy with ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) as the visual backbone and two recurrent
layers, resulting nearly 8517k parameters. It takes about 300 million simulation steps (roughly 6 days
of training) to reach 90% navigation success rate using the above hardware setup.
Pick Skill. Given the location of the target object, the robot uses neural network policies to pick
up an object by controlling the arm and moving the base (i.e., mobile pick, as defined in Gu et al.
(2023)). The robot has access to (1) an arm depth camera (224 Г— 171 with hFOV of 55), (2) the
relative pose of the target object in a Cartesian coordinate system (3-dim), (3) the arm joint angles
(7-dim), (4) a binary holding detector if the robot is holding an object (1-dim), and (5) the relative
pose of arm end-effector to the target resting location in a Cartesian coordinate system (3-dim). The
output space of the pick skill is (1) the linear and angular base velocities with the range of вҲ’1 and +1
(2-dim), followed by scaling to вҲ’10 and +10, (2) the delta arm joint angles applied to the arm with
the range of вҲ’1 and +1 (7-dim), followed by a scaling factor of 5 Г— 10вҲ’2 , and a binary command
to snap/desnap the object to the end-effector (1-dim). The robot can only pick up the object if the
distance between the end-effector and the object is less than 0.15m (we teleport the object to the
end-effector to simulate the grasping).
During training, before picking up the object, the pick reward that encourages the arm to move toward
the object rtmove at time t is defined as вҲҶ(ctвҲ’1 , etвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(ct , et ), where вҲҶ(ct , et ) is the geodesic
distance between the robotвҖҷs arm end-effector location ct and the object et at time t. After picking
up the object, the retract-arm reward that encourages the robot to retract the arm rtretract at time t
is defined as вҲҶ(ctвҲ’1 , qtвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(ct , qt ), where вҲҶ(ct , qt ) is the distance between the robotвҖҷs arm
end-effector location ct and the target end-effector resting location qt at time t. The robot receives
the success reward of +2 if the robot (1) picks up the right target object, and (2) вҲҶ(ct , qt ) is less
than 0.15m. Finally, a slack reward of вҲ’5 Г— 103 is given to encourage the robot to pick up the target
object as soon as possible. The final pick reward is as follows:

                               rtpick = 2вҠ®success + rtmove + rtretract вҲ’ 0.005.

During training, the episode terminates if the robot (1) picks up the wrong object or drops the object,
both with the penalty of вҲ’0.5, (2) reaches maximum simulation steps of 1250, or (3) successfully
picks up the right target object and retracts the arm, with the success reward of +2. To make sure that
the robot learns to orient itself to pick up the object, the robot is placed at least 3m away from the
target object location. We train the pick skill using DD-PPO, distributing training across 8 NVIDIA
GPUs, and with learning rate of 3 Г— 10вҲ’4 and the maximum gradient norm of 0.2. Each GPU runs
18 parallel environments, and collects 128 steps for each update. We use a long short-term memory
network (LSTM) policy with ResNet-18 as the visual backbone and two recurrent layers, resulting
nearly 8540k parameters. It takes about 100 million simulation steps (roughly one day of training) to
reach 90% pick success rate using the above hardware setup.
Place Skill. Given the location of the goal location, the robot uses neural network policies to place
an object by controlling the arm and moving the base (i.e., mobile place Gu et al. (2023)). For
consistency, the input space of the place skill has the exact same input space as the pick skill. The
output space of the place skill also shares the same output space of the pick skill. The robot can only
place the object if the distance between the end-effector and the target place location is less than
0.15m (we teleport the object from the end-effector to the target place location).
During training, before placing the object, the place reward that encourages the robot to move close
to the target location rtmove at time t is defined as вҲҶ(ctвҲ’1 , etвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҶ(ct , et ), where вҲҶ(ct , et ) is the
distance between the robotвҖҷs arm end-effector location ct and the object et at time t. After placing the
object, the retract-arm reward rtretract is the same as the one in pick skill to learn to reset the arm. In
addition, the robot receives an addition bonus reward rtbonus of +5 if the robot places the object in the
right location. Finally, the robot receives the success reward of +10 if (1) the robot places the object
in the right location, and (2) вҲҶ(ct , qt ) is less than 0.15m. A slack reward of вҲ’5 Г— 103 is given to
encourage the robot to place the object as soon as possible. The final place reward is as follows:

                         rtplace = 10вҠ®success + rtbonus + rtmove + rtretract вҲ’ 0.005.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           SвҶ‘         SPSвҶ‘         FвҶ‘         CRвҶ“         BYR         TDвҶ“         FDвҶ“
Heuristic Expert           1.00        0.97        0.51        0.52        0.24        2.56        1.72
End-to-end RL           0.97Вұ0.00   0.65Вұ0.00   0.44Вұ0.01   0.51Вұ0.03   0.19Вұ0.02   3.43Вұ0.07   1.70Вұ0.04
- humanoid GPS          0.76Вұ0.02   0.34Вұ0.01   0.29Вұ0.01   0.48Вұ0.03   0.13Вұ0.00   5.18Вұ0.11   1.64Вұ0.02
- humanoid detector     0.98Вұ0.00   0.68Вұ0.00   0.37Вұ0.01   0.64Вұ0.05   0.16Вұ0.03   3.44Вұ0.03   1.67Вұ0.09
- arm depth             0.94Вұ0.01   0.54Вұ0.01   0.19Вұ0.01   0.71Вұ0.08   0.15Вұ0.01   4.94Вұ0.03   1.91Вұ0.27
- arm depth + arm RGB   0.96Вұ0.00   0.61Вұ0.01   0.38Вұ0.02   0.55Вұ0.04   0.17Вұ0.02   3.74Вұ0.05   1.82Вұ0.05

Table 2: Social Navigation baseline results. We report three additional metrics: (1) Backup-Yield
Rate (BYR), (2) The Total Distance between the robot and the humanoid (TD), and (3) The вҖҳFollowingвҖҷ
Distance between the robot and the humanoid after the first encounter (FD).


Figure 7: Illustration of Social Navigation end-to-end RL policyвҖҷs behavior. The robot finds the
humanoid (left). The robot yields to the humanoid by doing a вҖҳthree-point-turnвҖҷ motion (center). The
robot yields to the humanoid by backing up (right).
During training, the episode terminates if the robot (1) places the object in the wrong location, (2)
reaches maximum simulation steps of 1250, or (3) successfully places the right target object and
retracts the arm, with the success reward of +10. To make sure that the robot learns to orient itself to
place the object, the robot is placed at least 3m away from the target object location. Similar to the
one in pick skill, we train the navigation skill using DD-PPO, distributing training across 8 NVIDIA
GPUs, and with learning rate of 3 Г— 10вҲ’4 and the maximum gradient norm of 0.2. Each GPU runs
18 parallel environments, and collects 128 steps for each update. We use a long short-term memory
network (LSTM) policy with ResNet-18 as the visual backbone and two recurrent layers, resulting
nearly 8540k parameters. It takes about 50 million simulation steps (roughly half of a day of training)
to reach 90% place success rate using the above hardware setup.

C     D ETAILED C OMPARISON R ESULTS

Here we provide additional detailed results comparing the performance of different baselines along
additional metrics.

C.1     S OCIAL NAVIGATION

In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the Social Navigation task, studying the behavior of
the different baselines at evaluation time.

C.1.1    A DDITIONAL M ETRICS
In Table 2, we further report three additional metrics: (1) Backup-Yield Rate (BYR): How often did
the robot do a backup or yield motion to avoid collision when the human is nearby? We define a
вҖҳbackup motionвҖҷ as a backward movement by the robot to avoid collision with the humanoid when
the distance between them is less than 1.5 meters. Furthermore, we define a вҖҳyield motionвҖҷ as a
robotвҖҷs motion aimed at avoiding collision with the humanoid when the distance between them is
less than 1.5 meters, and the robotвҖҷs velocity is less than 0.1m/s; (2) The Total Distance between
the robot and the humanoid (TD): What was the L2 distance (in meter) between the robot and the
humanoid over the total number of episode steps?, and (3) The вҖҳFollowingвҖҷ Distance between the
robot and the humanoid after the first encounter (FD): What was the L2 distance between the robot


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the humanoid after the robot finds the humanoid? In summary, the backup-yield rate lets us
quantitatively measure the frequency of backup and yield motions, and the two distance matrices
provide an observation of how close the robot and the humanoid are during the finding and following
stages. Ideally, the FD should be between 1-2m, while policies with higher SPS have lower TD.

C.1.2    A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide additional analysis for the end-to-end RL policy and its ablations. Fig. 7
provides an example of how the robot moves to find the humanoid and produces a backup motion to
yield to the humanoid by anticipating where the humanoid will walk next. For the ablation baseline
without the humanoid GPS, we observe that it learns two types of finding humanoid strategies. The
first strategy is that the robot randomly walks to increase the chances of finding the humanoid. The
second strategy is that the robot keeps rotating until there is a humanoid in sight (i.e., scanning the
environment), captured by the humanoid detector. As a result, compared to the method with the
humanoid GPS, the one without the humanoid GPS needs more steps to find the humanoid (lower
SPS). It also tends to lose track of the humanoid when the humanoid walks into another room, leading
to the case that the humanoid is not in sight, and the robot needs to find the humanoid again (lower
following rate).
For the ablation baseline without the humanoid detector, we observe that it has worse following
performance (7% drop), and a higher collision rate (13% increase) than those of the one with the
humanoid detector. This occurs because while the humanoid GPS offers a relative L2 distance to the
humanoid, it does not account for scenarios where a wall or obstacle obstructs the robotвҖҷs view. As a
result, the robot has no idea if there is a wall with a low L2 distance to the humanoid, leading to a
lower following rate and higher collision rate. Providing the humanoid detector allows the agent to
вҖҳseeвҖҷ if there is a humanoid there, and thus follow the humanoid.
For the ablation baseline without the arm depth, we find that it has the highest collision rate (leading
to the lowest following rate). This is because the arm depth provides useful information to know and
record where the empty space/obstacles are (incorporated with the LSTM memory) when the robot
needs to avoid collision. As a result, we find that the baselines with the arm depth or arm RGB tend
to have a lower collision rate.
Finally, for the ablation baseline with the arm depth being replaced by the arm RGB, we find that it
has a slightly higher collision rate than the one with the arm depth. This is because the arm depth
provides information about the distance to obstacles, leading to a better moving strategy to avoid
collisions.
Overall, we find that the end-to-end RL policy and its ablations have a comparable Backup-Yield Rate,
suggesting that humanoid avoidance motion is learned through RL training. At the same time, the RL
policy and its ablations can maintain a close distance to the humanoid (low Following Distance). But
still, there is a performance gap between the RL policy and the Heuristic Expert in terms of SPS and
the following rate. This leaves room for future improvement.

C.2     S OCIAL R EARRANGEMENT

Here we present additional metrics and analysis for social rearrangement. We also describe the
different ablations in more details.

C.2.1    A DDITIONAL M ETRICS
Collision Rate (CR). Together with the success rate and relative efficiency, we are interested in
measuring whether the social rearrangement agents can complete tasks safely, without colliding with
the humanoid agent. Thus, we measure the collision rate (CR) in both the train-population and the
zsc-population settings. Following Sec. 3.2, we define CR as the proportion of episodes containing
collisions between the robot and the humanoid. We report the results in Table 3, along with the
Success rate (SR) and Relative Efficiency (RE) metrics. We observe similar trends to the success
rate measure, with Learn-Single, Plan-Pop1 , having low CR with the training population but high
CR with ZSC population (0.09 вҶ’ 0.23 with train-pop for Plan-pop1 ). Plan-Pop4 obtains the best
collision rate in the training population, with a rate of 9%, despite having a more diverse population
than other baselines. This is because one of the agents in the training population for Plan-pop4 stays


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Method                                   Train-pop-eval                                       ZSC-pop-eval
                          SRвҶ‘            REвҶ‘          CRвҶ“         RCвҶ‘          SRвҶ‘            REвҶ‘             CRвҶ“       RCвҶ‘
 Learn-Single          98.50Вұ0.48     159.2Вұ1.0     0.12Вұ0.12   0.49Вұ0.00   50.94Вұ39.55   106.02Вұ34.32    0.25Вұ0.33   0.45Вұ0.02
 Plan-Pop1              91.2Вұ2.63      152.4Вұ5.4    0.09Вұ0.09   0.46Вұ0.00   50.44Вұ39.02   109.75Вұ34.63    0.23Вұ0.31   0.43Вұ0.05
 Plan-Pop2             66.89Вұ1.47     110.06Вұ6.83   0.10Вұ0.10   0.50Вұ0.00   70.23Вұ7.02    102.13Вұ11.10    0.15Вұ0.17   0.52Вұ0.05
 Plan-Pop3             77.79Вұ2.86     118.95Вұ6.04   0.12Вұ0.12   0.48Вұ0.01   71.79Вұ7.38    101.99Вұ15.18    0.17Вұ0.19   0.53Вұ0.05
 Plan-Pop4             72.42Вұ1.32     105.49Вұ1.7    0.09Вұ0.09   0.55Вұ0.00   71.32Вұ6.47     103.53Вұ9.8     0.16Вұ0.17   0.53Вұ0.04
 Learn-Pop             92.20Вұ2.21     135.32Вұ3.43   0.15Вұ0.15   0.50Вұ0.00   48.52Вұ35.51   99.80Вұ31.02     0.26Вұ0.33   0.46Вұ0.02
 + learned skills      41.09Вұ2.15      79.63Вұ1.76   0.37Вұ0.19   0.12Вұ0.12   21.44Вұ18.26     76.45Вұ9.23    0.17Вұ0.17   0.12Вұ0.12
 - depth + RGB         76.70Вұ3.15     110.04Вұ3.05   0.13Вұ0.14   0.49Вұ0.02   70.89Вұ8.18     100.16Вұ14.79   0.16Вұ0.18   0.54Вұ0.04
 - Humanoid-GPS        76.45Вұ1.85     108.96Вұ2.66   0.18Вұ0.18   0.49Вұ0.01   68.70Вұ6.75      98.58Вұ10.32   0.22Вұ0.24   0.53Вұ0.05
 - Primitive actions   85.71Вұ1.58     124.36Вұ3.79   0.32Вұ0.32   0.55Вұ0.00   76.80Вұ9.66    111.97Вұ10.91    0.33Вұ0.34   0.58Вұ0.04


                                    Table 3: Social Rearrangement baseline results.


in place does no part of the task, thus reducing the total number of collisions. In the ZSC setting,
Plan-Pop2 obtains the lowest collision rate, though the rates are comparable across Plan-Pop2,4 .
Ratio of Completion (RC). We also report, for all our baselines, the ratio of the task completed
by the robot, which measures the proportion of objects that were rearranged by the robot agent. A
value of 1.0 indicates that the task is completely done by the robot, whereas 0.0 indicates that the
task was done by the humanoid alone. Values closer to 0.5 indicate that the task was split among the
robot and humanoid, resulting in increased efficiency. We show the results in Table 3. Almost all
baselines achieve a RC close to 0.5 with training population. Learn-Single achieves a RC close to
0.5 in the train population, showing that both agents learned to split the task to perform it efficiently.
Plan-Pop1 shows a slight decrease in RC, which is consistent with the drop in the SR, indicating that
agents are still splitting the task evenly, while overall achieving lower success rate. Plan-pop4 has
the highest train-pop RC, because one of its training population agents complete no part of the task,
requiring the robot to rearrange both objects. The results on ZSC population follow success rates,
with Plan-Pop2,3,4 achieving higher RC, since the agents are trained to rearrange either object. In
comparison, Learn-Single, Plan-pop1 and Learn-Pop have slightly reduced RC due to inability to
generalize to partners that rearrange different objects than their training population.

C.2.2      A DDITIONAL A BLATION R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
In the main paper we presented ablation experiments where we: (1) replaced oracle skills with learned
skills, (2) replaced depth arm camera with RGB, (3) Removed the humanoid GPS. Here, we present
an additional ablation, where we remove some primitive actions like move backwards, forwards, turn
left or right from the action space of the high-level policy. This measures the effect of these primitive
navigation actions in the Social Rearrangement task, called - Primitive actions. The robot agent is
trained in the same setting as Plan-Pop3 , but without the four low level navigation actions. We report
the results in Table 3. As we can see, the collision rate (CR) increases significantly, showing that
the primitive navigation actions are essential to reduce collisions between both agents. At the same
time, removing the navigation actions improves the success rate and RE both in the Train-Pop and
ZSC-pop settings. This is because the agent does not spend time making way for the humanoid,
which allows to complete the task in a lower number of steps. Despite being faster at completion, the
high CR makes this baseline non-ideal as it reduces the вҖңsafetyвҖқ of human or humanoid collaborators.

C.2.3      Z ERO - SHOT POPULATION DETAILS
Here we describe the ZSC population used in our experiments in detail, and their effect in the behavior
of the trained agents in the zero-shot coordination setting.
The 10 ZSC population collaborators used in ZSC eval are created as follows: 3 are trained check-
points from the training of Learn-Single, 3 are trained checkpoints from the training run of Learn-Pop
and 4 are planner-based humanoids, where 1 picks up both objects, 2 pick up one of the two, and 1
stays still. For the learned checkpoints, we only use the learned policy for the humanoid, and discard
the learned robot policy. As a result, most baselines have seen about 1/3 of the ZSC population during
training, and need to generalize to 2/3 of the population. In general, the learned ZSC evaluation
agents tend to focus on rearranging one of the 2 objects in the environment, while the planner-based
agents follow their scripted behavior.


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Learn-Single 32.59Вұ46.07 65.92Вұ46.61 65.16Вұ46.08 26.81Вұ31.90 62.52Вұ44.17 31.59Вұ44.51 64.06Вұ45.30 47.87Вұ0.42 64.33Вұ0.54 48.58Вұ0.55 50.94Вұ39.55
                      Plan-Pop1      0.08Вұ0.04   96.59Вұ1.46 95.86Вұ2.52     4.19Вұ0.26   92.79Вұ1.81   0.09Вұ0.03   94.63Вұ2.51 46.96Вұ1.04 64.49Вұ0.81 48.68Вұ0.55 54.44Вұ39.02

 Training agents      Plan-Pop2      79.22Вұ5.66 72.62Вұ5.94 70.41Вұ5.31 59.57Вұ4.51 69.04Вұ5.15 72.97Вұ5.46 65.79Вұ4.56 67.26Вұ1.63 77.06Вұ0.83 68.40Вұ2.88 70.23Вұ7.02

                      Plan-Pop3      73.21Вұ1.93 78.07Вұ6.33 76.36Вұ7.18 59.63Вұ3.59 72.19Вұ8.60 69.96Вұ3.09 71.60Вұ7.75 69.81Вұ3.56 78.22Вұ2.72 68.90Вұ2.49 71.79Вұ7.38

                      Plan-Pop4      76.48Вұ6.24 72.39Вұ7.67 71.50Вұ6.55 63.60Вұ1.86 68.14Вұ5.04 73.03Вұ4.55 66.63Вұ6.05 68.59Вұ1.80 77.72Вұ0.83 75.14Вұ1.71 71.32Вұ6.47

                      Learn-Pop 67.37Вұ41.80 38.26Вұ42.58 37.05Вұ41.84 49.79Вұ27.16 34.38Вұ40.10 63.59Вұ39.93 34.41Вұ43.34 47.30Вұ1.77 64.48Вұ1.19 48.61Вұ0.66 48.52Вұ35.51
                                            ner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4 Partner 5 Partner 6 Partner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4veraged
                                      -Part       -         -         -         -         -        - Plan- Plan- Plan-                   A
                                 Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Plan
                                                                                               ZSC-Agents
                                                             (a) Success rate across different ZSC-agents
                   Learn-Single 97.45Вұ41.89 127.85Вұ42.44 125.49Вұ40.77 77.64Вұ14.52 105.51Вұ26.66 91.14Вұ32.97 129.58Вұ43.66 100.78Вұ0.21 108.92Вұ0.65 95.81Вұ0.68 106.02Вұ34.33
                      Plan-Pop1      67.82Вұ0.02 153.88Вұ3.66 150.57Вұ5.67 67.46Вұ0.07 123.58Вұ1.75 67.82Вұ0.02 160.24Вұ3.54 100.20Вұ0.95 109.48Вұ0.90 96.43Вұ0.61 109.75Вұ34.63
 Training agents


                      Plan-Pop2      98.11Вұ5.31 114.15Вұ3.39 110.16Вұ2.95 79.37Вұ1.58 98.36Вұ1.17 90.03Вұ4.00 113.26Вұ3.25 105.47Вұ1.78 112.28Вұ1.41 100.07Вұ1.65 102.13Вұ11.10

                      Plan-Pop3 97.24Вұ12.42 113.12Вұ16.67 110.93Вұ16.49 81.00Вұ6.22 97.56Вұ11.95 91.46Вұ10.41 113.57Вұ15.79 105.17Вұ3.49 111.39Вұ2.10 98.49Вұ1.38 101.99Вұ15.18
                      Plan-Pop4 105.28Вұ7.56 109.88Вұ6.09 107.67Вұ6.76 84.90Вұ3.94 95.31Вұ6.77 96.67Вұ7.51 109.59Вұ5.50 107.43Вұ1.17 113.29Вұ1.58 105.34Вұ2.15 103.54Вұ9.84
                      Learn-Pop 124.02Вұ39.60 97.57Вұ41.77 96.08Вұ39.82 85.14Вұ12.23 84.79Вұ24.35 110.03Вұ29.80 98.70Вұ42.75 97.75Вұ2.00 108.59Вұ1.99 95.34Вұ0.77 99.80Вұ31.01
                                            ner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4 Partner 5 Partner 6 Partner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4veraged
                                      -Part       -         -         -         -         -        - Plan- Plan- Plan-                   A
                                 Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Plan
                                                                                               ZSC-Agents
                                                                      (b) Efficiency rate ZSC-agents
                   Learn-Single      0.73Вұ0.35   0.48Вұ0.33     0.49Вұ0.33   0.74Вұ0.20   0.53Вұ0.29    0.74Вұ0.33   0.29Вұ0.11   0.34Вұ0.01   0.38Вұ0.02   0.29Вұ0.01   0.25Вұ0.33

                      Plan-Pop1      0.94Вұ0.02   0.23Вұ0.01     0.24Вұ0.00   0.86Вұ0.01   0.30Вұ0.00    0.94Вұ0.02   0.19Вұ0.00   0.31Вұ0.01   0.35Вұ0.02   0.26Вұ0.01   0.23Вұ0.31
 Training agents


                      Plan-Pop2      0.36Вұ0.02   0.32Вұ0.04     0.33Вұ0.04   0.46Вұ0.02   0.36Вұ0.04    0.41Вұ0.03   0.17Вұ0.00   0.21Вұ0.00   0.24Вұ0.01   0.18Вұ0.01   0.15Вұ0.17

                      Plan-Pop3      0.40Вұ0.07   0.35Вұ0.08     0.34Вұ0.06   0.52Вұ0.07   0.39Вұ0.06    0.44Вұ0.08   0.20Вұ0.05   0.22Вұ0.02   0.25Вұ0.02   0.19Вұ0.01   0.17Вұ0.19

                      Plan-Pop4      0.33Вұ0.03   0.34Вұ0.04     0.35Вұ0.03   0.47Вұ0.05   0.40Вұ0.04    0.38Вұ0.04   0.20Вұ0.04   0.21Вұ0.03   0.23Вұ0.02   0.19Вұ0.02   0.16Вұ0.17

                      Learn-Pop      0.50Вұ0.34   0.71Вұ0.31     0.74Вұ0.31   0.59Вұ0.22   0.74Вұ0.29    0.52Вұ0.32   0.40Вұ0.13   0.32Вұ0.03   0.39Вұ0.01   0.30Вұ0.01   0.26Вұ0.33

                                            ner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4 Partner 5 Partner 6 Partner 1 Partner 2 Partner 3 Partner 4veraged
                                      -Part       -         -         -         -         -        - Plan- Plan- Plan-                   A
                                 Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Learn Plan
                                                                                               ZSC-Agents
                                                                       (c) Collision rate ZSC-agents
                   Learn-Single      0.45Вұ0.02   0.47Вұ0.02     0.47Вұ0.03   0.45Вұ0.02   0.46Вұ0.04    0.44Вұ0.03   0.47Вұ0.01   0.47Вұ0.00   0.44Вұ0.00   0.44Вұ0.00   0.46Вұ0.03

                      Plan-Pop1      0.38Вұ0.06   0.48Вұ0.00     0.48Вұ0.01   0.41Вұ0.04   0.48Вұ0.00    0.37Вұ0.06   0.47Вұ0.01   0.44Вұ0.03   0.41Вұ0.03   0.42Вұ0.02   0.44Вұ0.05
 Training agents


                      Plan-Pop2      0.59Вұ0.02   0.48Вұ0.02     0.48Вұ0.02   0.58Вұ0.01   0.48Вұ0.02    0.57Вұ0.02   0.46Вұ0.01   0.51Вұ0.01   0.48Вұ0.01   0.54Вұ0.01   0.52Вұ0.05

                      Plan-Pop3      0.55Вұ0.05   0.52Вұ0.04     0.52Вұ0.03   0.58Вұ0.02   0.51Вұ0.02    0.55Вұ0.04   0.50Вұ0.04   0.52Вұ0.01   0.49Вұ0.00   0.53Вұ0.01   0.53Вұ0.04

                      Plan-Pop4      0.55Вұ0.06   0.52Вұ0.06     0.52Вұ0.06   0.58Вұ0.03   0.51Вұ0.05    0.55Вұ0.05   0.50Вұ0.07   0.53Вұ0.01   0.49Вұ0.00   0.57Вұ0.01   0.53Вұ0.05

                      Learn-Pop      0.48Вұ0.01   0.47Вұ0.02     0.46Вұ0.02   0.50Вұ0.01   0.44Вұ0.04    0.48Вұ0.02   0.46Вұ0.02   0.45Вұ0.02   0.44Вұ0.01   0.45Вұ0.01   0.46Вұ0.03

                                              er 1      er 2      er 3      er 4      er 5      er 6      er 1      er 2      er 3      er 4    ed
                                    ar n-Partn arn-Partn arn-Partn arn-Partn arn-Partn arn-Partn lan-Partn lan-Partn lan-Partn lan-Partn Averag
                                 Le          Le        Le        Le        Le        Le        P          P         P         P
                                                                                               ZSC-Agents
                                                               (d) Ratio of Completion for ZSC-agents

Figure 8: Zero-shot coordination. We report the performance of the baseline agents in the zero-shot
coordination setting. Each row corresponds to one of the baselines and the columns represent the
different types of zero-shot coordination agents.


                                                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Simulation                                                       Real

Figure 9: Robot Embodiment. Spot robot in the simulation environment is designed to minimize the
embodiment gaps to the robot in the physical world.


We measure the trained agentsвҖҷ performance when evaluated with different agents from the ZSC-pop-
eval population. In Figs. 8a, 8b, 8c and 8d, we show the success rate (a), efficiency rate (b), collision
rate (c) and ratio of completion (d) of the different baseline trained agents under this setting. Each
row corresponds to one of the baselines, trained and averaged across three seeds, and each column
corresponds to one of the 10 ZSC evaluation agents. The last column corresponds to the ZSC-pop-val
results in Fig. 4.
The Learn-Single agent overfits to one type of partner, learning to split the task by focusing on
rearranging a single object and letting the other agent rearrange the remaining one. When evaluated
with a ZSC partner, it will either be highly successful and efficient, if the evaluation partner was
trained to pick the opposite object, or exhibit low performance if the evaluation agent is focused
on the same object. For this reason the success rate in the first row of Fig. 8a is close to 33% and
66% for the Learn-Single agent, corresponding to one or two of the 3 training seeds matching the
ZSC-partner.
Plan-Pop1 exhibits a similar behavior to the Learn-Single baseline, but in this case, the agent is
trained with a planner that always focuses on the same object, which makes Plan-Pop1 focus on the
opposite objects across all the training seeds. As a result, the agent has a success rate close to 100%
or 0% for the different ZSC evaluation agents. As expected, it also exhibits a high success rate when
partnering with the Plan1 agent. Because of this, the agent also exhibits a significant increase in
relative efficiency when partnering with certain agents. As a results it is the method with highest
relative efficiency, when averaged across ZSC-agents, despite exhibiting high variance.
Plan-Pop2 is trained with a population of agents arranging one of the two objects at random and
therefore it cannot specialize anymore by always focusing on the same object. As a result, the agent
shows much lower variance across the members of the ZSC-population, resulting in a higher success
rate. At the same time, it needs to adapt to the behavior of the ZSC partnering agent, which results
in lower peak efficiency than Plan-Pop1 or Learn-Single, resulting on a lower relative efficiency
on average. The average collision rate is also reduced relative to the previous baselines, with a
lower collision rate with planning-based partners than the learning-based ones. Interestingly, this
trend of lower CR with ZSC plan-agents holds across all baselines. We believe this is because ZSC
plan-agents stop after finishing their portion of the task, while ZSC learned-agents continue to move
in the environment (since our reward function does not penalize this). As a result, the chances of
colliding with ZSC plan-partners is higher than with ZSC learned partners.
Plan-Pop3,4 exhibit very similar performance across the different agents in the ZSC population.
Their success rate shows a slight improvement with respect to Plan-Pop2 , whereas the relative
efficiency decreases slightly for Plan-Pop3 and increases slightly for Plan-Pop4 , though not significant.
In general, adding an extra agents to Plan-Pop4 that remains still does not seem to change the
performance. To improve performance of learned coordination robot policies, we might need to
incorporate other types of diversities, like humanoid speed, instead of just which object they rearrange.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3    Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLE

We also show in Fig. 10 an example episode of social rearrangement. We use Plan-Pop3 as the
baseline policy with learned low-level skills. In this example, the task is split amongst both agents,
with each rearranging one of the goal objects. Frames 1,3 show the robot and humanoid picking
up objects. 4,5 show them placing each object in its desired location. Frame 2 shows a scenario
where the humanoid and robot cross paths, and the robot backs up to let the humanoid pass before
continuing, avoiding a collision.


D     ROBOT

We use the Boston Dynamics (BD) Spot robot as the robot agent (Fig. 9) due to its robust hardware
for real world deployment of trained policies in the future. Spot is a quadruped robot with five pairs of
depth and RGB cameras (front-left, front-right, left, right, back), and a 7 degree of freedom arm with
one pair of depth and RGB cameras mounted on the gripper. The arm depth camera has a 224 Г— 171
resolution and hfov of 55. Spot robots are capable of grasping rigid objects, climbing up/down stairs,
and outdoor/indoor navigation given usersвҖҷ control input using BDвҖҷs Spot control APIs. Its versatility
and robustness make it an ideal mobile platform for studying sensing, manipulation, and human-robot
interaction. On the simulation side, the Spot robot simulation moves its base by commanding linear
and angular velocities (2D, continuous) and can move backwards if turning or moving forwards
results in collision. The action space of the robot is continuous forward and angular velocity in the
local frame of the robot (2-dim) for navigation and delta joint angles (7-dim) for the arm.


E     S CENES

We incorporate scene assets from the Habitat Synthetic Scenes Dataset (HSSD-200) (Khanna et al.,
2023) in Habitat 3.0. HSSD is a dataset of 211 high-quality 3D homes (scenes) containing over 18k
individual models of real-world objects. An example scene is shown in Fig. 11. For our experiments,
we use a subset of 59 scenes and limit our objects to the YCB dataset (Calli et al., 2017) for simplicity.
Specifically, we use 37 scenes from training, sampling 1000 episodes per scene, 12 for validation,
with 100 episodes per scene and 10 for test, with 15 episodes in each scene. Note that the Habitat3.0
framework will be released with the complete HSSD dataset.


F     S IMULATOR D ETAILS

F.1   B ENCHMARKING

We benchmark here Habitat 3.0 speed under varying scene sizes, different number of objects in the
scene, and the type and number of agents. All tests are conducted on a single Nvidia V100 GPU. We
report results on a single environment (Fig. 12, left) and 16 parallel Habitat 3.0 environments (Fig 12,
right). For each measure we sample random actions for 300 steps per agent and report average and
standard error results across 10 runs. All the solid blue curves correspond to small scenes sizes and
two objects in the environment. For each agent, we always render a single depth image. Our small
scene is 68.56m2 in size and has 1 bedroom and 1 bathroom, the medium scene is 136.11m2 in
size with 3 bedrooms and 2 bathrooms, and the large scene is 846.15m2 in size with 4 bedrooms, 4
bothrooms, and a den and office space.
On a single environment, we obtain performances on the range of 140 to 250 FPS, depending on the
setting. As we can see, varying the number of objects has no significant effect in the performance
speed, while we notice significant differences when changing the scene size (245Вұ19 FPS down to
154Вұ14). Switching from a single spot agent to two spot agents drops the performance from 245Вұ19 to
150Вұ1, having a similar effect to varying the scene size. The humanoid is also slower than the Spot
robot (245Вұ19 vs 155Вұ26), due to the higher number of joints in the skeletal model. However, the
difference between robot and humanoid agents, becomes much less pronounced when switching to the
two agent setting, obtaining comparable performances between the Robot-Robot and Human-Robot
settings (150Вұ1 vs. 136Вұ1). Since humanoid-robot simulation is the primary use-case of Habitat3.0,
this is a positive signal, that shows that adding a humanoid over a robot does not decrease simulation


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Humanoid path            Spot path             Object start pos.            Target pos.


                                                                        2
                                                                                     1


         1                              2


                                                                            3



                                                                                5

                                        4


     3                              4                               5


Figure 10: Social Rearrangement Example: We show an example behavior from the Plan-Pop3
baseline with learned low-level skills. Here, the agents split the rearrangement task, with each picking
one of the objects (frames 1, 3) and placing them in their target location (frames 4, 5). In frame 2,
we observe an emergent collaborative behavior: the robot moves backward to let the humanoid pass
through the hallway, before continuing with its task, avoiding a collision.



                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Example Scene. Habitat 3.0 is based on HSSD (Khanna et al., 2023) scenes. An example
scene which includes various types of objects and scene clutter has been shown.

                     Habitat 3.0 Benchmark - 1 Processes                         Habitat 3.0 Benchmark - 16 Processes
                         Small Scenes                                                 Small Scenes
    Robot - 2 Obj.       Medium Scenes                          Robot - 2 Obj.        Medium Scenes
    Robot - 5 Obj.       Large Scenes                           Robot - 5 Obj.        Large Scenes
   Robot - 10 Obj.                                             Robot - 10 Obj.
    Robot - 2 Obj.                                              Robot - 2 Obj.
    Robot - 5 Obj.                                              Robot - 5 Obj.
   Robot - 10 Obj.                                             Robot - 10 Obj.
    Robot - 2 Obj.                                              Robot - 2 Obj.
    Robot - 5 Obj.                                              Robot - 5 Obj.
   Robot - 10 Obj.                                             Robot - 10 Obj.
            Robot                                                       Robot
        Humanoid                                                    Humanoid
Humanoid w/o Skin                                           Humanoid w/o Skin
  Humanoid - Pick                                             Humanoid - Pick
      Robot-Robot                                                 Robot-Robot
  Robot-Humanoid                                              Robot-Humanoid
                 0      50     100    150    200    250                      0       500     1000 1500       2000
                                     FPS                                                        FPS
      (a) Benchmark with a single environment                       (b) Benchmark with 16 environments

Figure 12: Benchmark results in Habitat 3.0. We study the effect of varying scene size, number of
objects, type of agents and single or multi-agent.


speed. We donвҖҷt notice a difference in performance between representing the humanoid as a skeleton
or applying linear blend skinning, implying that the visual realism of skinned humanoids has very
little effect on our simulation speed. We also donвҖҷt notice significant differences in performance
between the picking or navigation actions.
We observe similar trends when switching to 16 environments, obtaining promising scaling results,
with performances in the range of 1100 to 2290 FPS. Note that these 16 environments are still on
a single GPU, and Habitat 3.0 natively supports environment parallelization. As a result, the most
common simulation speed that users will experience when training policies is between 1100 to 2290
FPS depending on the scenario.

F.2   C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING S IMULATORS

Habitat 3.0 is designed to support efficient simulation of tasks with humans and robots in indoor
environments. Since Habitat 3.0 is built upon the Habitat platform, it also supports features present
in Habitat 1.0 and Habitat 2.0, including physics simulation, support for multiple types of robots,
articulated objects or real scanned scenes. Our work opens an opportunity to update Embodied AI
tasks previously studied in the Habitat platform with humanoid simulation or human in the loop
interaction, allowing to train robots that can better interact with humans.
In Tab. 4 we provide a comparison of Habitat3.0 with some existing related simulators. Habitat3.0
provides support for both real robot models and humanoids, enabling to train policies for both types of


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


agents. Humanoids in Habitat3.0 are based on the SMPL-X model, as opposed to Authored Designs
(AD). This enables to scale up the number of possible body models, and provide motions coming
from motion captured data or motion generation models. The humanoids can also be controlled
at different levels, including joints (Jt), inverse kinematics (IK) or high level commands, such as
walk or pick up (HL). A key feature in our platform is the HITL interface, which allows to control
the humanoid via a mouse-keyboard interface (Г№) or VR ( ). Furthermore, we include a large
number of authored multi-room scenes enabling training policies in a wide diversity of realistic indoor
environments, and provides a significant increase in simulation speed, compared to other simulators
with robot and humanoid support. Note that the speed is influenced by several factors, including
rendering fidelity, physics simulation, resolution, hardware capabilities, and more (refer to Section
F.1 for detailed benchmarking). As such, speed numbers between different simulators are not directly
comparable and serve as rough reference points. We take the reported numbers in individual papers
for single environment settings.
                      Robot                Humanoid                  HITL        Type of                   #Authored    Speed
                      Support   Support   Body Model    Control     Interface   Simulation   Multi-Agent    Scenes     (steps/s)
 VirtualHome-Social      -                   AD          IK, HL        Г№            PP                        50          10
 VRKitchen               -                   AD           Jt, IK                 RBF, PP          -           16          15
 SAPIEN                            -           -             -           -         RBF            -            -       200-400
 AI2-THOR                          -           -             -           -       RBF, PP                     120        90-180
 Habitat 2.0                       -           -             -           -         RBF            -          105         1400
 TDW                                         AD          IK, HL                  RBF, PS                      15       5 вҲ’ 168
 SEAN 2.0                                    AD             HL       Г№             RBF                         3       3 вҲ’ 60вҖ 
 iGibson                                     AD             R        Г№             RBF                        50          100
 Habitat 3.0                               SMPL-X      Jt, IK, HL    Г№             RBF                       200       140-250

Table 4: Comparison with related simulators. We compare Habitat3.0 with other related simulators
for Embodied AI supporting simulation of real robots or humanoids. Speeds were taken directly from
respective publications or obtained via direct personal correspondence with the authors when not
publicly available (indicated by вҖ ).
Body Model: Authored Design (AD), SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019).
Control: Joints (Jt), Inverse Kinematics (IK), High Level Commands (HL), Rigid Transforms (R).
HITL Interface: Mouse and Keyboard (Г№), Virtual Reality ( ).
Type of Simulation: Rigid Body Physics (RBF), Pre-post-conditions (PP), Particle Simulation (PS).
Speed: The reported numbers correspond to benchmarks conducted by different teams using different
hardware configurations to simulate diverse capabilities. Thus, these should be considered only as
qualitative comparisons representing what a user should expect to experience on a single instance of
the simulator (without parallelization).



G     H UMAN - IN - THE - LOOP (HITL) E VALUATION
We test the ability of trained robotic agents to coordinate with real humans via our human-in-the-loop
(HITL) infrastructure across 30 participants. Our user study consisted of 3 conditions: doing the
task alone (solo), paired with a robot operating with Learn-Single, or paired with a Plan-Pop3 agent.
We have a brief training step, where the users get accustomed to the tool, followed by solving each
condition in a random order. However, as the users interact more with the tool, they get better at the
overall task. We account for this learning effect by leveraging latin-square counter-balancing (Bradley,
1958) for the ordering of these conditions.
Each participant performs the task for 10 episodes per condition in one of the test scenes. We measure
the collision rate (CR), task completion steps (TS) and Relative Efficiency (RE) across all episodes,
and report them in Table 1. CR is the ratio of episodes that contain collisions with the robot. SR, RE
are the same as defined in Sec 4.2. RE still captures the relative efficiency of task completion when
the task is done with a robot and requires the computation of task completion steps with the robot
relative to the human doing the task alone. However, unlike the automated evaluation (Train-pop-eval)
and (ZSC-pop-eval), we cannot compute the RE per episode in HITL evaluation. Since humans
exhibit learning effect when asked to do an episode multiple times, we cannot ask the human to do
the same episode with and without the robot, preventing the computation of RE per episode. Instead,
we fit a generalized linear mixed-effect model (GLMM) (Kaptein, 2016) with a Poisson distribution,
for TS as the dependent variable and method/condition as the independent variable while controlling


                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Task completion steps (TS)
                                                                                                           1.00
                                         4000


                                                                                     Collision rate (CR)
                                                                                                           0.75
                                         3000

                                                                                                           0.50
                                         2000

                                                                                                           0.25
                                         1000

                                                                                                           0.00
                                                 learnвҲ’single planвҲ’pop   solo                                     learnвҲ’single planвҲ’pop   solo
                                                             Method                                                           Method

                                                Figure 13: TS and CR across all participants in the user study.

                                                                                 Estimated mean
                                                             Method                                                           p-value
                                                                                 difference in TS
                                                   Plan-pop - Learn-Single                                  78.45             0.0533
                                                     Solo - Learn-Single                                    316.58            <.0001
                                                       Solo - Plan-pop                                      238.12            <.0001

    Table 5: Post hoc pairwise comparison between the three conditions of the user study for TS.


for variations from participants and scenes using random intercepts (Bates et al., 2015). We then use
the ratio between the estimated means of TS for Learn-Single and Plan-Pop conditions w.r.t the solo
condition to compute their average RE respectively. For CR, we fit a logistic regression model with a
binomial distribution, again controlling for the random effects of participants and scenes. We use
lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015) in R version of 4.3.1 to fit the GLMMs. Table 1 shows the results
over three conditions across the 30 users. Fig. 13 shows the TS over all successful episodes and CR
over all episodes across the three conditions in HITL.
After fitting a GLMM model with Poisson distribution for TS, we also compute post hoc pairwise
comparisons between the three conditions. We find that the difference in estimated mean of TS
between Learn-Single and Plan-pop is not significant, while that between both these conditions and
the solo condition is significant (Table 5). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first analysis
of performance of learned collaboration agents when paired with real human partners in a realistic,
everyday rearrangement task. The indication that the robot agents indeed make humans more efficient
is very promising, with huge significance for the assistive-robotics community.


H     L IMITATIONS

In this section, we address the limitations of our work, focusing on our three primary contributions:
Human simulation. While our framework can accommodate various actions, our experiments utilize
only walking and reaching behaviors. We implement the reaching behavior by obtaining static poses
representing distinct reaching positions and interpolating between them to generate motion. For the
walking motion, our approach for navigating across waypoints is suitable for path planners, but shows
visual artifacts when the humanoid is rotating in place. While this approach suits the behaviors we
consider, it may not be suitable for more complex motions, such as opening a cabinet or sitting down.
This aspect will be explored in our future work. Additionally, we employ fixed linear blend skinning
to represent the human, with static weight assignments for various poses. Consequently, certain pose
configurations may exhibit skinning artifacts, as mentioned in the main paper.
Human-in-the-loop tool. There is a gap between the observations a human acquires through the
HITL tool and those accessible to our humanoid in automated evaluations. Although we provide
visual cues to bridge this gap (such as markers that indicate the direction from the human to the target
objects), they still represent a different observation space between the two domains.
Tasks. Our current focus is on zero-shot coordination without communication, but introducing
communication between the robot and human could potentially enhance task efficiency. Furthermore,


                                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our models currently benefit from access to ground truth information regarding the initial and final
object locations in the rearrangement task. A future challenge lies in integrating search capabilities
into the rearrangement task. Additionally, we make the assumption that objects are initially placed on
open receptacles. Handling rearrangements that involve searching for and interacting with articulated
objects, like drawers, poses a greater challenge.


                                                 31
