Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DAPTIVE I NSTRUMENT D ESIGN FOR
I NDIRECT E XPERIMENTS
 Yash Chandak             Shiv Shankar         Vasilis Syrgkanis        Emma Brunskill
 Stanford University      UMass Amherst        Stanford University      Stanford University



                                            A BSTRACT
         Indirect experiments provide a valuable framework for estimating treatment ef-
         fects in situations where conducting randomized control trials (RCTs) is impracti-
         cal or unethical. Unlike RCTs, indirect experiments estimate treatment effects by
         leveraging (conditional) instrumental variables, enabling estimation through en-
         couragement and recommendation rather than strict treatment assignment. How-
         ever, the sample efficiency of such estimators depends not only on the inherent
         variability in outcomes but also on the varying compliance levels of users with
         the instrumental variables and the choice of estimator being used, especially when
         dealing with numerous instrumental variables. While adaptive experiment de-
         sign has a rich literature for direct experiments, in this paper we take the initial
         steps towards enhancing sample efficiency for indirect experiments by adaptively
         designing a data collection policy over instrumental variables. Our main contri-
         bution is a practical computational procedure that utilizes influence functions to
         search for an optimal data collection policy, minimizing the mean-squared error
         of the desired (non-linear) estimator. Through experiments conducted in various
         domains inspired by real-world applications, we showcase how our method can
         significantly improve the sample efficiency of indirect experiments.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Advances in machine learning, especially from large language models, are greatly expanding the
potential of AI to augment and support humans in an enormous number of settings, such as help-
ing direct teachers to students unproductively struggling while using math software (Holstein et al.,
2018), providing suggestions to novice customer support operators (Brynjolfsson et al., 2023), and
helping peer volunteers learn to be more effective mental health supporters (Hsu et al., 2023). AI-
augmentation will often (importantly) provide autonomy to the human, who may consider infor-
mation or suggestions provided by an AI, before ultimately making their own choice about how to
proceed (we provide examples of more use-cases in Appendix B). In such settings it will be highly
informative to be able to separate estimating the strength of the intervention on humans’ treatment
choices, as well as the actual treatment effects (the outcomes if the human chooses to follow the
treatment of interest), instead of estimating only intent-to-treat effects. This estimation problem be-
comes more challenging given the likely existence of latent confounders, that may influence both
whether a person is likely to uptake a particular recommendation (such as following a large language
model’s recommendation of what to say to a customer), and their downstream outcomes (on cus-
tomer satisfaction). Fortunately, if the AI intervention satisfies the requirements of an instrumental
variable (Hartford et al., 2017; Syrgkanis et al., 2019), it is well-known when and how consistent
estimates of the treatment effect estimates can be obtained.
In this paper, we consider how to automatically learn data-efficient adaptive instrument-selection
decision policies, in order to quickly estimate conditional average treatment effects. While adaptive
experiment design is well-studied when direct experimentation is feasible (Murphy, 2005; Xiong
et al., 2019; Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; Rainforth et al., 2023; Che & Namkoong, 2023; Hahn
et al., 2011; Kato et al., 2020; Song et al., 2023), it remains largely unexplored in situations where
direct assignment to interventions is impractical, unethical or undesirable, such as for the real-time
AI support of teachers, customer support agents, and volunteer mental health support trainees. Some
work has considered adaptive data collection to minimize regret when using instrument variables
(Kallus, 2018; Della Vecchia & Basu, 2023), which also relates to work in the multi-armed bandit
literature. Other work has considered when user compliance may be dynamic, and shaped over


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               1.3 Binary Instrument & Treatment
Figure 1: In randomized control trials (direct ex-
periments), there is no unobserved confounding,


                                                       Percent of MSE of Uniform
                                                                               1.2
i.e., the value of the treatment is the same as that
                                                                               1.1
of the instrument. Using adaptive experiment de-
                                                                               1.0                                      Adaptive
sign strategy of RCTs naively for indirect experi-
                                                                               0.9
                                                                                                                        RCT
ments, i.e., when confounding does exists, can re-                                                                      DIA
                                                                               0.8                                      Uniform
sult in performance worse than the uniform sam-
pling strategy. In contrast, the proposed algo-
                                                                               0.7                                      Oracle
                                                                               0.6
rithm for designing instruments adaptively (DIA)
                                                                               0.5
is more effective for indirect experiments.                                        0     1     2    3     4    5
                                                                                        Confounder Strength ×10 1

time (Ngo et al., 2021). In contrast, our work focuses on estimating treatment effects through the
use of adaptive allocation of instruments, but the impact of those instruments is assumed to be
static, though unknown. As Figure 1 demonstrates, we will shortly show that it is possible to create
adaptive instrumental strategies that far outperform standard uniform allocation. In particular, our
paper address this challenge of adaptive instrument design through two main avenues:
1. A general framework for adaptive indirect experiments: We envision modern scenarios
where available instruments could be high-dimensional, even encompassing natural language (e.g.,
personalised texts to encourage participation in treatment or control groups). This necessitates mod-
eling the sampling procedure with rich function approximators. Taking the first steps towards this
goal, we do restrict ourselves to relatively small synthetic and semi-synthetic experiments but prior-
itize understanding the fundamental challenges of creating such a flexible framework.
In Section 3 we introduce influence functions estimators for black-box double causal estimators and
a multi-rejection sampler. These tools enable us to perform a gradient-based optimization of a data
collection policy π. Importantly, the proposed method is flexible to support π that is modeled using
deep networks, and is applicable to various (non)-linear (conditional) IV estimators.
2. Balancing sample complexity and computational complexity: Experiment design is most
valuable when sample efficiency is paramount as data is relatively costly in terms of time or re-
sources compared to computation. Therefore, we advocate for leveraging computational resources
to enhance the search for an optimal data collection strategy π. Our framework is designed to mini-
mize the need for expert knowledge and can readily scale with computational capabilities.
Perhaps the most relevant is the work by Gupta et al. (2021) for enhancing sample efficiency for a
specific (linear) IV estimator by learning a sampling distribution over a few data sources, where each
source provides different moment conditions. This is complementary to our work as we consider
the problem of adaptive sampling, even within a single data source, and using potentially non-linear
estimators. Therefore, a detailed related work discussion is deferred to Appendix A.

2   BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S ETUP
                                                                                                                    X
Let X ∈ X be the observable covariates, U ∈ U be the unobserved
confounding variables, Z ∈ Z be the instruments, A ∈ A be the
actions/treatments, and Y ∈ R be the outcomes. Let π : X →
∆(Z) be an instrument sampling policy, and Π be the set of all such                  X
policies. Let Dn := {Si }ni=1 be a dataset of size n, where each
data sample Si := {Xi , Zi , Ai , Yi } is collected using (potentially
                                                                         Figure 2: Causal graph.
different) policy πi ∈ Π. With the model given in Figure 2, we
assume that the causal relationship can be represented with the following structural model:
                         Y = g(X, A) + U,       E[U ] = 0,                          E[U |A, X] ̸= 0,                               (1)
where g is an unknown (potentially non-linear) function. Importantly, note that the variable U can
affect not only the outcomes Y but also X and A. We consider treatment effects to be homogenous
across instruments, i.e., the CATE matches the conditional LATE (Angrist et al., 1996).
Following Newey & Powell (2003) and Hartford et al. (2017), we define the counterfactual predic-
tion as f (x, a) := g(x, a) + E[U |x], where E[U |x] corresponds to the fixed baseline effect across all
treatments a ∈ A, for a given covariate x ∈ X . This definition of f is useful, as it can be identified
(discussed later) and can also be used to determine the effect of treatment a1 ∈ A compared to


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


another treatment a2 ∈ A as f (x, a1 ) − f (x, a2 ) = g(x, a1 ) − g(x, a2 ). Further, in the simpler
setting, if U ⊥
              ⊥ X, then f (x, a) = g(x, a).
In the supervised learning setting (which assumes U ⊥⊥ A, X), the prediction model estimates
E[Y |x, a], however, this can result in a biased (and inconsistent) treatment effect estimate as
E[Y |x, a] = g(x, a)+E[U |x, a] ̸= f (x, a). This issue can often be alleviated using instruments. For
Z to be a valid instrument, Z should satisfy the following assumptions (red arrows in Fig 2),
Assumption 1. (a) Exclusive: Z ⊥   ⊥ Y |X, A, i.e., instruments do not effect the outcomes directly.
(b) Relevance: Z ̸⊥⊥ A|X, i.e., the action chosen can be influenced using instruments. (c) Inde-
pendence: Z ⊥ ⊥ U |X, i.e., the unobserved confounder does not affect the instrument.
Under Assumption 1, an inverse problem can be designed for estimating f , with the help of z,
                                                                   Z
       E[Y |x, z] = E[g(x, A)|x, z] + E[U |x] = E[f (x, A)|x, z] = f (x, a)dP (a|x, z).            (2)
                                                                         a

However, identifiability of f using 2 depends on specific assumptions. In the simple setting where
f is linear and E[U |x, z] = 0, Angrist et al. (1996) discuss how two-stage least-squares estimator
(2SLS) can be used to identify f . In contrast, if f is non-linear (or non-parametric), exact recovery
of f may not be viable as equation 2 results in an ill-posed inverse problem (Newey & Powell, 2003;
Xu et al., 2020). Different techniques have been proposed to mitigate this issue (Newey & Powell,
2003; Xu et al., 2020; Syrgkanis et al., 2019; Frauen & Feuerriegel, 2022); see Wu et al. (2022)
for a survey. These methods often employ a two-stage procedure, where each stage solves a set of
moment conditions. We formalize these below.
Let f : X × A → R be parametrized using θ ∈ Θ, where Θ is the set of all parameters. Let θ0 ∈ Θ
be the true parameter for f . Let q(Si ; ϕ) and m(Si ; θ, ϕ) be the moment condition for nuisance
parameters ϕ and parameters of interest θ, respectively, for each sample Si . Let Mn and Qn be the
corresponding sample average moments such that,
                                n                                        n
                             1X                                       1X
                 Mn θ, ϕ̂ :=       m(Si ; θ, ϕ̂),         Qn (ϕ) :=         q(Si ; ϕ),             (3)
                             n i=1                                    n i=1

where ϕ̂ is the solution to Qn (ϕ) = 0, and the estimated parameters of interest θ̂ are obtained
as a solution to Mn (θ, ϕ̂) = 0. For example, in the basic 2SLS setting without covariates Xi
(Pearl, 2009), first stage moment q(Si ; ϕ) := ∇ϕ (Zi ϕ − Ai )2 and the second stage moment
m(Si ; θ, ϕ̂) := ∇θ (Ãi θ − Yi )2 , where Ãi = Zi ϕ̂. Similarly, to solve 2 in the non-linear setting
with deep networks, Hartford et al. (2017) use q(Si ; ϕ) := −∇ϕ log Pr(Ai |Xi , Zi ; ϕ) to estimate
density dP (Ai |Xi , Zi ; ϕ) using a neural density estimator, and subsequently define m(Si ; θ, ϕ̂) :=
∇θ (Yi − f (Xi , a; θ)dP (a|Xi , Zi ; ϕ̂))2 , where f is also a neural network parametrized by θ.
         R

To make the dependency of the estimated parameters of f on the data explicit, we denote the esti-
mated parameter as θ(Dn ). Further, we assume that the θ(Dn ) is symmetric in Dn , i.e., θ(Dn ) is
invariant to the ordering of samples in the dataset Dn . This holds for 2SLS, DeepIV (Hartford et al.,
2017), and most other popular estimators (Syrgkanis et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2022). We also consider
θ(Dn ) to be deterministic for a given Dn . In Appendix H.2, we discuss how the proposed algorithm
can be used as-is for the setting where θ(Dn ) is also stochastic given Dn .
Problem Statement: While these estimators mitigate the confounder bias in estimation of f , they
are often subject to high variance (Imbens, 2014). In this work, we aim to develop an adaptive data
collection policy that can improve sample-efficiency of the estimate of the counterfactual prediction
f . Importantly, we aim to develop an algorithmic framework that can work with general (non)-linear
two-stage estimators. Specifically, let X, A ∼ Px,a be samples from a fixed distribution over which
the expected mean-squared error is evaluated,
                                                             h                               i
                                                                                           2
     L(π) := E [MSE(θ(Dn ))], and MSE(θ) := EX,A (f (X, A; θ0 ) − f (X, A; θ)) .                  (4)
             Dn ∼π

To begin, we aim to find a single policy π ∗ ∈ arg minπ∈Π L(π) for the most sample-efficient
estimation of θ. In Section 3.3, we will adapt this solution for sequential collection of data.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3   A PPROACH
As Figure 1 illustrates, selecting instruments strategically to generate a dataset can have a substantial
impact on the efficiency of indirect experiments. Importantly, as L(π) is a function of both the data
Dn and the estimator f (·; θ), an optimal π ∗ not only depends on the data-generating process (e.g.,
heteroskedasticity in compliances Z|X and outcomes Y , even given a specific covariate X) but also
on the actual procedure used to compute an estimate of the parameter of interest θ, such as 2SLS,
etc. In Appendix C, we present a simple illustrative case of linear models for the conditional average
treatment effect (CATE) estimation, where each aspect can be observed explicitly.
Now we provide the key insights for a general gradient-based optimization procedure to find an
instrument selection decision policy π ∗ that tackles all of these problems simultaneously. A formal
analysis of the claims and the algorithmic approaches we make, and how they contrast with some
other alternate choices, will be presented later in Section 4.
As our main objective is to search for π ∗ , we propose computing the gradient of L(π), which we
can express as the following using the popular REINFORCE approach (Williams, 1992),
                                                           "              n
                                                                                              #
                                ∂ log Pr(Dn ; π) (a)                     X   ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
 ∇L(π) = E MSE(θ(Dn ))                             = E MSE(θ(Dn ))                              (5)
          Dn ∼π                        ∂π            Dn ∼π
                                                                         i=1
                                                                                   ∂π

where (a) follows because Pr(Dn ; π) is the probability of observing the entire dataset Dn ,
                           n
                           Y
            Pr(Dn ; π) =         Pr(Xi , Ui )π(Zi |Xi ) Pr(Ai |Xi , Ui , Zi ) Pr(Yi |Xi , Ui , Ai ).   (6)
                           i=1

The gradient in 5 is appealing as it provides an unbiased direction to update π, and encapsulates
properties of both the data-generating process and the estimators as a black-box in MSE(θ(Dn )).
However, using ∇L(π) for optimization is impractical due to two main challenges:
• Challenge 1: As we will state more formally in Section 4, the variance of sample estimate of
  ∇L(π) can be Θ(n), i.e., it can grow linearly in the size of Dn . This can make the optimization
  process prohibitively inefficient as we collect more data.
• Challenge 2: Optimization using 5 will also require evaluating ∇L(π) for a π different from
  π ′ that was used to collect the data. If off-policy correction is done using importance weighting
  (Precup, 2000), then the variance might grow exponentially with n.
To address these two issues we now demonstrate how influence functions and multi-rejection impor-
tance sampling can be used to leverage the structure in our indirect experiment design setup to not
only significantly reduce the variance of the resulting gradient estimate, but also do so in a compu-
tationally practical manner that is compatible with deep neural networks. The pseudocode for our
algorithm approach is shown in Appendix H.
3.1 I NFLUENCE F UNCTIONS FOR C ONTROL VARIATES
To address challenge 1, a common approach in reinforcement learning and other areas is to introduce
control variates, that reduce the variance of estimation without introducing additional bias. In partic-
ular, we observe that for our setting, using the MSE computed using all other data points Dn\i (i.e.,
all of Dn , except the sample Si used in the log π(Zi |Xi ) term) serves as a control variate,
                              n
               ˆ CV L(π) :=
                              X ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
               ∇                                       MSE(θ(Dn )) − MSE θ Dn\i                  .     (7)
                              i=1
                                           ∂π
As we illustrate in Figure 3 and formalize in Section 4, this immediately results in a substantial
variance reduction over the originally proposed gradient (5). However, the computation required for
estimating ∇ˆ CV L(π) can be prohibitively expensive as now for each ∇ log π(Zi |Xi ) in 7, an entire
separate re-training process is required to estimate the control variate MSE(θ(Dn\i )).
                in terms of both the variance and the computation, we now show that MSE(θ(Dn )) −
To be efficient
MSE θ Dn\i can be estimated using influence functions (Fisher & Kennedy, 2021). As we
discuss below, this requires only a single optimization process for estimating MSE(θ(Dn )) −
MSE(θ(Dn\i )) across all i’s, and thus preserves the best of both ∇ˆ CV L(π) and ∇L(π).
                                                                                 ˆ


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       ×104                        ×10 2
                                                                               8
Figure 3: Bias-variance of different               4                           6


                                            Variance
gradient estimators, for a given policy
                                                                                                                   CV


                                                                          Bias
π, when using a 2SLS estimators un-                                            4
                                                   2
der model-misspecification. Observe                                            2                                   IF
the scale on the y-axes.
                                                   0                           0
                                                              2      4                 2            4
                                                              Samples ×102                 Samples ×102
Let D be the distribution function induced by the dataset Dn , and with a slight overload of notation,
we let θ(Dn ) ≡ θ(D). Let Di,ϵ := (1 − ϵ)D + ϵδ(Si ) be a distribution perturbed in the direction of
Si , where δ(·) denotes the Dirac distribution. Note that for ϵ = −1/n, distribution Di,ϵ corresponds
to the distribution function without the sample Si , i.e., the distribution induced by Dn\i . From this
perspective, MSE(θ(·)) corresponds to a functional of the data distribution function D, and thus we
can do a Von Mises expansion (Fernholz, 2012), i.e., a distributional analog of the Taylor expansion
for statistical functionals, to directly approximate MSE(θ(Di,ϵ )) in terms of MSE(θ(D)) as
                                                                    ∞ k
                                                                    X ϵ          (k)
                         MSE(θ(Di,ϵ )) = MSE(θ(D)) +                           IMSE (Si ),                               (8)
                                                                          k!
                                                                    k=1
        (k)
where IMSE is the k-th order influence function (see the work by Fisher & Kennedy (2021); Kahn
(2015) for an accessible introduction to influence functions). Therefore, when all the higher order in-
fluence function exists, we can use 8 to recover an estimate of MSE(θ(Dn )) − MSE(θ(Dn\i )) with-
out re-training. In practice, approximating 8 with a K-th order expansion often suffices, which per-
mits a gradient estimator ∇ˆ IF L(π) that avoids any re-computation of the mean-square-error,
                  n                                                                           K
   ˆ IF L(π) :=
                  X ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )                                                          X ϵk        (k)
   ∇                                    IMSE (Si ),           where, IMSE (Si ) := −                     IMSE (Si ).     (9)
                  i=1
                             ∂π                                                                     k!
                                                                                              k=1

In fact, as we illustrate in Figure 3 and state formally in Section 4, when using finite K terms, the bias
of the gradient in 9 is of the order n−K , while still providing significant variance reduction. This en-
                                                                                     (k)
ables the bias to be neglected even when using K = 1. Intuitively, for k = 1, IMSE operationalizes
the concept of the first-order derivative for the functional MSE(θ(·)), i.e., it characterizes the effect
on MSE when the training sample Si is infinitesimaly up-weighted during optimization,
                             (1)          d
                           IMSE (Si ) := MSE θ (1 − t)D + tδ(Si )                .                    (10)
                                         dt                                  t=0
                                                                                                         (1)
A key contribution is to derive (Theorem 2 in Appendix D) the following form for IMSE (Si ),
                (1)        d             (1)
              IMSE (Si ) =    MSE(θ̂) Iθ (Si ),                                                                         (11)
                           dθ
                             ∂Mn −1                                       ∂Qn −1

                 (1)                                       ∂Mn
     where,     Iθ (Si ) = −     (θ̂, ϕ̂) m(Si , θ̂, ϕ̂) −     (θ̂, ϕ̂)       (ϕ̂)q(Si , ϕ̂) .                          (12)
                              ∂θ                            ∂ϕ             ∂ϕ
Note that these expressions generalize the influence function for standard machine learning estima-
tors (e.g., least-squares, classification) (Koh & Liang, 2017) to more general estimators (e.g., IV
estimator, GMM estimators, double machine-learning estimators) that involve black-box estimation
of nuisance parameters ϕ alongside the parameters of interest θ, as discussed in 3.
                                  (1)
In Appendix H we show how Iθ (Si ) can be computed efficiently, without ever explicitly storing
or inverting derivatives of Mn or Qn , using Hessian-vector products (Pearlmutter, 1994) readily
available in auto-diff packages (Bradbury et al., 2018; Paszke et al., 2019). Our approaches are
inspired by techniques used to scale implicit gradients and influence function computation to models
                                                                                         (1)
with millions (Lorraine et al., 2020) of parameters. In Appendix H, we also discuss how Iθ (Si ) can
                                           (2)
be further re-used to partially estimate IMSE (Si ), thereby making IMSE (Si ) more accurate.
3.2 M ULTI -R EJECTION S AMPLING FOR D ISTRIBUTION C ORRECTION
Recall from Challenge 2 that gradient based search of π ∗ would require evaluating gradient at π ′
using data collected from π ̸= π ′ . A common technique in RL to address this is by using importance

                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: (Left) Change in k                                                             ×104
                                                              0


                                   MSE Estimate
did not impact the π optima as                    100
the orderings were preserved.                                 1
                                                                                     2


                                                                              Variance
(Right) variance of rejection                                 2                                                 RS
sampling (RS) vs importance                   10 1
                                                                                     1                          IS
sampling (IS). See Figure 8 for
the plot with log-scale. Ob-                  10 2
serve the scale on the y-axes.                                                       0
                                                        1     0.75      0.5              1      2   3   4   5
                                                            for k = n                           Samples×102
sampling (IS) (Precup, 2000; Thomas, 2015). Unfortunately, the effective importance ratio, when
using IS in our setting, will be a product of the importance ratios for all the n data points (see
Equation 165 in Appendix F). This can result in the variance of gradient estimates being exponential
in the number of samples n, in the worst case. We illustrate this in Figure 4 and discuss formally in
Appendix F.
We now introduce a multi-rejection importance sampling approach to estimate the gradient under a
decision policy different from that used to gather the historical data. In contrast, unlike in RL, in our
setting, the estimator θ(Dn ) can be considered symmetric for most of the popular estimators as the
order of samples in Dn does not matter. Therefore, instead of performing importance sampling over
the whole prior data, we propose creating a new dataset of size k by employing rejection sampling.
Critically, the importance ratio used to select (or reject) each sample Si to evaluate a new policy π ′
depends only on the importance ratio ρ(s) for that single sample s, instead of the product of those
ratios over the entire dataset:
                                                                     Pr(Si ; π ′ )   π ′ (Zi |Xi )

                  Accept if ξi ≤ ρ(Si )/ρmax
          Si =                                             ρ(Si ) :=               =               , (13)
                  Reject Otherwise.                                  Pr(Si ; πi )    πi (Zi |Xi )
where ξi ∼ Uniform(0, 1) and ρmax := maxs ρ(s). Note that 13 allows simulating samples
from the data distribution governed by π ′ , without requiring any knowledge of the unobserved con-
founders Ui . As we will prove in Section 4, this ensures that the variance of the resulting dataset
scales with the worst single sample importance ratio, instead of exponentially over the entire dataset
size n. This process can therefore be used to generate a smaller k sized dataset with the same
distribution of data as sampling from the desired policy π ′ .
As we illustrate in Figure 4 and discuss formally in Appendix F.4, it is reasonable to consider
that instrument-selection policy ordering (in terms of their MSE) is robust to the dataset size,
i.e., Eπ [MSE(θ(Dn ))] ≥ Eπ′ [MSE(θ(Dn ))] implies that Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))] ≥ Eπ′ [MSE(θ(Dk ))],
where k < n. In addition, as we will state formally in Property 4, if k = o(n), then the probability
of the failure case, where the expected number of samples nRS accepted by rejection sampling is
less than the desired k samples, decays exponentially.
This insight is advantageous as we can now directly obtain datasets Dk from π ′ , albeit of size k < n,
to evaluate π ′ , as desired. We implement this by first running the rejection process for all samples,
yielding a set of samples of size nRS that are drawn from π, and then selecting a random subset of
size k from the nRS accepted samples. For the sub-sample Dk , analogous to the true MSE in 4 we
calculate an estimate of the MSE using Xi and Ai drawn from a held-out dataset with M samples
from Px,a as
                                   M
                                1 X                                                2
                 MSE(θ(D
                 [       k )) =       (f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dn )) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk ))) .                           (14)
                                M i=1

Note that in general, our historical data may be a sequence of decision policies, as we adaptively
deploy new instrument-selection decision policies. In this setting, a straightforward application
of rejection sampling will require the support assumption which necessitates πi (Zi |Xi ) > 0 if
π ′ (Zi |Xi ) > 0 for all i ∈ {1, ..., n}. This may restrict the class of new instrument-selection policies
that can be deployed. Instead we propose the following multi-rejection sampling strategy:
                                                                                  π ′ (Zi |Xi )

                      Accept if ξi ≤ ρ̄(Si )/ρ̄max
              Si =                                                  ρ̄(Si ) := 1 P                     (15)
                                                                                    j πj (Zi |Xi )
                      Reject Otherwise.                                        n



                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ρ̄max = maxs ρ̄(s). As we show in Appendix G, this relaxes the support assumption enforced
for every πi to support assumption over the union of supports of {πi }ni=1 , while still ensuring that
the accepted samples follow the distribution specified by π ′ . For e.g., if the initial data collected or
available used a uniform instrument-selection decision policy, then subsequent policies can be arbi-
trarily deterministic and the multi-rejection procedure can still use all the data and remain valid. This
makes it particularly well suited for our adaptive experiment design framework. In Appendix G, we
further prove that the expected number of samples nMRS accepted under multi-rejection will always
be more than or equal to nRS obtained using rejection sampling, irrespective of {πi }ni=1 .
3.3 DIA: D ESIGNING I NSTRUMENTS A DAPTIVELY
Using influence functions and multi-rejection sampling we addressed both the challenges about
high variance. Leveraging the flexibility offered by the proposed gradient-based procedure, we
can now readily extend the idea for sequential collection of data. To do so, we propose using a
parameterization of π to account for data already collected, which is important during adaptive
instrument-selection policy design.
Let n be the size of the dataset Dn= {Si }ni=1 collected so far, and let N be the budget for the total
number of samples that can be collected. At each stage of data collection, DIA searches for a policy
πφ , parameterized using φ, such that when the remaining DN −n= {Si }N   i=n+1 samples are collected
using πφ , the combined distribution DN := Dn ∪DN −n would approximate the optimal distribution
for estimating θ. Let πφeff operationalize DN , if DN −n were to be collected using πφ ,
                                            n
                                                        !
                       eff           n 1X                          n
                      πφ (z|x) :=               πi (z|x) + 1 −         πφ (z|x).                 (16)
                                     N n i=1                       N

Let IMSE
      [ (Si ) be the influence function similar to 9, where the MSE is replaced with its proxy 14,
and let {Si }ki=1 in the following be the samples for πφeff obtained using multi-rejection sampling in
15. Then for the first batch, πφ is designed to be a uniform distribution, and for the later batches we
leverage 9 and 14 to update πφ using
                                              k
                                              X ∂ log πφeff (Zi |Xi )
                          ˆ IF L(πφeff ) :=
                          ∇                                             IMSE
                                                                         [ (Si ).                    (17)
                                              i=1
                                                          ∂φ

We use πφ to collect the next batch of data and then update πφ again, as discussed above, to ensure
that the final distribution DN = {Si }N  i=1 approximates the optimal distribution, for estimating θ,
as closely as possible. Intuitively, this technique is similar to receding horizon control, where the
controller is planned for the entire remaining horizon of length N − n, but is updated and refined
again periodically. A pseudo-code for the proposed algorithm is provided in Appendix H.

4    T HEORY
We now provide theoretical statements about the impact of the algorithmic design choices, over
alternatives, in terms of their benefit on the variance. Proofs and more formal detailed statements of
the theorems are deferred to Appendix E. We first state that variance of the naive gradient can scale
poorly with the dataset size:
Property 1 (Informal). If MSE(θ(Dn )) is leave-one-out stable and n∥MSE(θ(Dn ))∥2L2 =
                            ˆ
Ω(α(n)) = ω(1), we have Var(∇L(π)) = Ω(α(n)) (c.f. Theorem 3 in Appendix).
In many cases, we would expect that the mean squared error decays at the rate of n−1/2 (unless we
can invoke a fast parametric rate of 1/n, which holds under strong convexity assumptions); in such
cases, we have that α(n) = ω(1) and Var(∇L(π))ˆ       can grow with the sample size. Moreover, if
the mean squared error does not converge to zero, due to persistent approximation error, or local
optima in the optimization, or if 2 is ill-posed when dealing with non-parametric estimators, then
the variance can grow linearly, i.e. α(n) = Θ(n). See Figure 3. In contrast, the variance of the
gradient of the loss with MSE covariates 7 is often independent of the data set size:
                         ˆ CV L(π)] = ∇L(π). Further, if MSE(θ(Dn )) is leave-one-out stable
Property 2 (Informal). E[∇
         ˆ CV
then Var(∇ L(π)) = O(1) (c.f. Theorem 4 in Appendix).


                                                      7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         IV                                                      Conditional IV                                                        TripAdvisor


                                                                                                                             Percent of MSE of Uniform
Percent of MSE of Uniform


                                                            Percent of MSE of Uniform
                        1.00                                                        1.00                                                             1.0
                        0.75                                                        0.75                                                             0.8
                        0.50                                                        0.50                                                             0.6
                        0.25                                                        0.25                                                             0.4

                               1   2      3      4    5                             0.00 1   2          3         4    5                                   0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8    1.0
                                       Samples       ×103                                          Samples            ×103                                              Samples            ×104


 Figure 5: Performance gains when considering a different number of instrumental variables, with a
 total of 5 re-allocation. First allocation (1000 samples) is done using uniform sampling, and thus all
 the methods have the same performance initially. DIA-X refers to the application of the proposed
 algorithm to the domain setting where the number of instruments is X. Note that since MSE under
 uniform distribution also keeps increasing, a saturating or increasing trend of the ratio does not imply
 that the MSE is increasing. (Left) Results for the IV setting (using closed-form linear estimator).
 Dotted lines correspond to the oracle estimate for the respective number of instruments. (Middle)
 Results for the conditional IV setting (using logistic regression based estimator). (Right) Results
 for the TripAdvisor domain (Syrgkanis et al., 2019) (using neural network based estimator). Error
 bars correspond to one stderr.


 Unlike Property 1, Property 2 holds irrespective of α(n), thus providing a reliable gradient estimator
 even if the function approximator is mis-specified, or optimization is susceptible to local optima, or
 if 2 is ill-posed when dealing with non-parametric estimators. Further, our loss using influence
 functions 9 can also yield similar variance reduction, at much lower computational cost:
                                                                  ˆ IF L(π)] = ∇L(π) + O(n−K ).
 Property 3 (Informal). If the Von-Mises expansion in 8 exists, E[∇
                                                 ˆ IF
 If MSE(θ(Dn )) is leave-one-out stable then Var(∇ L(π)) = O(1) (c.f. Theorem 5 in Appendix).
 We then prove how rejection sampling can impact the MSE, enabling a variance that has an expo-
 nential reduction in variance compared to importance sampling, whose variance can depend on ρkmax
 (c.f. Theorem 7 in Appendix), at the expense of only a bounded failure rate of not producing the
 desired number of samples k. For this result, let MSERSk be the estimate of MSE computed using
 the mean of MSE(θ(Dk )) across all the subsets Dk from the nRS accepted samples.
              [
                                              2
 Property 4 (Informal). Let Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )) ] = α(k)2 then Var MSERS

                                                                        k   = O(α(k)2 kρmax /n+
                                             p
 α(n)) and Bias MSEk = O(e−n/ρmax + α(n)). Further, the failure probability is bounded as
                        RS


 Pr(nRS < k) ≤ e−n/(8ρmax ) (c.f. Theorem 8 in Appendix).
 We also show in the Appendix (c.f. Corollary 1) that the above theorem, together with further regu-
 larity conditions, can be used to argue that ranking policies based on MSERS
                                                                           k leads to approximately
 optimal policy decisions, with respect to E[MSE(θ(Dn ))], in a strong approximation sense.

 5                          E XPERIMENTS
 In this section we empirically investigate the flexibility and efficiency of our approach. We provide
 the key takeaway points here, and more experimental details are deferred to Appendix I.
 A. Flexibility of the proposed approach: One of the key benefits of DIA is that it can be used as-
 is for a variety of estimators (linear and non-linear) and settings (unconditional and conditional IV
 setting). Drawing inspiration from real-world use cases, consider binary treatment settings, where
 we only have access to a plethora of instruments that can be used to encourage (e.g., using different
 types of notifications, emails, etc.) treatment uptake. Specifically, we consider three regimes:
 IV: This simulator is a basic IV setting with homogenous treatment effects and which thus permits
 a closed-form solution using the standard two-stage least-squares procedure (Pearl, 2009). This do-
 main has heteroskedastic outcome noise and varying levels of compliance for different instruments.
 Figure 5 (left) presents the results for this setting.


                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  IV                                                         Conditional IV


         Percent of MSE of Uniform


                                                                          Percent of MSE of Uniform
                                 1.0                                                              1.0
                                 0.8                                                              0.8
                                 0.6                                                              0.6
                                 0.4                                                              0.4
                                 0.2                                                              0.2
                                 0.0   3           5              7                               0.0   3           5              7
                                       Number of Re-allocations                                         Number of Re-allocations


Figure 6: DIA-X refers to the application of the proposed algorithm to the domain setting where the
number of instruments is X. The plots illustrate the percent of MSE of uniform, after all the 5000
samples are collected, with the given number of re-allocations. Error bars correspond to one stderr.


Conditional IV: Second we consider the important setting where instruments/encouragements can
be allocated in a context-dependent way, and the objective is to estimate the conditional average
treatment effect. Our simulator has covariates containing a mix of binary and continuous-valued
features, and heteroskedastic noises and compliances, across instruments and outcomes, for every
covariate. We solve the counterfactual prediction f in 2 using the two-stage moment conditions in
3 involving logistic regression and this estimator does not have a closed-form solution. Figure 5
(middle) presents the results for this setting.

TripAdvisor: We use the simulator built from TripAdvisor customer data (Syrgkanis et al., 2019).
The goal is to estimate the effect on revenue if a customer becomes a subscribed member. The
original setup had instruments corresponding to easier/promotional sign-up options, but to provide
ablation studies we consider a larger, synthetically augmented, set of instruments. Covariates corre-
spond to demographic data about the customer, and their past interaction behavior on the website.
For this setting, we use the estimator by Hartford et al. (2017) and model all the functions f , dP
(from 2), and π, using neural networks. Figure 5 (right) presents the results for this setting.

B. Understanding the performance gains: In order to simulate a realistic situation where de-
ployed policy can be updated only periodically, we consider a batched allocation setting. To measure
the performance gain, we compute the relative improvement in MSE over uniform allocation strat-
egy, i.e., a metric popular in direct experiment design literature (Che & Namkoong, 2023) (lower
is better). In the IV setting, in Figure 5 (left), we also provide a comparison with the oracle ob-
tained using brute force search. To assess the robustness of our method, we also consider varying
the number of available instruments and the number of batch re-allocations possible.

Across all the domains, we observe that DIA can provide substantial gains for estimating the coun-
terfactual prediction f by adaptively designing the instruments for indirect experiments (Figure 5).
Performance gains are observed even as we vary the number of instruemnts present in the domain.
Importantly, DIA achieves this across different (linear and non-linear) estimators, thereby illustrat-
ing its flexibility. In addition, in general there is a benefit to increasing the number of times the
instrument-design policy is updated (Figure 6).

It is worth highlighting that DIA can improve the accuracy of the base estimator by a factor of 1.2×
to 10×: equivalently, for some desired target treatment effect estimation accuracies, DIA needs only
80% to an order-of-magnitude less sample data.

Our results also suggest a tension behind the amount of data and the complexity of the problem,
creating a ‘U’-trend (see e.g. Figure 6). With a larger number of instruments, there is more potential
advantage of being strategic, especially when for many contexts, most instruments have a weak
influence. However, learning the optimal strategy to realize those gains also becomes harder when
there are so many instruments (and the sample budget is held fixed). In the middle regime gains are
substantial and the method can also quickly learn an effective instrument-selection design π ∗ .


                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6      C ONCLUSION
The increasing prevalence of human-AI interaction systems presents an important development.
However, as AI systems can often only be suggestive and not prescriptive, estimating the effect of
its suggested action necessitates the development of sample-efficient methods to estimate treatment
effect merely through suggestions, while leaving the agency of decision to the user. This work
took the initial step to lay the foundation for adaptive data collection for such indirect experiments.
We characterized the key challenges, theoretically assessed the proposed remedies, and validated
them empirically on domains inspired by real-world settings. Scaling the framework to settings
with natural language instruments, and doing inference with adaptively collected data (Zhang et al.,
2021; Gupta et al., 2021) remain exciting future directions.

7      ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Stefan Wager, Jann Spiess, and Art Owen for their valuable feedback. Earlier versions of
the draft also benefited from feedback from Jonathan Lee and Allen Nie. This work was supported
in part by 2023 Amazon Research Award.

R EFERENCES
Karim Abou-Moustafa and Csaba Szepesvári. An exponential efron-stein inequality for l_q stable
  learning rules. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 31–63. PMLR, 2019. [Page(s): 27]
Ahmed Alaa and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Validating causal inference models via influence func-
  tions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 191–201. PMLR, 2019. [Page(s): 17, 25]
Ahmed Alaa and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Discriminative jackknife: Quantifying uncertainty in
  deep learning via higher-order influence functions. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 165–174. PMLR, 2020. [Page(s): 17]
Joshua D Angrist, Guido W Imbens, and Donald B Rubin. Identification of causal effects using
  instrumental variables. Journal of the American statistical Association, 91(434):444–455, 1996.
    [Page(s): 2, 3, 17]

Susan Athey and Stefan Wager. Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica, 89(1):
  133–161, 2021. [Page(s): 17]
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:17953–17967, 2022. [Page(s): 24, 46, 47]
Samyadeep Basu, Philip Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14651, 2020. [Page(s): 46]
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax. [Page(s): 5]
Patrick Breheny. Statistical functionals and influence functions. Technical report, The University of
  Iowa, 2020. https://myweb.uiowa.edu/pbreheny/uk/teaching/621/notes/
  8-28.pdf. [Page(s): 24]
Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R Raymond. Generative ai at work. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2023. [Page(s): 1]
Brian S Caffo, James G Booth, and AC Davison.             Empirical supremum rejection sampling.
  Biometrika, 89(4):745–754, 2002. [Page(s): 45]
Ricardo Cao. Bootstrapping the mean integrated squared error. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 45
  (1):137–160, 1993. [Page(s): 17]
Alain Celisse and Benjamin Guedj. Stability revisited: new generalisation bounds for the leave-one-
  out. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.06412, 2016. [Page(s): 27]
Kathryn Chaloner and Isabella Verdinelli. Bayesian experimental design: A review. Statistical
  science, pp. 273–304, 1995. [Page(s): 1, 17, 47]


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethan Che and Hongseok Namkoong. Adaptive experimentation at scale: Bayesian algorithms for
  flexible batches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11582, 2023. [Page(s): 1, 9, 17]
Yen-Chi Chen. Introduction to resampling methods. lecture 5: Bootstrap. Technical report, Uni-
  versity of Washington, 2017a. https://faculty.washington.edu/yenchic/17Sp_
  403/Lec5-bootstrap.pdf. [Page(s): 17]
Yen-Chi Chen. Introduction to resampling methods. lecture 9: Introduction to the bootstrap the-
  ory. Technical report, University of Washington, 2017b. https://faculty.washington.
  edu/yenchic/17Sp_403/Lec9_theory.pdf. [Page(s): 17]
Yen-Chi Chen. Stat 512: Statistical inference. lecture 10: Statistical functionals and the bootstrap.
  Technical report, University of Washington, 2020. https://faculty.washington.edu/
  yenchic/20A_stat512/Lec10_functional.pdf. [Page(s): 17]
Paul S Clarke and Frank Windmeijer. Instrumental variable estimators for binary outcomes. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 107(500):1638–1652, 2012. [Page(s): 17]
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Residuals and influence in regression. New York: Chapman
  and Hall, 1982. [Page(s): 24]
Alicia Curth, Alihan Hüyük, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Adaptively identifying patient populations
  with treatment benefit in clinical trials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05844, 2022. [Page(s): 17]
Michiel Debruyne, Mia Hubert, and Johan AK Suykens. Model selection in kernel based regression
 using the influence function. Journal of machine learning research.-Cambridge, Mass., 9:2377–
 2400, 2008. [Page(s): 17]
Riccardo Della Vecchia and Debabrota Basu. Online instrumental variable regression: Regret anal-
  ysis and bandit feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09357, 2023. [Page(s): 1]
Ozkan Eren and Daniel J Henderson. The impact of homework on student achievement. The Econo-
  metrics Journal, 11(2):326–348, 2008. [Page(s): 18]
Yingying Fan, Jinchi Lv, and Jingbo Wang. Dnn: A two-scale distributional tale of heterogeneous
  treatment effect inference. Available at SSRN 3238897, 2018. [Page(s): 31, 41]
Luisa Turrin Fernholz. Von Mises calculus for statistical functionals, volume 19. Springer Science
  & Business Media, 2012. [Page(s): 5]
Johannes Ferstad, Priya Prahalad, David M Maahs, Emily Fox, Ramesh Johari, and David Scheinker.
  1009-p: The association between patient characteristics and the efficacy of remote patient moni-
  toring and messaging. Diabetes, 71(Supplement_1), 2022. [Page(s): 18]
Aaron Fisher and Edward H Kennedy. Visually communicating and teaching intuition for influence
  functions. The American Statistician, 75(2):162–172, 2021. [Page(s): 4, 5]
Dennis Frauen and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating individual treatment effects under unobserved
  confounding using binary instruments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08544, 2022. [Page(s): 3]
Charles J Geyer. 5601 notes: The subsampling bootstrap. Unpublished manuscript, 2006. URL
  https://www.stat.umn.edu/geyer/5601/notes/sub.pdf. [Page(s): 17]
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, et al. Studying large language model generalization
  with influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03296, 2023. [Page(s): 45]
Shantanu Gupta, Zachary Lipton, and David Childers. Efficient online estimation of causal effects
  by deciding what to observe. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:20995–
  21007, 2021. [Page(s): 2, 10]
Jinyong Hahn, Keisuke Hirano, and Dean Karlan. Adaptive experimental design using the propen-
   sity score. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(1):96–108, 2011. [Page(s): 1, 17]
Peter Hall. Using the bootstrap to estimate mean squared error and select smoothing parameter in
  nonparametric problems. Journal of multivariate analysis, 32(2):177–203, 1990. [Page(s): 17]
Peter Hall.    Methodology and theory for the bootstrap. Technical report, University
  of California, Davis, 2016.   https://anson.ucdavis.edu/~peterh/sta251/
  bootstrap-lectures-to-may-16.pdf. [Page(s): 17]


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Hartford, Greg Lewis, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Matt Taddy. Deep iv: A flexible approach
  for counterfactual prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1414–1423.
  PMLR, 2017. [Page(s): 1, 2, 3, 9, 48]
James J Heckman and Sergio Urzua. Comparing iv with structural models: What simple iv can and
  cannot identify. Journal of Econometrics, 156(1):27–37, 2010. [Page(s): 17]
Oliver Hines, Oliver Dukes, Karla Diaz-Ordaz, and Stijn Vansteelandt. Demystifying statistical
  learning based on efficient influence functions. The American Statistician, 76(3):292–304, 2022.
  [Page(s): 17]

Wassily Hoeffding. A class of statistics with asymptotically normal distribution. The Annals of
 Mathematical Statistics, 19(3):293–325, 1948. [Page(s): 31]
Kenneth Holstein, Bruce M McLaren, and Vincent Aleven. Student learning benefits of a mixed-
  reality teacher awareness tool in ai-enhanced classrooms. In Artificial Intelligence in Education:
  19th International Conference, AIED 2018, London, UK, June 27–30, 2018, Proceedings, Part I
  19, pp. 154–168. Springer, 2018. [Page(s): 1]
Shang-Ling Hsu, Raj Sanjay Shah, Prathik Senthil, Zahra Ashktorab, Casey Dugan, Werner Geyer,
  and Diyi Yang. Helping the helper: Supporting peer counselors via ai-empowered practice and
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08982, 2023. [Page(s): 1]
Hidehiko Ichimura and Whitney K Newey. The influence function of semiparametric estimators.
  Quantitative Economics, 13(1):29–61, 2022. [Page(s): 17, 24]
Guido Imbens. Instrumental variables: an econometrician’s perspective. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2014. [Page(s): 3]
Guido W Imbens. Better late than nothing: Some comments on deaton (2009) and heckman and
  urzua (2009). Journal of Economic literature, 48(2):399–423, 2010. [Page(s): 17]
Jay Kahn. Influence functions for fun and profit. Ross School of Business, University of
  Michigan, 2015. URL http://j-kahn.com/files/influencefunctions.pdf.
  [Page(s): 5, 19, 24, 48]

Nathan Kallus. Instrument-armed bandits. In Firdaus Janoos, Mehryar Mohri, and Karthik Sridha-
  ran (eds.), Proceedings of Algorithmic Learning Theory, volume 83 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 529–546. PMLR, 07–09 Apr 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v83/kallus18a.html. [Page(s): 1]
Maximilian Kasy. Semiparametrically efficient estimation of conditional instrumental variables pa-
 rameters. The International Journal of Biostatistics, 5(1), 2009. [Page(s): 17]
Maximilian Kasy and Anja Sautmann. Adaptive treatment assignment in experiments for policy
 choice. Econometrica, 89(1):113–132, 2021. [Page(s): 17]
Masahiro Kato, Takuya Ishihara, Junya Honda, and Yusuke Narita. Efficient adaptive experi-
 mental design for average treatment effect estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05308, 2020.
  [Page(s): 1, 17]

Michael Kearns and Dana Ron. Algorithmic stability and sanity-check bounds for leave-one-out
 cross-validation. In Proceedings of the tenth annual conference on Computational learning the-
 ory, pp. 152–162, 1997. [Page(s): 27]
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017. [Page(s): 5, 24]
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Buy 4 REINFORCE samples, get a baseline
 for free! In Deep Reinforcement Learning Meets Structured Prediction, ICLR 2019 Workshop,
 New Orleans, Louisiana, United States, May 6, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=r1lgTGL5DE. [Page(s): 17]
Steven George Krantz and Harold R Parks. The implicit function theorem: history, theory, and
  applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2002. [Page(s): 24]
Zhaobin Kuang, Frederic Sala, Nimit Sohoni, Sen Wu, Aldo Córdova-Palomera, Jared Dunnmon,
  James Priest, and Christopher Ré. Ivy: Instrumental variable synthesis for causal inference.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 398–410. PMLR, 2020.
  [Page(s): 17]



                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Harrison H Li and Art B Owen. Double machine learning and design in batch adaptive experiments.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15297, 2023. [Page(s): 17]
Pierre Liotet, Francesco Vidaich, Alberto Maria Metelli, and Marcello Restelli. Lifelong hyper-
  policy optimization with multiple importance sampling regularization. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 7525–7533, 2022. [Page(s): 17]
Hao Liu, Yihao Feng, Yi Mao, Dengyong Zhou, Jian Peng, and Qiang Liu. Action-depedent con-
  trol variates for policy optimization via stein’s identity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11198, 2017.
  [Page(s): 17]

Noel Loo, Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, and Daniela Rus. Dataset distillation with convexified
  implicit gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06755, 2023. [Page(s): 17, 24]
Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by
  implicit differentiation. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
  1540–1552. PMLR, 2020. [Page(s): 5, 45]
Anna Mikusheva.        Time series analysis. lecture 9: Bootstrap. Technical report, Mas-
  sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2013.            https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/
  14-384-time-series-analysis-fall-2013/resources/mit14_384f13_
  lec9/. [Page(s): 17]
Susan A Murphy. An experimental design for the development of adaptive treatment strategies.
  Statistics in medicine, 24(10):1455–1481, 2005. [Page(s): 1]
Whitney K Newey and Daniel McFadden. Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing. Hand-
 book of econometrics, 4:2111–2245, 1994. [Page(s): 19]
Whitney K Newey and James L Powell. Instrumental variable estimation of nonparametric models.
 Econometrica, 71(5):1565–1578, 2003. [Page(s): 2, 3]
Dung Daniel T Ngo, Logan Stapleton, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Steven Wu. Incentivizing compliance
  with algorithmic instruments. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8045–8055.
  PMLR, 2021. [Page(s): 2]
Matteo Papini, Alberto Maria Metelli, Lorenzo Lupo, and Marcello Restelli. Optimistic policy op-
 timization via multiple importance sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 4989–4999. PMLR, 2019. [Page(s): 17]
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [Page(s): 5]
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009. [Page(s): 3, 8]
Barak A Pearlmutter. Fast exact multiplication by the hessian. Neural computation, 6(1):147–160,
  1994. [Page(s): 5, 45]
Dimitris N Politis, Joseph P Romano, and Michael Wolf. Subsampling. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 1999. [Page(s): 17]
Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
  Faculty Publication Series, pp. 80, 2000. [Page(s): 4, 6]
Tom Rainforth, Adam Foster, Desi R Ivanova, and Freddie Bickford Smith. Modern bayesian ex-
  perimental design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14545, 2023. [Page(s): 1, 17, 47]
Lorenz Richter, Ayman Boustati, Nikolas Nüsken, Francisco Ruiz, and Omer Deniz Akyildiz. Var-
  grad: a low-variance gradient estimator for variational inference. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:13481–13492, 2020. [Page(s): 17]
Emmanuel Rio. Moment inequalities for sums of dependent random variables under projective
  conditions. Journal of Theoretical Probability, 22(1):146–163, 2009. [Page(s): 28]
James Robins, Lingling Li, Eric Tchetgen, Aad van der Vaart, et al. Higher order influence functions
  and minimax estimation of nonlinear functionals. In Probability and statistics: essays in honor of
  David A. Freedman, volume 2, pp. 335–422. Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2008. [Page(s): 25]


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joseph P Romano. On subsampling estimators with unknown rate of convergence. 1995. [Page(s): 47]
Tim Salimans and David A Knowles. On using control variates with stochastic approxima-
   tion for variational bayes and its connection to stochastic linear regression. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1401.1022, 2014. [Page(s): 17]
Andrea Schioppa, Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, and Artem Sokolov. Scaling up influence func-
   tions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8179–
   8186, 2022. [Page(s): 24]
Jiaxin Shi, Yuhao Zhou, Jessica Hwang, Michalis Titsias, and Lester Mackey. Gradient estimation
   with discrete stein operators. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:25829–
   25841, 2022. [Page(s): 17]
Xiaoxia Shi. Econ 715. lecture 10: Bootstrap. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
   2012. https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~xshi/econ715/Lecture_10_bootstrap.
   pdf. [Page(s): 17]
Difan Song, Simon Mak, and CF Wu. Ace: Active learning for causal inference with expensive
   experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07480, 2023. [Page(s): 1, 17]
Masashi Sugiyama, Motoaki Kawanabe, et al. Dimensionality reduction for density ratio estima-
   tion in high-dimensional spaces. Artificial Intelligence Society, 2009(DMSM-A901):04, 2009.
  [Page(s): 49]

Masashi Sugiyama, Makoto Yamada, Paul Von Buenau, Taiji Suzuki, Takafumi Kanamori, and Mo-
  toaki Kawanabe. Direct density-ratio estimation with dimensionality reduction via least-squares
  hetero-distributional subspace search. Neural Networks, 24(2):183–198, 2011. [Page(s): 49]
Vasilis Syrgkanis, Victor Lei, Miruna Oprescu, Maggie Hei, Keith Battocchi, and Greg Lewis. Ma-
  chine learning estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects with instruments. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. [Page(s): 1, 3, 8, 9, 18, 49]
Hajime Takahashi. A note on edgeworth expansions for the von mises functionals. Journal of
  multivariate analysis, 24(1):56–65, 1988. [Page(s): 17]
Yunhao Tang. Biased gradient estimate with drastic variance reduction for meta reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21050–21075. PMLR, 2022.
  [Page(s): 17]

Philip S Thomas. Safe reinforcement learning. PhD thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
  2015. [Page(s): 6]
Michalis Titsias and Jiaxin Shi. Double control variates for gradient estimation in discrete latent
  variable models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6134–
  6151. PMLR, 2022. [Page(s): 17]
Toon Vanderschueren, Alicia Curth, Wouter Verbeke, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Accounting for
  informative sampling when learning to forecast treatment outcomes over time. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.04255, 2023. [Page(s): 17]
Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using
  random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1228–1242, 2018a.
  [Page(s): 42]

Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using
  random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1228–1242, 2018b.
  [Page(s): 31, 41]

Linbo Wang, Yuexia Zhang, Thomas S Richardson, and James M Robins. Estimation of local
  treatment effects under the binary instrumental variable model. Biometrika, 108(4):881–894,
  2021. [Page(s): 17]
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8:229–256, 1992. [Page(s): 4]
Anpeng Wu, Kun Kuang, Ruoxuan Xiong, and Fei Wu. Instrumental variables in causal inference
  and machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05778, 2022. [Page(s): 3]
Cathy Wu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Yan Duan, Vikash Kumar, Alexandre M Bayen, Sham Kakade,
  Igor Mordatch, and Pieter Abbeel. Variance reduction for policy gradient with action-dependent
  factorized baselines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07246, 2018. [Page(s): 17]


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruoxuan Xiong, Susan Athey, Mohsen Bayati, and Guido Imbens. Optimal experimental design for
  staggered rollouts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03764, 2019. [Page(s): 1]
Liyuan Xu, Yutian Chen, Siddarth Srinivasan, Nando de Freitas, Arnaud Doucet, and Arthur Gret-
  ton. Learning deep features in instrumental variable regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07154,
  2020. [Page(s): 3]
Junkun Yuan, Anpeng Wu, Kun Kuang, Bo Li, Runze Wu, Fei Wu, and Lanfen Lin. Auto iv:
  Counterfactual prediction via automatic instrumental variable decomposition. ACM Transactions
  on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 16(4):1–20, 2022. [Page(s): 17]
Kelly Zhang, Lucas Janson, and Susan Murphy. Statistical inference with m-estimators on adap-
  tively collected data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:7460–7471, 2021.
  [Page(s): 10]


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Adaptive Instrument Design for Indirect Experiments
                           (Appendix)
C ONTENTS
1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Background and Problem Setup                                                                     2

3   Approach                                                                                        4
    3.1 Influence Functions for Control Variates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4
    3.2 Multi-Rejection Sampling for Distribution Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
    3.3 DIA: Designing Instruments Adaptively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7

4   Theory                                                                                          7

5   Experiments                                                                                      8

6   Conclusion                                                                                      10

7   Acknowledgement                                                                                 10

A Extended Discussion on Related Work                                                               17

B Examples of Practical Use-cases                                                                   18

C Linear Conditional Instrumental Variables                                                         18
  C.1 Specific Instantiations of Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20

D Influence functions                                                                               24

E Bias and Variances of Gradient Estimators                                                         26
  E.1 Naive REINFORCE estimator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             26
  E.2 REINFORCE estimator with CV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             29
  E.3 REINFORCE estimator with Influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            30

F Estimation Error, Bias and Variance Analysis                                                      31
  F.1 Preliminaries on U-Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
  F.2 Variance of IS procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
  F.3 Guarantees for Rejection Sampling Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           35
  F.4 Policy Ordering Consistency Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          39
  F.5 Proof of Theorem 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        40

G Multi-Rejection Sampling                                                                          42
  G.1 Review: Standard Rejection Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           42
  G.2 Proposed: Multi-Rejection Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          43

H Algorithm                                                                                         44
  H.1 Pseudo-code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       44
  H.2 Influence function usage when the estimates are stochastic . . . . . . . . . . . . .          46
  H.3 Proxy MSE alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47

I   Additional Empirical Details                                                                    47
    I.1 Synthetic Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       48
    I.2 TripAdvisor domain (semi-synthetic) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49
    I.3 Hyper-parameters: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49
    I.4 Details of other plots: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION ON R ELATED W ORK
Experiment design has a rich literature and no effort is enough to provide a detailed review. We
refer readers to the work by Chaloner & Verdinelli (1995); Rainforth et al. (2023) for a survey. Re-
searchers have considered adaptive estimation of (conditional) average treatment effect (Hahn et al.,
2011; Kato et al., 2020), leveraging Gaussian processes (Song et al., 2023), active estimation of
the sub-population benefiting the most from the treatment (Curth et al., 2022), for estimating the
treatment effects when samples are collected irregularly (Vanderschueren et al., 2023), and adaptive
data collection to find the best arm while also maximizing welfare (Kasy & Sautmann, 2021). Che
& Namkoong (2023) consider adaptive experiment design using differentiable programming. Our
work shares their philosophy in terms of balancing sample complexity with computational complex-
ity. Li & Owen (2023) consider using methods from double ML for adaptive direct experiments.
In contrast, we consider adaptive indirect experiments that often make use of two-stage and double
ML estimators. However, all these works only consider design for direct experiments.
For instrumental variables, researchers have developed methods that can automatically decide how
to efficiently combine different instruments to enhance the efficiency of the estimator (Kuang et al.,
2020; Yuan et al., 2022). In contrast, our work considers how to collect more data online. Further,
while considered IV estimation under specific assumptions, we refer readers to the work by Angrist
et al. (1996); Clarke & Windmeijer (2012); Wang et al. (2021) for discussions on alternate assump-
tions. Particularly, we considered conditional LATE to be equal to CATE. For more discussion on
the relation of CATE and conditional LATE, we refer readers to the work by Heckman & Urzua
(2010); Imbens (2010); Athey & Wager (2021).
Some of the tools that we developed are also related to a literature outside of causal estimation
and experiment design. Our treatment of the dataset selection policy as a factorized distribution
and development of the leave-one-out sample is related to ideas in action-factorized baselines in
reinforcement learning (Wu et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2017) and leave-one-out control variates (Richter
et al., 2020; Salimans & Knowles, 2014; Shi et al., 2022; Kool et al., 2019; Titsias & Shi, 2022). In
contrast to these, our work is for experiment design, and to be compute efficient in our setup we had
to additionally develop black-box influence functions for two-stage estimators.
Our work also complements prior work on influence function for conditional IVs (Kasy, 2009;
Ichimura & Newey, 2022) as they were not directly applicable to deep neural network-based esti-
mators. Further, our characterization of the leave-one-out estimate of the MSE requires existence
of all the higher-order influence functions. Similar conditions have been used by prior works in the
context of uncertainty quantification (Alaa & Van Der Schaar, 2020), model selection (Alaa & Van
Der Schaar, 2019; Hines et al., 2022; Debruyne et al., 2008), and dataset distillation (Loo et al.,
2023).
Tang (2022) quantifies and developes first-order gradient-based control-variates to perform bias-
variance trade-off of the naive REINFORCE gradient in the meta-reinforcement learning setting.
However, in their analysis, the effective ‘reward’ function admits a simple additive decomposition,
where in our setting it corresponds to MSE(θ(Dn )) which cannot be analysed using their technique.
Further, potential non-linearity of θ makes the analysis a lot more involved in our case. Similarly,
to deal with off-policy correction in RL, researchers have also considered using multi-importance-
sampling (Papini et al., 2019; Liotet et al., 2022). However, using multi-importance sampling (as
opposed to multi-rejection sampling) in our setup can still result in exponential variance. Our multi-
rejection sampling is designed by leveraging the symmetric structure of our estimator.

Further, our MSE
              [ estimator is related to MSE estimation using sub-sampling bootstrap (Politis et al.,
1999; Geyer, 2006), where the mean-squared-error is computed by comparing the estimate from the
entire dataset of size n with the estimator obtained using the subset of the dataset of size k < n, and
then rescaling this appropriately using the convergence rate of the estimator (Hall, 1990; Cao, 1993).
In our setting, we can avoid using the rescaling factor (which requires knowledge of convergence
rates) since we only care about computing the gradient of the MSE.
                                                                [ Additionally, we had to address
the distribution shift issue for our setting. For more background on statistical bootstrap, we refer
readers to some helpful lectures notes (Chen, 2017a; Mikusheva, 2013; Shi, 2012; Hall, 2016). See
(Chen, 2017b, 2020) for connections between bootstrap and influence functions, and (Takahashi,
1988) for connections between Von-Mises expansion (used for LOO estimation using influence
functions) and Edgeworth expansions (used for bootstrap theory).


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, while we leverage tools from RL, our problem setup presents several unique challenges that
make the application of standard RL methods as-is ineffective. Off-policy learning is an important
requirement for our method, and policy-gradient and Q-learning are the two main pillars of RL. As
we discussed in Section 4, conventional importance-sampling-based policy gradient methods can
have variance exponential in the number of samples (in the worst-case), rendering them practically
useless for our setting. On the other hand, it is unclear how to efficiently formulate the optimization
problem using Q-learning. From an RL point of view, the ‘reward’ corresponds to the MSE, and
the ‘actions’ corresponds to instruments. Since this reward depends on all the samples, the effective
‘state space’ for Q-learning style methods would depend on the combinatorial set of the covariates,
i.e., let X be the set of covariates and n be the number of samples, then the state s ∈ X n . This causes
additional trouble as n continuously changes/increases in our setting as we collect more data.

B    E XAMPLES OF P RACTICAL U SE - CASES
Due to space constraints, we presented the motivation concisely in the main paper. To provide more
discussion on some real-world use cases, below we have mentioned three use cases across different
fields of application:
• Education: It is important for designing an education curriculum to estimate the effect of home-
  work assignments, extra reading material, etc. on a student’s final performance (Eren & Hender-
  son, 2008). However, as students cannot be forced to (not) do these, conducting an RCT becomes
  infeasible. Nonetheless, students can be encouraged via a multitude of different methods to partic-
  ipate in these exercises. These different forms of encouragement provide various instruments and
  choosing them strategically can enable sample efficient estimation of the desired treatment effect.
• Healthcare: Similarly, for mobile gym applications, or remote patient monitoring settings (Fer-
  stad et al., 2022), users retain the agency to decide whether they would like to follow the sug-
  gested at-home exercise or medical intervention, respectively. As we cannot perform random user
  assignment to a control/treatment group, RCTs cannot be performed. However, there is a variety
  of different messages and reminders (in terms of how to phrase the message, when to notify the
  patient, etc.) that serve as instruments. Being strategic about the choice of the instrument can
  enable sample efficient estimation of treatment effect.
• Digital marketing: Many online digital platforms aim at estimating the impact of premier mem-
  bership on both the company’s revenue and also on customer satisfaction. However, it is infeasible
  to randomly make users a member or not, thereby making RCTs inapplicable. Nonetheless, var-
  ious forms of promotional offers, easier sign-up options, etc. serve as instruments to encourage
  customers to become members. Strategically personalizing these instruments for customers can
  enable sample-efficient treatment effect estimation. In our work, we consider one such case study
  using the publicly available TripAdvisor domain (Syrgkanis et al., 2019).

C    L INEAR C ONDITIONAL I NSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES
In this section, we aim to elucidate how different factors in (a) the data-generating process (e.g.,
heteroskedasticity in compliance and outcome noise, structure in the covariates) and (b) the choice
of estimators can affect the optimal data collection strategy.
Since this discussion is aimed at a more qualitative (instead of quantitative results like those in
Section 5) we will consider a (partially) linear CATE IV model,
                                      Y = θ0′ XA + f0 (X) + ϵ,                                      (18)

where E[ϵ|X, A] ̸= 0 but E[ϵ|X, Z] = 0. As E[XZϵ] = E[XZE[ϵ|XZ]] = 0, the estimate θ̂ is
constructed based on the solution to the moment vector:
                                 E[(Y − θ′ X A − fˆ(X))X Z] = 0,                                    (19)
where Z is a scalar, A ∈ {0, 1} and E[Z | X] = 0 (i.e. we know the propensity of the instrument
and we can always exactly center the instrument). Moreover, fˆ(X) is an arbitrary function that
converges in probability to some function f0 .
An example: Z = w(X)′ V and E[V | X] = 0. This can simulate a situation where V represents the
one-hot-encoding of a collection of binary instruments, w(X) selects a linear combination of these


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


instruments to observe, yielding the observed instrument Z (e.g. w(X) ∈ {e1 , . . . , em } encodes
that we can only select one base instrument to observe). Moreover, each of these base instruments
comes from a known propensity and we can always exactly center it conditional on X.
The estimate θ̂ is the solution to:
                               1X
                                    (Yi − θ′ Xi Ai − fˆ(Xi ))Xi Zi = 0.                            (20)
                               n i

We care about the MSE of the estimate θ̂:
                                     MSE(θ̂) = EX [(θ̂′ X − θ0′ X)2 ].                             (21)

Lemma 1. Let V = E[XX ′ ] and J = E[AZXX ′ ] and Σ = E[ϵ2 Z 2 XX ′ ], with ϵ = Y − θ0′ XA −
f0 (X). Finally, let
                                       U = V 1/2 J −1 ΣJ −1 V 1/2 .                                (22)
The mean and the variance of the MSE converge to:
              nE[MSE(θ̂)] → ∥U ∥nuclear                    n2 Var[MSE(θ̂)] → 2∥U ∥2f ro .          (23)

Proof. The proof is structured as the following,
• Part A: We first recall the asymptotic properties of GMM estimators.
                                                                              √
• Part B: We then use this result to estimate the asymptotic property of          n(θ̂ − θ), and also of
  nMSE(θ̂).
• Part C: Finally, we use singular value decomposition to express the mean and variance for
  MSE(θ̂) in simplified terms.
Part A: Let Si = {Xi , Zi , Ai , Yi }. Recall that for a GMM-estimator, θ̂ is the solution to
                                         1X
                                                m(θ, Si ) = 0,                                     (24)
                                         n i

where m(θ, Si ) is the moment for sample Si . For large enough n we can represent the difference
between the estimates θ̂ and the true θ by use of a Taylor expansion (Kahn, 2015),
                                     1X
                           θ̂ = θ +        IF(θ, Si ) + higher order terms,                 (25)
                                    n i

where IF(θ, Si ) is the influence of the sample i, and is given by E[∇m(θ, S)]−1 m(θ, Si ). Therefore,
                               √               1 X
                                 n(θ̂ − θ) = √          IF(θ, Si ) + op (1).                      (26)
                                                 n i

Moreover, E[IF(θ, S)] = 0 and Cov(IF(θ, S)) = E[IF(θ, S)IF(θ, S)′ ]. See (Newey & McFadden,
1994) for a more formal argument.
Part B: Therefore, the parameters estimated by the empirical analogue of the vector of moment
equations in 20 are asymptotically linear:
                                 n
          √                  1 X
              n(θ̂ − θ0 ) = √       E[AZXX ′ ]−1 Xi Zi (Yi − θ0′ Xi Ai − f0 (Xi )) + op (1).       (27)
                              n i=1

For simplicity, let’s take f0 (X) = 0. We can always redefine Y → Y − f0 (X). Moreover, let
v(X) = E[AZ | X] = Cov(A, Z | X) and J = E[v(X)XX ′ ]. Let ϵi = Yi − θ0′ Xi Ai . Then we
have:
                                                  n
                            √                 1 X −1
                               n(θ̂ − θ0 ) = √       J Xi Zi ϵi + op (1).             (28)
                                               n i=1


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We care about the average prediction error:
                             E[(θ′ X − θ0′ X)2 ] = (θ − θ0 )′ E[XX ′ ](θ − θ0 ).                         (29)
                ′
Let V = E[XX ]. Then,
                             E[(θ′ X − θ0′ X)2 ] = ∥V 1/2 (θ − θ0 )∥2 .                                  (30)
                                    √
Invoking the asymptotic linearity of n(θ̂ − θ0 ):
                                                                                   2
                                                    1 X
                    nE[(θ X − θ0′ X)2 ] =
                         ′
                                                   √     ϵi Zi V 1/2 J −1 Xi           + op (1).         (31)
                                                     n i
Moreover, we have:
              1 X
            √      ϵi Zi V 1/2 J −1 Xi ⇒d N 0, V 1/2 J −1 E[ϵ2 Z 2 XX ′ ]J −1 V 1/2 .                    (32)
               n i

Let Σ = E[ϵ2 Z 2 XX ′ ] and U = V 1/2 J −1 ΣJ −1 V 1/2 . Thus the mean squared error is distributed as
the squared of the ℓ2 norm of a multivariate Gaussian vector N (0, U ).
Part C: If we let U = CΛC ′ , be the SVD decomposition, then note that if v ∼ N (0, U ) then since
C ′ C = I, we have:
                                    ∥Cv∥2 = v ′ C ′ Cv = v ′ v = ∥v∥2 .                                  (33)
Now note that Cv ∼ N (0, C ′ U C) = N (0, Λ). Thus ∥Cv∥2 is distributed as the weighted sum of d
independent chi-squared distributions, i.e. we can write:
                                                        d
                                                        X
                                            ∥v∥2 =            λj Xj2 ,                                   (34)
                                                        i=1

where Xj2 are independent χ2 (1) distributed random variables and λj are the singular values of the
matrix:
                                        U = V 1/2 J −1 ΣJ −1 V 1/2 .                                     (35)
Using the mean and variance of the chi-squared distribution, asymptotic mean and variance of the
RMSE can be expressed as:
                                        d
                                        X
                    n E[MSE(θ̂)] →            λj                                                         (36)
                                        j=1
                                        d
                                        X                         X                        X
               n2 Var[MSE(θ̂)] →              Var(λj Xj2 ) =             λ2j Var(Xj2 ) =       2 λ2j .   (37)
                                        j=1                        j                       j

Thus the expected MSE is the trace norm (or nuclear norm) of U and the variance of the MSE is
twice the square of the Forbenius norm.

C.1 S PECIFIC I NSTANTIATIONS OF L EMMA 1
In this subsection, we instantiate Lemma 1 to understand the impact of heteroskedastic compli-
ance, heteroskedastic outcome errors, and structure of covariates on the optimal data collection
policy.
Note that U in Lemma 1 takes the form:
              U = E[XX ′ ]1/2 E[AZXX ′ ]−1 E[ϵ2 Z 2 XX ′ ]E[AZXX ′ ]−1 E[XX ′ ]1/2 .                     (38)
Noting that by the instrument assumption ϵ ⊥⊥ Z | X, and denoting with
              σ 2 (X) = E[ϵ2 | X]                         (residual variance of the outcome)             (39)
                2               2
              u (X) = E[Z | X]                                     (variance of the instrument)          (40)
                      E[A Z | X]
               γ(X) =                                             (heteroskedastic compliance)           (41)
                       E[Z 2 | X]


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the heteroskedastic compliance corresponds to the coefficient in the regression A ∼ Z con-
ditional on X. Then we can simplify:
 U = E[XX ′ ]1/2 E[γ(X)u2 (X)XX ′ ]−1 E[σ 2 (X)u2 (X)XX ′ ]E[γ(X)u2 (X)XX ′ ]−1 E[XX ′ ]1/2
                                                                                        (42)

Remark 1 (Homoskedastic Compliance, Outcome Error and Instrument Propensity). If we have a
lot of homoskedasticity, i.e.: σ 2 (X) = σ 2 , u2 (X) = u2 and γ 2 (X) = γ then U simplifies to:
                          U = γ −2 u−2 σ 2 V 1/2 V −1 V V −1 V 1/2 = γ −2 u−2 σ 2 I                           (43)
and we get:
                                                     d −2 −2 2
                                         E[MSE(θ̂)] =  γ u σ                                                  (44)
                                                    n
                                                    2d
                                      Var[MSE(θ̂)] = 2 γ −4 u−4 σ 4                                           (45)
                                                     n
                                                                                      2
Thus we are just looking for instruments that maximize γ u where  p γ := E[AZ]/E[Z ] is the OLS
coefficient of A ∼ Z (the first stage coefficient in 2SLS) and u = Var(Z) is the standard deviation
of the instrument.
Remark 2 (Homoskedastic Compliance and Outcome Error). If we have homoskedasticity in com-
pliance (i.e. γ(X) = γ) and in outcome (σ(X) = σ), then:
                           U = σ 2 γ −2 E[XX ′ ]1/2 E[u2 (X)XX ′ ]−1 E[XX ′ ]1/2                              (46)
Or equivalently, we want to maximize the trace of the inverse of U :
                           E[XX ′ ]−1/2 E γ 2 u2 (X)XX ′ E[XX ′ ]−1/2

                                                                                                              (47)
As XX ′ is positive semi-definite, the latter is maximized if we simply maximize γu(X) for each X.
Thus assuming that all the instruments in our choice set have a homogeneous compliance, then we
are looking for the instrument policy that maximizes: γu(X), where γ is the compliance coefficient
and u(X) is the conditional standard deviation of the instrument. If for instance, in our choice set
we have only binary instruments and we can fully randomize them, then we should always randomize
the instrument equiprobably and we should choose the binary instrument with the largest γ.
It is harder to understand how the trace norm or the schatten-2 norm of these more complex matrices
behave. Though maybe some matrix tricks could lead to further simplifications of these.
Remark 3 (Orthonormal Supported X). If X takes values on the orthonormal basis {e1 , . . . , ej },
                                                                                                  Z|X=ei ]
then by denoting σi2 = E[ϵ2 | X = ei ], u2i = E[Z 2 | X = ei ] and γi = E[A                    E[Z 2 |X=ei ] and by
Σ = diag{σ12 , . . . , σd2 } and K = diag{u21 , . . . , u2d } and Γ = diag{γ1 , . . . , γd }, let V = E[XX ′ ] =
W ΛW ′ be the eigen-representation of V , then we have:
                                  E σ 2 (X)u2 (X)XX ′ = W ΛKΣW ′ ,

                                                                                                               (48)
                                             2               ′              ′

                                   E γ(X)u (X)XX = W ΛΓKW .                                                    (49)
Leading to:
            U = W Λ1/2 W ′ W Λ−1 Γ−1 K −1 W ′ W ΛKΣW ′ W Λ−1 Γ−1 K −1 W ′ W Λ1/2 W,                           (50)
which by orthonormality of the W , simplifies to:
                                            U = W Γ−2 K −1 ΣW ′ .                                             (51)
hence we get that:
                                         X σ2        X E[ϵ2 | X = ei ]E[Z 2 | X = ei ]
                                               i
                    nE[M SE(θ̂)] =                 =                                   ,                      (52)
                                         i
                                           γi2 u2i   i
                                                              E[AZ | X = ei ]2
                                           X σ4
                                                 i
                n2 Var[M SE(θ̂)] = 2           4 u4 ,                                                         (53)
                                           i
                                             γ i   i



                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Compliance           Instrument Var. E[Z 2 |X]
                Estimator                                                                   Optimal?
                                          X=-1 X = 1            X = −1         X=1
                                                                   1/4           0            Yes
                                            1          1/3
                                                                   1/4          1/4           No
      En (Y − θ⊤ X A)X Z = 0

                                                                   1/4           0            No
                                            1          1/2
                                                                   1/4          1/4           Yes
                                                                   1/4           0            No
                                            1          1/3
                                                                   1/4          1/4           Yes
    h                       i
  En σγ(X)         ⊤
       2 (X) (Y − θ X A)X Z   =0
                                                                   1/4           0            No
                                            1          1/2
                                                                   1/4          1/4           Yes

Table 1: In general the optimal instrument-selection policy will depend not only on compliance
per covariates but also on the estimation method. We demonstrate this here for a simple linear
CATE estimation where g(X, A) := θ0⊤ XA, instrument Z is a scalar, A ∈ {0, 1}, X ∈ {−1, 1},
E[Z | X] = 0, and outcome error is homoskedastic. For the first estimator, the optimal instrument-
selection policy for X = 1 changes depending on the compliance for X = 1, where we characterize
optimality in terms of the asymptotic mse. In contrast, for the second estimator, randomizing the
instrument is best for both compliance values of X = 1.


and the problem decomposes into optimizing separately for each i, maximize the terms:
                                   E[AZ | X = ei ] p
                          q
                        γi u2i =                       E[Z 2 | X = ei ]                             (54)
                                    E[Z 2 | X = ei ]
assuming that our constraints on the policy for choosing Z are decoupled across the values of X. So
similarly, we just want to maximize the compliance coefficient, multiplied by the standard deviation
of the instrument, conditional on each X.
Beyond this case, when X doesn’t only take values on the orthonormal basis, then the problem of
optimizing the choice of an instrument distribution so as to minimize the expected MSE doesn’t
seem to decouple across the values of X.
Remark 4 (Scalar X). One can see the intricacies of the problem when there is no homoskedastic
compliance, even when we have a scalar X. In this case, we are trying to maximize:
                                            E[γ(X)u2 (X)X 2 ]2
                                U −1 :=                                                             (55)
                                          E[X 2 ]E[σ 2 (X)u2 (X)X 2 ]
Suppose for instance that X ∼ U ({−1, 1}) and that our policy can only choose the conditional
variance of Z, but not the conditional compliance γ(X) (e.g. we have a fixed binary instrument and
we can only play with its randomization probability). Then we are maximizing:
                                          (γ1 u21 + γ2 u22 )2
                                                                                                    (56)
                                           σ12 u21 + σ22 u22
over u21 , u22 ∈ [0, 1/4] (the variance of Z for each value of X). Without loss of generality, we can
take γ1 = 1 and σ1 = 1 in the above problem, since we can always take out these factors and
rename γ2 /γ1 → γ2 and σ2 /σ1 → σ2 . We then get the simplified problem:
                                            (u21 + γu22 )2
                                                                                                    (57)
                                             u21 + σ 2 u22
where γ, σ ∈ (0, ∞).
Take for instance the case when σ = 1 (i.e. homoskedastic outcome error) and γ = 1/3 (i.e.
compliance is 30% less for X = 1 than for X = −1. Then the optimal solution is u21 = 1/4, u22 = 0,
i.e. we don’t want to randomize the instrument at all when X = 1, yielding a value of 1/4 = 0.25
for U −1 . If we were for instance to randomize also when X = 1, then we would get a value of
(1/3)2 /(1/2) = 2/9 ≈ 0.22.
If on the other hand γ = 1/2, then if we randomize on both points we get (3/8)2 /(1/2) = 9/32 ≈
0.281, while if we only randomize when X = 1, then we get again 1/4 = 0.25. Thus the relative
compliance strength for different values of X, changes the optimal randomization solution for Z.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 5 (Efficient Instrument). It may very well be the case that the above contorted optimal
solution is an artifact of the estimator that we are using. Under such a heteroskedastic compliance,
most probably the estimate that we are using is not the efficient estimate, and we should be dividing
the instruments by the compliance measure (i.e. construct efficient instruments, e.g. Z̃ = Zσ2γ(X)
                                                                                                (X) ).
Then maybe once we use an efficient instrument estimator, its variance most probably would always
be improved if we full randomize on all X points. But at least the above shows that for some fixed
estimator (and in particular one that is heavily used in practice), it can very well be the case that
we don’t want to fully randomize the instrument all the time. If we use such an instrument Z̃ then
observe that for this instrument, by definition γ̃(X) = σ 2 (X). Then U simplifies to:
                                           2                    −1
                                   ′ 1/2  u (X)γ 2 (X)       ′
                           E[XX ] E                     XX         E[XX ′ ]1/2                   (58)
                                              σ 2 (X)
                                      2         2
Thus we just want to maximize u (X)γ   (X)
                                 σ 2 (X)   , i.e. maximize the product of the OLS coefficient of
                      1
A ∼ Z conditional on X and the conditional standard deviation of the instrument.
Revisiting the simple example in the previous remark, when we use an efficient instrument, the matrix
U −1 takes the form:
                                                            u22 γ 2
                                                    u21 +                                               (59)
                                                              σ2
For the case when γ = 1/3 and σ = 1, if we choose u21 = u22 = 1/4, we get 1/4 + 1/36 (compared
to the 1/4 we would achieve with the inefficient estimator under the optimal randomization policy).
When γ = 1/2, with the same u2i , we would get 1/4 + 1/16 ≈ 0.3125, which is larger than the
≈ 0.281 we would get under the optimal policy with the inefficient estimator.
Remark 6. (Non-conditional IV) Even when X = 1 always, it can be shown that randomizing a
single binary instrument equiprobably might be sub-optimal. To show this, we will consider the
setting where there is heteroskedasticty in outcomes with respected to the treatment A, thus with a
slight abuse of notation let σ 2 (Z) = E[ϵ2 | Z]. Under this setting, we can simplify,

 U = E[XX ′ ]1/2 E[γ(X)u2 (X)XX ′ ]−1 E[σ 2 (Z)u2 (X)XX ′ ]E[γ(X)u2 (X)XX ′ ]−1 E[XX ′ ]1/2
                                                                                        (60)
to
                           E[σ 2 (Z)u2 ]
                    U=                                                                                  (61)
                            E[γu2 ]2
                           E[σ 2 (Z)E[Z̃ 2 ]]
                       =                                              ∵ u2 (X) = E[Z̃ 2 |X]             (62)
                             (γE[Z̃ 2 ])2

where Z̃ is the centered instrument. Now assume γ = 1 (full compliance, i.e., A = Z, such that
σ 2 (Z = 0) = σ02 = variance in outcome for treatment A = 0, and σ12 is defined similarly.), and
Z ∈ {0, 1} with probability p and (1 − p),
                                         p2 (1 − p)σ02 + p(1 − p)2 σ1
                                    U=                                                                  (63)
                                                   p2 (1 − p)2
                                         pσ + (1 − p)σ12
                                            2
                                       = 0                                                              (64)
                                               p(1 − p)
                                             2
                                          σ0        σ2
                                       =         + 1.                                                   (65)
                                         1−p        p
When σ02 = 1 and σ12 = 2, then the minimizer is p ≈ 0.6, thereby illustrating that drawing the
binary instrument equiprobably can be sub-optimal even in this simple setting.
    1
      Equivalently the efficient instrument can be viewed as the normalized residualized efficient instrument
Zγ(X) := E[A | Z, X]−E[A | X], and γ(X) is the heterogeneous compliance; normalized by the conditional
variance of the conditional moment σ 2 (X).


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    I NFLUENCE FUNCTIONS
Influence functions have been widely studied in the machine learning literature from the perspective
of robustness and interpretability (Koh & Liang, 2017; Bae et al., 2022; Schioppa et al., 2022; Loo
et al., 2023), and dates back to the seminal work in robust statistics of (Cook & Weisberg, 1982).
Asymptotic influence functions for two stage procedures and semi-parametric estimators have also
been well-studied in the econometrics and semi-parametric inference literature (see e.g. (Ichimura &
Newey, 2022; Breheny, 2020; Kahn, 2015)). Here we derive a finite sample influence function of a
two-stage estimator that arises in our IV setting, from the perspective of a robust statistics definition
of an influence function, that approximates the leave-one-out variation of the mean-squared-error of
our estimate.
Influence functions characterize the effect of a training sample Si := {Xi , Zi , Ai , Yi } on θ̂ (for
brevity, let θ̂ ≡ θ(Dn )), i.e., the change in θ̂ if moments associated with Si were perturbed by a
small ϵ. Specifically, let θ̂ be a solution to the Mn (θ, ϕ̂) = 0 and ϕ̂ be a solution to Qn (ϕ) = 0,
as defined in 3. Similarly, let θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ be a solution to the following perturbed moment conditions
M̄ (ϵ, θ, ϕ̂ϵ ) = 0, and ϕ̂ϵ is the solution to Q̄(ϵ, ϕ) = 0, where
                             M̄ (ϵ, θ, ϕ) = Mn (θ, ϕ) + ϵm(Si , θ, ϕ) = 0                                (66)
                                 Q̄(ϵ, ϕ) = Qn (ϕ) + ϵq(Si , ϕ) = 0.                                     (67)
The rate of change in MSE due to an infinitesimal perturbation ϵ in the moments of Si can be
                                                     (1)
obtained by the (first-order) influence function IMSE , which itself can be decomposed using the
                                                    (1)
chain-rule in terms of the (first-order) influence Iθ on the estimated parameter θ̂ by perturbing the
moment associated with Si ,

            (1)           d
                                          (1)                          (1)          dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ
          IMSE (Si ) :=      MSE θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ Iθ (Si )           where,    Iθ (Si ) :=                    .   (68)
                          dθ                                                          dϵ       ϵ=0
                                                     ϵ=0

To derive the influence function for our estimate we will use the classical implicit function theo-
rem:
Theorem 1 (Implicit Function Theorem (Krantz & Parks, 2002)). Consider a multi-dimensional
vector-valued function F (x, y) ∈ Rn , with x ∈ Rm and y ∈ Rn and fix any point (x0 , y0 ), such
that
                                              F (x0 , y0 ) = 0                                           (69)
Suppose that F is differentiable and let Fx (x, y) and Fy (x, y), denote the Jacobians of F with
respect to its first and second arguments correspondingly. Suppose that det(Fy (x0 , y0 )) ̸= 0. Then
there exists an open set U containing x0 and a unique function ψ(x), such that ψ(x0 ) = y0 and
such that F (x, ψ(x)) = 0 for all x ∈ U . Moreover, the Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives of ψ
in U is given by:

                                  ∂                               −1
                    Dx ψ(x) :=       ψi (x)     = − [Fy (x, ψ(x))] Fx (x, ψ(x))                   (70)
                                 ∂xj        n×m

If F is k-times differentiable, then there exists an open set U and a unique function ψ that satisfies
the above properties and is also k-times differentiable.
Theorem 2 (Influence Functions for Black-box DML Estimators). Assuming that the inverses exist,
                        ∂Mn −1                                       ∂Qn −1

            (1)                                        ∂Mn
          Iθ (Si ) = −       (θ̂, ϕ̂) m(Si , θ̂, ϕ̂) −     (θ̂, ϕ̂)      (ϕ̂)q(Si , ϕ̂) . (71)
                         ∂θ                             ∂ϕ            ∂ϕ


Proof. Let θ̂, ϕ̂ be the empirical solutions without perturbation. Note that the ϵ-perturbed estimates
θ(ϵ), ϕ(ϵ) are defined as the solution to the zero equations:
                             M̄ (ϵ, θ, ϕ) = Mn (θ, ϕ) + ϵm(Si , θ, ϕ) = 0                                (72)
                                 Q̄(ϵ, ϕ) = Qn (ϕ) + ϵq(Si , ϕ) = 0                                      (73)


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Defining x = ϵ, y = (θ; ϕ) and F (ϵ, (θ, ϕ)) = [M̄ (ϵ, θ, ϕ); Q̄(ϵ, θ)]. Suppose that:

                                             Dθ Mn (θ̂, ϕ̂) Dϕ Mn (θ̂, ϕ̂)
                        Fy (0, (θ̂, ϕ̂)) =                                                                             (74)
                                                  0            Dϕ Qn (ϕ̂)
is invertible (equiv. has a non-zero determinant). Note that for the latter it suffices that the diagonal
block matrices are invertible, since it is an upper block triangular matrix.
Applying the implicit function theorem, we get that there exists an open set U containing ϵ = 0 and
a unique function ψ(ϵ) = (θ(ϵ), ϕ(ϵ)), such that ψ(0) = (θ̂, ϕ̂) and such that ψ(ϵ) solves the zero
equations for all ϵ ∈ U . Moreover, for all ϵ ∈ U :

                      Dϵ θ(ϵ)                              −1
                                = − [Fy (ϵ, (θ(ϵ), ϕ(ϵ)))] Fx (ϵ, (θ(ϵ), ϕ(ϵ)))                (75)
                      Dϵ ϕ(ϵ)
                                                                    2
Using  the form of  the inverse of an upper triangular matrix and applying the latter at ϵ = 0 we get
        Dϵ θ(0)
that                takes the form:
       Dϵ ϕ(0)
      h                 i−1     h                i−1                   h           i−1 
         D   M   (θ̂, ϕ̂)     −   D   M   (θ̂, ϕ̂)    D    M   (θ̂, ϕ̂)  D   Q  (ϕ̂)

           θ   n                    θ   n                ϕ   n             ϕ  n          m(Si , θ̂, ϕ̂)
  −
     
                                                   h            i−1
                                                                                            q(Si , ϕ̂)
                                                                                        
                 0                                   Dϕ Qn (ϕ̂)
                                                                                                                       (76)
                                         (1)
Since the influence function is Iθ (Si ) := Dϵ θ(0), we get the result by applying the matrix multi-
plication.
Higher order influence functions can be calculated in a similar manner, using repeated applications
of the chain rule and the implicit function theorem. Note that writing an explicit form for a general
k-th order can often be tedious, and computing it can be practically challenging. Discussion about
higher-order influences for the single-stage estimators can be found in the works by Alaa & Van
Der Schaar (2019) and Robins et al. (2008). As we formally show in Theorem 5, for our purpose, we
recommend using K = 1 as it suffices to dramatically reduce the variance of the gradient estimator,
incurring bias that decays quickly, while also being easy to compute

(Alternative) Informal Proof. Here we provide an alternate way to derive the form of the influence
function without invoking the implicit function theorem. This derivation only makes use of the
chain rule of the derivatives. In the following, we will use ∂f to denote partial derivative with
respect to the immediate argument of the function, whereas df is for the total derivative. That is, let
f (x, g(x)) := xg(x) then
                   ∂f                                df                      ∂g
                      (x, g(x)) = g(x)                  (x, g(x)) = g(x) + x (x).                                      (77)
                   ∂x                                dx                      ∂x

From 67 we know that θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ is the solution to the moment conditions M̄ ϵ, θ, ϕ̂ϵ = 0
                                            n
                                         1X
                   M̄ ϵ, θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ =       m(Sj , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) = 0.                  (78)
                                         n j=1
Therefore,
                             n
dM̄                       1 X dm                                                      dm
    (ϵ, θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) =          (Sj , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ    (Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ )         (79)
 dϵ                       n j=1 dϵ                                                    dϵ
                        dMn                                               dm
                      =     (θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ     (Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ )                 (80)
                         dϵ                                               dϵ
                        ∂Mn                  dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ   ∂Mn                  dϕ̂ϵ                               dm
                      =     (θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ )          +         (θ̂ , ϕ̂ϵ )        + m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ    (Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ).
                         ∂θ                    dϵ        ∂ϕ ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ             dϵ                                dϵ
                                                                                                                    (81)
                                            −1
                                                         A−1    −A−1 XB −1

   2                               A   X
       For any block matrix:                     =                                   .
                                   0   B                  0       B −1


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Further, note that,
                                        dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ         ∂ θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ       ∂ θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ ∂ ϕ̂ϵ
                                                   =                 +                     .                      (82)
                                              dϵ           ∂ϵ              ∂ϕ      ∂ϵ
Using the fact that dM̄ (ϵ, θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ )/dϵ = 0, rearranging terms in equation 81,
                                     "                                                                             #
  dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ      ∂Mn −1                                           dm                         ∂Mn             dϕ̂ϵ
           =−        (θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ    (Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) +     (θ̂ , ϕ̂ϵ )      .
    dϵ           ∂θ                                              dϵ                          ∂ϕ ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ        dϵ
                                                                                                                   (83)

Now we expand the terms in blue. Similar to earlier, since ϕ̂ϵ is the solution to the moment condition
Q̄ (ϵ, ϕ) = 0,
                                                     n
                                                1X
                               Q ϵ, ϕ̂ϵ       =       q(Sj , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) = 0.                          (84)
                                                n j=1

Therefore,
                                           n
                         dQ̄            1 X dq                                 dq
                               ϵ, ϕ̂ϵ =          (Sj , ϕ̂ϵ ) + q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ (Si , ϕ̂ϵ )                       (85)
                         dϵ             n j=1 dϵ                               dϵ
                                        dQn                           dq
                                      =     (ϕ̂ϵ ) + q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ (Si , ϕ̂ϵ )                                 (86)
                                         dϵ                           dϵ
                                        ∂Qn        dϕ̂ϵ                   dq
                                      =     (ϕ̂ϵ )      + q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ (Si , ϕ̂ϵ )                            (87)
                                         ∂ϕ         dϵ                    dϵ
Now using the fact that dQ̄(ϵ, ϕ̂ϵ )/dϵ = 0, rearranging terms in equation 87,
                                      ∂Qn −1

                          dϕ̂ϵ                                    dq
                                =−         (ϕ̂ϵ ) q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ (Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) .                                  (88)
                           dϵ          ∂ϕ                         dϵ

Combining equation 83 and equation 88,
                                 "
 dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ    ∂Mn −1                                          dm
          =−     (θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) m(Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ     (Si , θ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ , ϕ̂ϵ )                         (89)
   dϵ         ∂θ                                             dϵ
                                                                                                           #
                                                                ∂Qn −1

                                      ∂Mn                                                    dq
                                   −           (θ̂ , ϕ̂ϵ )            (ϕ̂ϵ ) q(Si , ϕ̂ϵ ) + ϵ (Si , ϕ̂ϵ )    . (90)
                                        ∂ϕ ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ                 ∂ϕ                          dϵ

At ϵ = 0, notice that θ̂0,ϕ̂0 = θ̂ and ϕ̂0 = ϕ̂. Therefore, using equation 90,

             dθ̂ϵ,ϕ̂ϵ          ∂Mn −1                                      ∂Qn −1

                                                             ∂Mn
                            =−     (θ̂, ϕ̂) m(Si , θ̂, ϕ̂) −     (θ̂, ϕ̂)      (ϕ̂)q(Si , ϕ̂) .                   (91)
               dϵ       ϵ=0     ∂θ                            ∂ϕ            ∂ϕ



E     B IAS AND VARIANCES OF G RADIENT E STIMATORS
To convey the key insights, we will consider ∇ log π(Si ) ∈ R to be scalar for simplicity. Similar
results would follow when ∇ log π(Si ) ∈ Rd .
E.1 NAIVE REINFORCE ESTIMATOR
                                                   1/p
For any random variable Z, we let ∥Z∥Lp = (E[Z p ]) .
              h       i
                ˆ
Theorem 3. E ∇L(π)      = ∇L(π). Moreover, let:

                                              X1 = MSE θ({Si }nj=2 )

                                                                                                                  (92)


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


denote the leave-one-out MSE and let:
                          ∆1 = MSE θ({Si }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Si }nj=2 )

                                                                                                 (93)
denote the leave-one-out stability. Suppose that for a sufficiently large n,
                                         ∥X1 ∥L4 ≤ C2,4 ∥X1 ∥L2                                  (94)
and for Yi := ∇ log π(Si ), let ∀i, ∥Yi ∥L∞ ≤ C and ∥Yi ∥L2 ≥ c > 0 for some universal constants
c, C, C2,4 . Then the variance of the naive REINFORCE estimator is upper and lower bounded as:
      c2
                                                ˆ
                                                       3C 2
         n∥X1 ∥2L2 − O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 ≤ Var ∇L(π)              n∥X1 ∥2L2 + O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2

                                                      ≤                                     (95)
      2                                                   2

Thus, when n∥∆1 ∥L2 = O(1) and n∥MSE θ({Si }nj=2 ) ∥2L2 = Ω(α(n)) = ω(1), we have

                                            ˆ
                                       Var ∇L(π)    = Ω(α(n)).                              (96)

Remark 7. In many cases, we would expect that the mean squared error decays at the rate of
n−1/2 (unless we can invoke a fast parametric rate of 1/n, which
                                                                 holds
                                                                      under strong convexity
                                                               ˆ
assumptions); in such cases, we have that α(n) = ω(1) and Var ∇L(π)  can grow with the sample
size. Moreover, if the mean squared error does not converge to zero, due to persistent approximation
error, or local optima in the optimization, then the variance can grow linearly, i.e. α(n) = Θ(n).
Remark 8. The quantity ∆ is a leave-one-out stability quantity. Hence, the property that n∥∆∥L2 =
O(1) is a leave-one-out-stability property of the estimator, which is a well-studied concept (see e.g.
Kearns & Ron (1997); Celisse & Guedj (2016); Abou-Moustafa & Szepesvári (2019)). It states
that the estimator is 1/n-leave-one-out-stable. This will typically hold for many M-estimators over
parametric spaces.

Proof. In the following, we first define some new notation to make the proof more concise. Subse-
                                                                            ˆ
quently, we show (I) unbiasedness, and then (II) we discuss the variance of ∇L(π).
Let Dn be the entire dataset {Si }ni=1 , where Si is the i-th sample.
                               Zi := MSE(θ({Si }ni=1 ))∇ log π(Si )                              (97)
                               X := MSE(θ({Si }ni=1 ))                                           (98)
                               Xi := MSE θ({Si }nj=1,j̸=i )

                                                                                                 (99)
                                ∆i := X − Xi                                                    (100)
                                Yi := ∇ log π(Si )                                              (101)
(I) Unbiased
                                    "                                #
                       h     i        X
                         ˆ
                      E ∇L(π)  = Eπ                n
                                        MSE(θ({Si }i=1 ))∇ log π(Si )                           (102)
                                              i
                                   (a)
                                   = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dn ))∇ log Pr(Dn ; π)]                           (103)
                                   = ∇Eπ [MSE(θ(Dn ))]                                          (104)
                                   = ∇L(π),                                                     (105)
where Eπ indicates that the dataset Dn is sampled using π, and (a) follows from 5.
(II) Variance
                                                     n
                                                         !
                                         X           X
                             ˆ
                        Var ∇L(π) = Var   Zi = Var X   Yi .                                     (106)
                                                                     i=1
Notice {Yi }ni=1 are i.i.d random variables, and X is dependent on all of {Yi }ni=1 , which makes the
analysis more involved. We begin with the following alternate expansion for variance,
                        X   X X
                  Var        Zi =          Cov(Zi , Zj ),                                      (107)
                                    i     j

     where,       Cov(Zi , Zj ) = Cov(XYi , XYj ) = Cov((Xi + ∆i )Yi , (Xi + ∆i )Yj ).          (108)


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore,
    X   X
Var      Zi = Cov(Xi Yi , Xi Yj ) + Cov(Xi Yi , ∆i Yj ) + Cov(∆i Yi , Xi Yj ) + Cov(∆i Yi , ∆i Yj ).
                     i,j
                                                                                                           (109)
Now, observe that as Xi ⊥
                        ⊥ Yi , Yi ⊥
                                  ⊥ Yj , and E[Yi ] = E[Xi Yi ] = E[Xi Yj ] = 0. Therefore,
                Cov(Xi Yi , Xi Yj ) = E[Xi2 Yi Yj ] = E[Xi2 Yj ]E[Yi ] = 0,                 ∀i ̸= j        (110)
                Cov(Xi Yi , Xi Yj ) =   E[Xi2 Yi2 ],                                       ∀i = j.         (111)
For all i, j:
                  Cov(Xi Yi , ∆i Yj ) = E[Xi ∆i Yi Yj ] − E[Xi Yi ]E[∆i Yj ] = E[Xi ∆i Yi Yj ],            (112)
                  Cov(∆i Yi , Xi Yj ) = E[Xi ∆i Yi Yj ] − E[∆i Yi ]E[Xi Yj ],                              (113)
                                      (a) q
                |Cov(∆i Yi , ∆i Yj )| ≤     E[∆2i Yi2 ]E[∆2i Yj2 ] ≤ C 2 E[∆2i ],                          (114)
where (a) follows
              p from Cauchy-Schwarz by noting that for any two random variables A and B,
                                                                  Pn
Cov(A, B) ≤ Var(A)Var(B) and that Var(A) ≤ E[A2 ]. If we let Ȳ = j=1 Yi , we have:3
       X   X               XX
   Var  Zi − E[Xi2 Yi2 ] ≤    2E[Xi ∆i Yi Yj ] − E[∆i Yi ]E[Xi Yj ] + n2 C 2 E[∆21 ]
                           i                  i    j
                                                                                                           (115)
                                            X
                                        =         2E[Xi ∆i Yi Ȳ ] − E[∆i Yi ]E[Xi Ȳ ] + n2 C 2 E[∆21 ]. (116)
                                              i
Now, by assumption p     we have that ∥Yi ∥L∞ ≤ C for some constant C. Further, from Cauchy-
Schwarz, |E[AB]| ≤ E[A2 ]E[B 2 ] for any two random variable A and B. Thus we get:
                                q             q         q
          E[∆i Yi ]E[Xi Ȳ ] ≤ E[∆2i ]E[Yi2 ] E[Xi2 ] E[Ȳ 2 ]                            (117)
                                 q             q        q
                             (a)
                             = E[∆2i ]E[Yi2 ] E[Xi2 ] nE[Yi2 ]                            (118)
                                  q
                             ≤ C 2 nE[∆2i ]E[Xi2 ]                      ∵ ∥Yi ∥L∞ ≤ C     (119)
                                  √
                             = C 2 n∥∆i ∥L2 ∥Xi ∥L2                                       (120)
                                                      2
where (a) follows from observing that E[( i Yi ) ] = E[ i,j Yi Yj ] = E[ i Yi ] = nE[Yi2 ] as
                                              P             P                 P 2
                                                        p
E[Yi Yj ] = 0 for i ̸= j. The final expression uses that E[Xi2 ] = ∥Xi ∥L2 . Similarly,
                                 q           q              q                         1/4
              E[Xi ∆i Yi Ȳ ] ≤ E[∆2i Yi2 ] E[Xi2 Ȳ 2 ] ≤ C E[∆2i ] E[Xi4 ]E[Ȳ 4 ]      (121)

Now by the Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund inequality Rio (2009) we have that √1n i Yi p ≤
                                                                                        P
                                                                                                          L
                                                                              4 1/4
√p ∥Yi ∥Lp for any p ≥ 2 and for some universal constant Cp . Therefore, (E[Ȳ ])
C                                                                                    ≤
  nC4 ∥Yi ∥L4 and
                                                           √
                      E[Xi ∆i Yi Ȳ ] ≤ CC4 ∥∆i ∥L2 ∥Xi ∥L4 n∥Yi ∥L4              (122)
                                         2
                                             √
                                      ≤ C C4 n∥∆i ∥L2 ∥Xi ∥L4                     (123)
                                         2
                                                 √
                                      ≤ C C4 C2,4 n∥∆i ∥L2 ∥Xi ∥L2 ,              (124)
where the last line follows as ∥Xi ∥L4 ≤ C2,4 ∥Xi ∥L2 . Thus for some constant C1 , combining 116,
120, and 124, we conclude that:
            X   X                             X√
       Var        Zi −       E[Xi2 Yi2 ] ≤ C1       n∥∆i ∥L2 ∥Xi ∥L2 + n2 C 2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 .     (125)
                               i                       i
   3
                                                                        the summation inside to get Ȳ and then√to
     We note here that an important aspect of the proof is to first push√
apply the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, since Ȳ concentrates around n and one saves an important extra n
factor.


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                1 2
Recall from the AM-GM inequality that for any a and b: a · b ≤ 2η a + 2ηb2 for any η > 0. Let
        √                        p
                                         2           2
a = C1 n∥∆i ∥ and b = ∥Xi ∥L2 = E[Xi ] and η = c /4, then
          X   X               X   2C12 n∥∆i ∥2 2  c2

                     2 2
      Var  Zi −   E[Xi Yi ] ≤            2
                                             L
                                                 + E[Xi ] + n2 C 2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 .
                                                      2
                                                                                                 (126)
                i             i
                                        c         2

Since c2 ≤ E[Yi2 ] ≤ C 2 and Xi ⊥        ⊥ Yi , we have E[Xi2 Yi2 ] = E[Xi2 ]E[Yi2 ] ≤ C 2 E[Xi2 ], and
E[Xi2 Yi2 ] ≥ c2 E[Xi2 ] . Further, as |A − B| ≤ C =⇒ A ≤ B + C and A ≥ B − C, we obtain the
lower bound:
             X   X                           2C12 n∥∆i ∥2L2  c2

                                      2 2
       Var        Zi ≥           E[Xi ]c −           2
                                                            − E[Xi ] − n2 C 2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2
                                                                     2
                                                                                                  (127)
                            i
                                                   c          2
                           c2
                      =n      E[X12 ] − O(n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 ).                                         (128)
                           2
Similarly, for the upper bound:
       X   X                           2C12 n∥∆i ∥2L2   c2

  Var        Zi ≤         E[Xi2 ]C 2 +         2
                                                      +    E[Xi
                                                               2
                                                                 ]   + n2 C 2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2           (129)
                      i
                                             c          2
                      3C 2
                           E[X12 ] + O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 .                                     ∵ c2 ≤ C 2

                 ≤n
                       2
Therefore, we obtain our result
      c2
                                          ˆ
                                                3C 2
         n∥X1 ∥2L2 − O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 ≤ Var ∇L(π)       n∥X1 ∥2L2 + O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2L2 .

                                               ≤                                                 (130)
      2                                          2



E.2  REINFORCE ESTIMATOR WITH CV
            h          i
Theorem 4. E ∇ˆ CV L(π) = ∇L(π). Moreover, let:

                           ∆1 = MSE θ({Si }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Si }nj=2 )

                                                                                                 (131)

denote the leave-one-out stability. Let Yi = ∇ log π(Si ) and suppose that and that ∥Yi ∥L∞ ≤ C for
some universal constant C. Then the variance of the CV REINFORCE estimator is upper bounded
as:

                                  Var ∇ ˆ CV L(π) ≤ C 2 n2 ∥∆1 ∥2 2                           (132)
                                                                 L


Thus if the estimator satisfies a n−1 -leave-one-out stability, i.e. n∥∆1 ∥L2 = O(1), then we have:

                                       Var ∇ ˆ CV L(π) ≤ O(1).                                  (133)


Remark 9. This holds irrespective of α(n), thus providing a more reliable gradient estimator even
if the function approximator is mis-specified or optimization is susceptible to local optima.


Proof. Let Dn be the entire dataset {Si }ni=1 , where Si is the i-th sample.

               Zi = ∇ log π(Si ) MSE θ({Sj }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Sj }nj=1,j̸=i )

                                                                                                 (134)
               ∆i = MSE θ({Sj }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Sj }nj=1,j̸=i )

                                                                                                 (135)
                 Yi = ∇ log π(Si )                                                               (136)


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(I) Unbiased
                  "                                                           #
    h       i       X
      ˆ L(π) = Eπ
       CV                                     n                  n

   E ∇                ∇ log π(Si ) MSE θ({Sj }j=1 ) − MSE θ({Sj }j=1,j̸=i )                        (137)
                            i
                                                "                                              #
                        h           i            X
                       ˆ                                 ∇ log π(Si )MSE θ({Sj }nj=1,j̸=i )

                  = Eπ ∇L(π) − Eπ                                                                  (138)
                                                     i
                                                                      
                  (a)            X
                   = ∇L(π) − Eπ    MSE θ(Dn\i ) Eπ ∇ log π(Si ) Dn\i                             (139)
                                  i
                                                 |        {z         }
                                                                                   =0
                  = ∇L(π),                                                                         (140)
where (a) follows as Si ⊥
                        ⊥ Dn\i , and Eπ [∇ log π(Si )] = 0.
(II) Variance
Let Z̄i = Zi − E[Zi ]. First, observe that
                                    !                                  !                  !2 
                  1          X                              1X                   1X
                      Var        Zi = Var                       Zi          = E     Z̄i     .    (141)
                 n2            i
                                                            n i                  n i

                                1
                                                 2                      2
                                                     ≤ n1
                                    P                       P
From Jensen’s inequality, as    n       i Z̄i                   i   Z̄i ,
                                                !
                        1       X                        1X             1X
                          2
                            Var   Zi                 ≤       E[Z̄i2 ] =     Var(Zi ).              (142)
                        n       i
                                                         n i            n i

Therefore,
                            X       X
     Var ∇ ˆ CV L(π) = Var   Zi ≤ n   Var(Zi ) ≤ n2 E[∆21 Y12 ] ≤ n2 C 2 E[∆21 ].                  (143)



E.3    REINFORCE ESTIMATOR WITH I NFLUENCE
               h          i
Theorem 5. E ∇   ˆ IF L(π) = ∇L(π) + O(n−K ). Moreover, let:

                          ∆1 = MSE θ({Si }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Si }nj=2 )

                                                                                            (144)

denote the leave-one-out stability. Let MSE θ({Si }nj=1 ) admit a convergent Taylor series expan-
sion. Let Yi = ∇ log π(Si ) and suppose that and that ∥Yi ∥L∞ ≤ C for some universal constant C.
Then the variance of the Influence function based REINFORCE estimator is upper bounded as:

                          Var ∇ ˆ IF L(π) ≤ O n2 ∥∆1 ∥2 2 + n2(1−K)                         (145)
                                                          L

Thus if the estimator satisfies a n−1 -leave-one-out stability, i.e. n∥∆1 ∥L2 = O(1), and K ≥ 1,
then we have:

                                     Var ∇  ˆ IF L(π) ≤ O(1).                               (146)

Proof. Let {Yi }ni=1 be i.i.d random variables, and let ∆i be a variable dependent on all of {Yi }ni=1 .
                                          ˜i
                         Zi = ∇ log π(Si )∆                                                        (147)
                                K                    k
                        ˜i =
                                X(−1/n) (k)
                        ∆               IMSE = ∆i + O(n−K )                                        (148)
                                   k!
                             k=1
                        ∆i = MSE θ({Sj }nj=1 ) − MSE θ({Sj }nj=1,j̸=i )

                                                                                                   (149)
                         Yi = ∇ log π(Si )                                                         (150)


                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 ˜ i is dependent on all of {Yi }n . The bias follows
Notice {Yi }ni=1 are i.i.d random variables, and ∆                               i=1
from standard results on K-th order remainder term in a convergent Taylor series expansion. Finally,
                              P
it can be observed that Var( Zi ) follows the exact same analysis as done for ∇    ˆ CV L(π):

                                                                                          n2

         ˆ IF             2 2   ˜ 2     2 2
   Var ∇ L(π) ≤ n C E[∆1 ] ≤ n C 2E[(∆1 + O(n      2        −2K             2     2
                                                                )] = O n E[∆1 ] + 2K . (151)
                                                                                         n



F    E STIMATION E RROR , B IAS AND VARIANCE A NALYSIS
F.1 P RELIMINARIES ON U-S TATISTICS
We first present a result on the variance of U-statistics with a growing order that primarily follows
from recent prior work. For references see Fan et al. (2018); Hoeffding (1948); Wager & Athey
(2018b) and some concise course notes [A, B, C, D, E]. With a slight abuse of notation, in the
following let ZS represents a set of S random variables (and is unrelated to notation for instrumental
variables). Let n be the number of random variables available and k be the size of the selected
random variables.
Theorem 6 (Variance of U-Statistics). Consider any k-order U-statistic
                                        1      X
                                  U = n               h(ZS )
                                               k    S⊆[n]:|S|=k

where h is a symmetric function in its arguments. Let:
                                        ηc = Var(E[h(Z) | Z1:c ])                                       (152)
Then, we have that:
                                               −1 Xk
                                             n        k   n−k
                                Var(U ) =                      ηc .                                     (153)
                                             k    c=1
                                                      c   k−c

Moreover, one can show that:
                                    k2                k2     k2
                                       η1 ≤ Var(U ) ≤    η1 + 2 ηk ,                                    (154)
                                    n                 n      n
and that
                                                          1
                                                   η1 ≤     ηk .                                        (155)
                                                          k

These results, for instance, follow from the classical Hoeffding’s canonical decomposition of a U-
statistic and an inequality due to Wager & Athey (2018b), to upper bound the non-leading term, for
every k, n, η1 , . . . , ηk not just asymptotically and for fixed k, η1 , . . . , ηk , and letting n → ∞ as in
Hoeffding’s classical analysis. The proof is included in Appendix F.5.
Typically, due to computational considerations, one considers an incomplete version of a U-statistic,
where instead of calculating all possible subsets of size k, we draw B random subsets {S1 , . . . , Sb },
each of size k, uniformly at random among all subsets of size k. Then we define the incomplete
U-statistic approximation as:
                                                       B
                                                   1 X
                                            Û =       h(ZSb )                                          (156)
                                                   B
                                                      b=1

We can also derive the following finite sample variance characterization for an incomplete U-
statistic:
Lemma 2. The variance of the incomplete U-statistic Û is:

                                            1              1
                           Var(Û ) = 1 −        Var(U ) + ηk .                                         (157)
                                            B              B

                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Note that Û is an unbiased estimate of U , conditional on the samples, i.e.:
                                          E[Û | Z1:n ] = U.                                    (158)
Moreover, the variance of an incomplete U-statistic can be decomposed by the law of total variance,
as:
      Var(Û ) = Var(E[Û | Z1:n ]) + E[Var(Û | Z1:n )] = Var(U ) + E[Var(Û | Z1:n )].        (159)

Note that, conditional on Z1:n , the incomplete statistic Û is the mean of i.i.d. samples of h(ZSb ),
where S is a random subset of the original n samples of size k. Thus:
                                                  1
                              Var(Û | Z1:n ) =     Var(h(ZS ) | Z1:n ).                        (160)
                                                  B
Combining 159 and 160,
                                                1
                          Var(Û ) = Var(U ) +    E[Var(h(ZS ) | Z1:n )].                      (161)
                                                B
Moreover, note that the un-conditional variance of the first k samples, is equal to the unconditional
variance of a random k subset of the n samples, since we can equivalently think of drawing k i.i.d.
samples, by first drawing n samples and then choosing a random subset of them.
      Var(h(Z1:k )) = Var(h(ZS )) = Var(E[h(ZS ) | Z1:n ]) + E[Var(h(ZS ) | Z1:n )].            (162)
Moreover, note that by the definition of the random sample S and the U-statistic:
                   E[h(ZS ) | Z1:n ] = U =⇒ Var(E[h(ZS ) | Z1:n ]) = Var(U ).                   (163)
Thus we get:

                         1               1                         1            1
     Var(Û ) = Var(U ) + Var(h(Z1:k )) − Var(U ) =             1−     Var(U ) + ηk .           (164)
                         B               B                         B            B



F.2 VARIANCE OF IS PROCEDURE
Observe that for the full n sample size, the importance sampling based estimate of MSE is
                      " n                  !             #                " n              !             #
                          Y Pr(Dn ; π)                     (a)              Y π(Zi |Xi )
    IS
MSEn =        E                              MSE(θ(Dn )) =       E                           MSE(θ(Dn ))
         Dn ∼{πi }n
                  i=1
                          i=1
                              Pr(Dn ; πi )                   Dn ∼{πi }n
                                                                      i=1      π (Zi |Xi )
                                                                            i=1 i
                                                                                              (165)

where (a) follows from expanding Pr(Dn ; π) and Pr(Dn ; πi ) using 6. Let MSEIS
                                                                              k be the estimate
of MSE for a subset dataset of size k, obtained using importance sampling and a complete enu-
                                                            IS
meration over all subsets of n of size k. Similarly, let MSE
                                                         [ k denote it’s computationally friendly
approximation that draws B subsets of size k uniformly at random.
Moreover, for simplicity, we will assume here, that given a sub-sample of size k we can exactly
calculate the MSE of the estimate that is produced from that sub-sample. Since our goal is to
showcase the poor behavior of the IS approach, it suffices to showcase such a behavior in this ideal
scenario.
Theorem 7. If ∥MSE(θ(Dk ))∥L2 = α(k) then
                                         −1 Xk
                          IS        2 n          k   n−k c
                 Var(MSEk ) ≤ α(k)                         ρ                                    (166)
                                       k    c=1
                                                 c   k − c max
                                        2
                                                k2 k

                                    2   k
                             ≤ α(k)       ρmax + 2 ρmax .                                       (167)
                                        n       n
                                        2
                                                k2 k

                          IS
                                    2   k                 1 k
                 Var(MSEk ) ≤ α(k)
                     [                    ρmax + 2 ρmax + ρmax .                                (168)
                                        n       n         B


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, for any deterministic data generating process without covariates, and for any determin-
istic policy π, the variance can be exactly characterized as:
                                            −1 X  k
                                       2 n             k     n−k
                  Var(MSEIS k  ) = α(k)                              (ρcmax − 1).           (169)
                                           k     c=1
                                                       c     k − c

                       [ k ) = 1 − 1 Var(MSEIS                      2 1
                            IS
                                                                          ρkmax − 1 .

                  Var(MSE                                k ) + α(k)                         (170)
                                          B                           B

Even though the lower bound formula for the complete U-statistic is hard to parse in terms of a
rate, we see that for many reasonable values of n and k, its dependence in ρmax is exponential (see
Figure 7). Moreover, it is obvious that for any finite B (which would be the typical application),
the dependence in ρmax is exponential in k, due to the extra variance stemming from the random
sampling of subsets.

Proof. Let n be the total number of samples. Let k = o(n) be the desired number of samples. To
consider analysis with all possible combination C(n, k), we will construct a U-estimator. Let the h
be the kernel for the importance weighted base estimator, and Dk = {Si }ki=1 ,
                                  h({Si }ki=1 ) = ρ1:k MSE(θ(Dk )),                          (171)
                                                      k
                                                      Y
                                         ρ1:k =             ρ(Si ).                          (172)
                                                      i=1

The U-statistic corresponding to this kernel is
                                   k!(n − k)!     X
                                                          h {Sij }kj=1 .

                             U=                                                              (173)
                                       n!     i <i <...<i
                                                  1    2        k


For this kernel, we can derive that:
                        E[h(Z) | Z1:c ] = E [ρ1:k MSE(θ(Dk )) | S1:c ]                       (174)
                                        = E [ρc+1:k MSE(θ(Dk )) | S1:c ] ρ1:c                (175)
                                        = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )) | S1:c ] ρ1:c .                    (176)
Thus we have that:
                ηc = Var (E[h(Z)|Z1:c ])                                                     (177)
                      h                              i
                                               2
                   = E Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )) | S1:c ] ρ21:c − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]2                    (178)
                        h                              i
                                                 2
                   = Eπ Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )) | S1:c ] ρ1:c − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]2                    (179)
                   ≤ Eπ Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 | S1:c ρ1:c − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]2 .

                                                                                             (180)
                   ≤ Eπ Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 | S1:c ρcmax − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]2 .

                                                                                             (181)
                   = Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 ρcmax − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]2 .

                                                                                             (182)

Upper bound From this we can derive the upper bound:
                     ηc ≤ Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 ρcmax = α(k)2 ρcmax .

                                                                                             (183)
Which, by invoking Theorem 6 yields the upper bound:
                                           −1 X k
                                      2 n            k n−k c
                      Var(U ) ≤ α(k)                          ρ  .                           (184)
                                         k     c=1
                                                     c k − c max

Moreover, from the looser upper bounds in Theorem 6, we also get that:
                                               2
                                                        k2 k

                                           2  k
                           Var(U ) ≤ α(k)        ρmax + 2 ρmax .                             (185)
                                              n         n


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Behavior of complete U-statistic variance for n = 1000, k = 100 as a function of ρmax .


Then, by invoking Lemma 2, we have that the incomplete version of our estimate with B random
sub-samples of size k has:

                                         1              1
                        Var(Û ) = 1 −       Var(U ) + ηk                                (186)
                                         B             B

                                         1              1
                                 ≤ 1−        Var(U ) + α(k)2 ρkmax                       (187)
                                         B             B
                                           2
                                                     k2

                                           k                   1
                                 ≤ α(k)2     ρmax + 2 ρkmax + ρkmax .                    (188)
                                           n         n         B
where the first inequality
                           comes by
                                    upper bounding Equation 182 and using our assumption in the
Theorem that Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 = α(k)2 , and the second inequality comes from substituting in
Equation 185.
Lower bound In general it is hard to characterize the lower bound. However, in the following,
we will show that for a certain class of problems, the lower bound on the variance from using the
importance sampling procedure can grow exponentially. Specifically, for this theoretical analysis,
we consider the case where there are no covariates, all aspects of the data generating process is
deterministic, and the policy π is also deterministic. Figure 4 (Right) provides an empirical evi-
dence of exponential growth of variance for a more general setting with both stochastic policy and a
stochastic data generating process.
Notice that (182) follows with equality when steps (180) and (181) follow with equality. This
holds when the entire data generating process is deterministic and the policy π is also deterministic.
Further, since there are no covariates and that π is a deterministic policy, then ρi = ρmax almost
surely when Si is drawn from π. Therefore,
                                                                             2
                       ηc = Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 ρcmax − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )]

                                                                                                (189)
                                                2    c

                          = Eπ MSE(θ(Dk )) (ρmax − 1)                                           (190)
                      = α(k)2 (ρcmax − 1),                                              (191)
where              holds because π is deterministic, and by our assumption in the Theorem,
    the last equality
Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))2 = α(k)2 . Moreover, from Theorem 6, the variance of the U-statistic is:
                                      −1 X  k
                                    n          k    n−k
                   Var(U ) = α(k)2                          (ρcmax − 1).                (192)
                                    k      c=1
                                               c    k − c
Similarly, using Lemma 2, the variance of the incomplete U-statistic is:

                                         1               1
                    Var(Û ) =      1−        Var(U ) + ηk                                      (193)
                                         B              B

                                         1                     1 k
                                              Var(U ) + α(k)2

                              =     1−                             ρmax − 1 ,                   (194)
                                         B                    B
where in the second equality we have used Equation 191.


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3 G UARANTEES FOR R EJECTION S AMPLING P ROCEDURE
We will analyze the bias and variance of the estimate of the mean squared error of the rejection
sampling procedure. Almost identical analysis also applies to the analysis of the bias and variance
of policy gradient estimates based on the rejection sampling procedure, but we omit it for concise-
ness.
Let n be the total number of available samples. Let MSERS     k be the estimate of MSE for a subset
dataset of size k, obtained using rejection sampling. This estimates first accepts a random subset of
size N ′ and if N ′ < k returns 0, otherwise if N ′ ≥ k, returns the estimate that goes over all subsets
of size k of the N ′ accepted samples:
                            c                                                           ′
                        1X[                   k                                         N
            MSERS k   =       MSE(θ({S    i  }
                                            j j=1
                                                  ))                             c =               (195)
                        c i=1                                                           k
                      M
                   1 X                                                2
     MSE(θ(D
     [      k )) =       (f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dn )) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk ))) ,                          (196)
                   M i=1

where MSE(θ(D
       [          k )) is the estimate of the mean-squared error produced by the samples in Dk , (same
as 14) and where {Xi , Ai }M  i=1 are held-out samples of covariates and treatments (outcomes for these
are not available), which is not used in the estimation of θ, i.e. is separate from Dn . We will assume
throughout that M >> n.
                                                       RS
We will also consider an alternative estimate MSE
                                              [ k that is the computationally friendly approxi-
mation that draws B subsets of size k uniformly at random from the N ′ accepted samples, instead
of performing complete enumeration over subsets of size k done for MSERS
                                                                       k .

Theorem 8 (Consistency of Rejection Sampling). Consider the rejection sampling estimate MSERS k
                                                                       RS
as defined in Equation (195) and its incomplete U-statistic variant MSEk . For any dataset Dn of
                                                                    [
iid samples of si‘ze n drawn from policy π, define:
                                     α(n) := ∥MSE(θ(Dn ))∥L2                                      (197)
Assume that k ≤ n/2 and n is large enough, such that n/ log(n) ≥ 8ρmax . Then:

                               RS            2 kρmax      1

                     Var MSEk ≤ O α(k)                +      + α(n) ,                             (198)
                                                 n       M

                               RS
                                              −n/8ρmax       1    p
                    B IAS MSEk ≤ O α(k)e                 +  √   + α(n) ,                          (199)
                                                              M
and similarly for the incomplete variant:

                         [ k ≤ O α(k)2 kρmax + α(k)2 1 + 1 + α(n) ,
                            RS
                   Var MSE                                                                        (200)
                                               n             B    M

                            RS
                         [ k ≤ O α(k)e−n/8ρmax + √ + α(n) .1     p
                 B IAS MSE                                                                        (201)
                                                            M
Moreover, the probability of failure, i.e. Pr(N ′ < k), is bounded as: e−n/(8ρmax ) .

Proof. Let n be the total number of samples and N ′ be the number of of samples accepted by the
rejection sampler, which in expectation equals to n′ := E[N ′ ] = n/ρmax . Like before, let k be the
desired number of samples. Let Dk = {S1:k }.
We first consider the difference between MSERS k from 195 and its ideal analogue (note that this ideal
version is biased as it returns 0 when N ′ < k),
                               c                                                  ′
                            1X                 k                                  N
                     U=           MSE(θ({Sij }j=1 ))                        c=                  (202)
                            c i=1                                                  k
                                 h                                 i
                                                                 2
        MSE(θ(Dk )) = EX,A (f (X, A; θ0 ) − f (X, A; θ(Dk )))                                   (203)
We now break the proof into three parts:


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         • Part I: Express bias and variance of MSERS
                                                   k in terms of bias and variance of U .

         • Part II: Compute Variance of U (for both complete and incomplete U-statistic).
         • Part III: Compute bias of U (for both complete and incomplete U-statistic).
(Part I) Bias and variance of MSERS  k in terms of that of U : We will first express the error of
MSERSk  in terms of the the convergence rate of MSE(θ(Dn )), as θ(Dn ) is used as a proxy for θ0 by
MSERSk . Observe  that,
               2
  E[(MSERS
         k − U) ]                                                                                 (204)
                                          2
  = E En [MSE(θ(D
           [      k )] − En [MSE(θ(Dk ))]                                                         (205)
                                            2
   = E En [MSE(θ(D
            [        k ) −  MSE(θ(D  k ))]                                          (206)
                                              2
   ≤ E En MSE(θ(D
             [        k  )) − MSE(θ(D   k ))                         (Jensen’s inequality)
                                        2
   = E MSE(θ(D
          [     k )) −    MSE(θ(D k ))       .                                      (207)
                                                           2
   (a)
   = E MSE(θ(D
           [     k ))  ±  MSE(θ(D
                           ]       k )) −  MSE(θ(D   k ))                           (208)
   (b)
                                          2                                    2
   ≤ 2E MSE(θ(Dk )) − MSE(θ(Dk ))
            [               ]                  + 2E MSE(θ(Dk )) − MSE(θ(Dk ))
                                                      ]                             (209)

where (a) follows from defining an intermediate quantity MSE  ] , which unlike MSE(θ(D[      k )) in 195
computes the true expectation instead of empirical average,
                                       h                                                  i
                                                                                        2
               MSE(θ(D
                ]         k )) = E X,A   (f (Xi , Ai ; θ(D n )) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(D k )))   ,       (210)

and (b) follows from (a + b)2 ≤ 2(a2 + b2 ). Now we bound the two terms in the RHS of 209.
To bound the first term in the RHS of 209, note that since predictions are uniformly bounded and
the M samples are independent of the samples in Dn , we have:
                                                              2      C
                          E MSE(θ(Dk )) − MSE(θ(Dk ))
                                [              ]                  ≤     ,                  (211)
                                                                    M

for some constant C, since MSE(θ(D
                             ]         k )) is the mean of MSE(θ(Dk )), conditional on Dn and
                                                            [
MSE(θ(D
[        k )) is the sum of M iid variables, conditional on Dn .

To bound the second term in the RHS of 209, we have that:
                                        2
   E MSE(θ(Dk )) − MSE(θ(D
                        ]         k ))                                                   (212)
               h                                                                        i2
                                               2                                      2
   = E EX,A (f (X, A; θ0 ) − f (X, A; θ(Dk ))) − (f (X, A; θ(Dn )) − f (X, A; θ(Dk )))
   (a)  h                                          i
                                                 2
   ≤ E EX,A [(f (X, A; θ0 ) − f (X, A; θ(Dn )))]                                                  (213)
       h    h                                    ii
                                               2
   ≤ E EX,A (f (X, A; θ0 ) − f (X, A; θ(Dn )))                                    (Jensen’s inequality)
                        p
   = E [MSE(θ(Dn ))] ≤ E [MSE(θ(Dn ))2 ] = α(n),                                                  (214)

where (a) follows as (a − b)2 − (c − b)2 ≤ (a − c)2 . Thus, combining 209, 211, and 214:

                                             2          2C
                                 E[(MSERS
                                       k − U) ] ≤          + 2α(n).                               (215)
                                                        M


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, using 215, bias and variance of MSERS
                                              k can be expressed using the bias and variance of
the idealized estimate U as the following,
   Var(MSERS           RS
          k ) = Var(MSEk + U − U )                                                              (216)
                  ≤   2Var(U ) + 2Var(MSERS
                                         k − U)           ∵ Var(A + B) ≤ 2(Var(A) + Var(B))
                  ≤   2Var(U ) + 2E[(MSEk − U )2 ]
                                        RS
                                                                                                (217)
                               4C
                  ≤ 2Var(U ) +    + 4α(n).                                                      (218)
                               M

                Bias(MSERS          RS
                        k ) = |E[MSEk ] − E[MSE(θ(Dk ))]|                                       (219)
                               =   |E[MSERS
                                         k ] ± E[U ] − E[MSE(θ(Dk ))]|                          (220)
                                                           q
                               ≤ |E[U ] − E[MSE(θ(Dk ))]| + E[(MSERS    2
                                                                  k − U) ]                      (221)
                                            r
                                              2C
                               ≤ Bias(U ) +      + 2α(n).                                       (222)
                                              M
Thus it suffices to analyze the bias and variance of the idealized estimate U .
(Part II) Analysis of variance of U : Note that the idealized estimate U returns 0 if N ′ < k and
otherwise returns a U-statistic (or an incomplete version of it):
                                 c                                       ′
                             1X             k
                                                                        N
                    UN ′ =          h {Sij }j=1                    c=                       (223)
                             c i=1                                       k

So if we let U be our estimate of the MSE on k samples, we have:
                                        U = UN ′ 1{N ′ ≥ k}.                                    (224)

Variance of complete U-statistic First we note that:
                           Var(U ) = Var(E[U | N ′ ]) + E[Var(U | N ′ )]                        (225)
The latter term, i.e. Var(U | N ′ ) is the variance of a U-statistic of order k with N ′ samples drawn
iid from distribution π. Thus based on Theorem 6, we have that for N ′ ≥ k:
                                      k2        k2
                      Var(U | N ′ ) ≤    η 1 +         ηk                                       (226)
                                      N′       (N ′ )2
                                       k        k2
                                    ≤    η k +         ηk                              (∵ η1 ≤ k1 ηk )
                                      N′       (N ′ )2
                                        k
                                    ≤ 2 ′ Varπ (h(S1:k ))                                (k/N ′ ≤ 1)
                                       N
                                        k                       k
                                    ≤ 2 ′ Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))2 ] = 2 ′ α(k)2 .                      (227)
                                       N                        N
Moreover, for N ′ < k, we have by the definition of U that Var(U | N ′ ) = 0. Thus we get that:

                                              1{N ′ ≥k}                      1
             E[Var(U | N ′ )] = 2kα(k)2 E                 ≤ 2kα(k)2
                                                                    E                        (228)
                                                N′                      max{N ′ , k}
Note that N ′ is a binomially distributed random variable, Bin(n, 1/ρmax ). Thus by a Chernoff
bound, and reminding that n′ = E[N ′ ] = n/ρmax , we have that:
                                                               2   ′
                              Pr(N ′ ≤ (1 − δ)n′ ) ≤ e−δ n /2 .                                 (229)
                         h             i
                               1
Therefore to upperbound E max{N   ′ ,k} , we split it into the following two cases

                                         (
                           1                  1
                                           (1−δ)n′     when N ′ > (1 − δ)n′
                                      ≤    1                                                    (230)
                       max{N ′ , k}        k           otherwise


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the first case holds because irrespective of the value of N ′ , the value of 1/ max{N ′ , k} ≤
1/N ′ . Further, when N ′ > (1 − δ)n′ , then 1/N ′ ≤ 1/(1 − δ)n′ . Thus we get that:
                                         Pr(N ′ > (1 − δ)n′ ) Pr(N ′ ≤ (1 − δ)n′ )

         E[Var(U | N ′ )] ≤ 2kα(k)2                                 +                           (231)
                                                (1 − δ)n′                     k

                                              1         1 −δ2 n′ /2
                          ≤ 2kα(k)2                  +    e                                     (232)
                                         (1 − δ)n′      k

                                            k           −δ 2 n′ /2
                          = 2α(k)2                  + e                                         (233)
                                       (1 − δ)n′

                                         kρmax            2
                          = 2α(k)2                 + e−δ n/(2ρmax )                             (234)
                                       (1 − δ)n
                q
Choosing δ = 2ρmaxnlog(n) , we get:

                               ′             2     kρmax          1             kρmax
                  E[Var(U | N )] ≤ 2α(k)                      +       ≤ 4α(k)2                  (235)
                                                  (1 − δ)n n                   (1 − δ)n
For n large enough such that n/ log(n) ≥ 8ρmax , we get δ ≤ 1/2 and:
                                                                          kρmax
                                 E[Var(U | N ′ )] ≤ 8α(k)2                                     (236)
                                                                            n
We now consider the first part in the variance decomposition in Equation (225). Note that for
N ′ ≥ k:
                           E[U | N ′ ] = E[h(Z1:k )] = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]                        (237)
            ′                         ′
While for N < k, we have E[U | N ] = 0. Thus we have:
                     Var(E[U | N ′ ]) = Var(Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]1{N ′ ≥ k})                        (238)
                                                                      2           ′
                                          = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))] Var(1{N ≥ k})                     (239)
                                                                    2             ′
                                          ≤ Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk )) ]Var(1{N ≥ k})                     (240)
                                                  2             ′
                                          ≤ α(k) Var(1{N ≥ k})                                 (241)
                                                  2        ′                          ′
                                          = α(k) Pr(N ≥ k) (1 − Pr(N ≥ k))                     (242)
                                                  2        ′
                                          ≤ α(k) Pr(N < k).                                    (243)
If we let δ, be such that k = (1 − δ)n, then we have by a Chernoff bound
                                     2    ′           2                                   2
                 Pr(N ′ < k) ≤ e−δ n /2 = e−δ n/(2ρmax ) = e−(1−k/n) n/(2ρmax )
Assuming that k ≤ n/2, we have:
                                     Pr(N ′ < k) ≤ e−n/(8ρmax ) .                              (244)
Since, we assume that n/ log(n) ≥ 8ρmax , we have:
                                                                1
                                              Pr(N ′ < k) ≤       .                            (245)
                                                                n
Thus overall we have derived that:
                                                               kρmax
                                      Var(U ) ≤ 9α(k)2               .                         (246)
                                                                 n
Variance of incomplete U-statistic With an identical analysis, if we instead use an incomplete U-
statistic with B random sub-samples (Lemma 2), then we can apply the exact same analysis, albeit,
when N ′ ≥ k:
                                          k           1
                         Var(U | N ′ ) ≤ 2 ′ α(k)2 + Varπ (h(S1:k ))                        (247)
                                          N           B
                                          k           1
                                       ≤ 2 ′ α(k)2 + α(k)2 .                                (248)
                                          N           B


                                                      38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Following then an identical analysis, we can derive:

                                               2   9 kρmax   1
                               Var(U ) ≤ α(k)              +     .                            (249)
                                                      n      B

(Part III) Analysis of bias of U : Finally, we also quantify the bias of the rejection sampling
estimate. Note that when N ′ ≥ k, we have:
                            E[U | N ′ ] = E[h(S1:k )] = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]                      (250)
and the estimate is un-biased. However, when N ′ < k, then we output 0, hence we incur a bias of:
                    |E[U | N ′ ] − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]| = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))] ≤ α(k).               (251)
Thus overall we have a bias of:
          |E[U ] − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]| ≤ |E[U | N ′ ] − Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]| Pr(N ′ < k)           (252)
                                                   −n/(8ρmax )
                                         ≤ α(k)e                                              (253)
The bias of the incomplete U-statistic variant is identical, since both variants are un-biased when
N ′ ≥ k.
Combining the aforementioned bounds on the idealized estimate U with our error bounds between
U and MSERS
          k , we get the result.


F.4 P OLICY O RDERING C ONSISTENCY G UARANTEES
Let:
                                                                   r h             i
                                                                                 2
           Lπ (k) = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))] ,                  απ (k) =   Eπ MSE(θ(Dk )) .           (254)

Suppose that we assume that the mean-squared-error, irrespective of sampling distribution, satisfies
that:
                      rn Lπ (n) → Vπ ,                 rn απ (n) = Θ(1),               (255)
                                                       √
for some random variable Vπ and some rate rn (e.g. rn = n). Then we can consider the normal-
ized estimate:
                                                       RS
                                            rk MSE
                                               [k .                                           (256)
                            n                  n                              2
Suppose we choose M >> kα(k)   2 and B >> k and we choose k such that rk /rn → 0 and

k/n → 0. Then, from Theorem 8, we have that the normalized estimate of the mean-squared-error
from 256 has:

                                2k                     k
                RS
                          2            2                     2
      Var(rk MSEk ) = O rk α(k)
             [                     + rk α(n) = O         + rk /rn → 0                  (257)
                                 n                     n
             [ k ≤ O rk α(k)e−n/8ρmax + rk α(n) = O e−n/8ρmax + rk /√rn → 0
                RS                              p
   rk B IAS MSE
                                                                                              (258)
Thus we can conclude that the normalized mean squared error of the estimate will satisfy:
                                             RS
                                   rk2 E[(MSE
                                          [ k − Lπ (k))2 ] → 0                                (259)
Thus we get that:
                           RS                          RS
                       [ k = rk Lπ (k) + rk (MSE
                    rk MSE                   [ k − Lπ (k)) = Vπ + op (1).                     (260)
                                            RS
From this we conclude that optimizing rk MSE
                                         [ k over policies π approximately optimizes Vπ , up to
an asymptotically neglibible error. Thus for a large enough sample n, we should expect that we are
choosing an approximately optimal policy π.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 1 (Approximate Policy Ordering). For any dataset Dn of iid samples of size n drawn
from policy π, define:
                                                           r h                  i
                                                                                                  2
              Lπ (k) = Eπ [MSE(θ(Dk ))]                          απ (k) =        Eπ MSE(θ(Dk ))          (261)

Suppose that for some appropriately defined growth rate rn , we have that:
                          |rn Lπ (n) − Vπ | ≤ ϵn                            rn απ (n) = O(1)             (262)
for some rate rn that is policy independent and for some approximation error ϵn → 0. Let
      RS
MSE
[ k (π) denote the rejection sampling estimate of the mean squared error of π. Suppose that
we choose k such that rk2 /rn → 0 and k/n → 0 and k → ∞ and M, B are large enough. Then for
any fixed policy π:
                     RS                                 RS
             [ k (π) − Vπ )2 ] = E[(rk MSE
       E[(rk MSE                       [ k (π) ± rk Lπ (k) − Vπ )2 ]                                     (263)
                                                            RS
                                       ≤ 2ϵ2k + 2rk2 E[(MSE
                                                        [ k − Lπ (k))2 ]                                 (264)
                                                         r2
                                      (a)

                                                    k
                                      ≤ O ϵ2k + + k + e−n/(8ρmax ) =: γ(n, k) → 0,                       (265)
                                                    n rn
where (a) follows from using the bias and variance terms from Theorem 8 to expand the mean-
                      RS
                 [ k − Lπ (k))2 ].
squared-error E[(MSE
Let π1 , π2 be two candidate policies. if we choose π2 over π1 based on V̂π (i.e., V̂π1 < V̂π2 ), By our
assumptions on the convergence of rn Lπ (n), we have:
                 rn (Lπ1 (n) − Lπ2 (n)) ≤ Vπ1 − Vπ2 + 2ϵn                                                (266)

                                        ≤ V̂π1 − V̂π2 + 2 ϵn + max |Vπ − V̂π |                           (267)
                                                              π∈{π1 ,π2 }

                                        ≤ 2 ϵn + max |Vπ − V̂π |                                         (268)
                                                             π∈{π1 ,π2 }

By Markov’s inequality and a union bound we have w.p. 1 − δ:
                                2                 2                     2p
                                                    q
                  |Vπ − V̂π | ≤ E[|Vπ − V̂π |] ≤     E[|Vπ − V̂π |2 ] ≤    γ(n, k)                       (269)
                                δ                 δ                     δ
for π ∈ {π1 , π2 }. Thus overall we get w.p. 1 − δ:

                                                           1p
                          rn (Lπ1 (n) − Lπ2 (n)) ≤ O ϵn +       γ(n, k) .                                (270)
                                                           δ

Thus the policy that is best according to the estimated criterion V̂π is also approximately best ac-
cording to the normalized expected mean-squared-error with n samples, i.e. rn Lπ (n).
F.5 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
For the first part of the Lemma, i.e. proving Equation (153), we first observe that:
                   −2
                  n          X              X
   Var(U ) =                                        Cov (h(Zi1 , . . . , Zik ), h(Zi1 , . . . , Zik ))   (271)
                  k
                            1≤i1 <...<ik ≤n 1≤j1 <...<jk ≤n

Moreover, note that if |{i1 , . . . , ik } ∪ {j1 , . . . , jk }| = c then
                                Cov (h(Zi1 , . . . , Zik ), h(Zi1 , . . . , Zik )) = ηc ,

                          the number of subsets {i1 , . . . , ik } and {j1 , . . . , jk } that have intersection
with η0 = 0. Furthermore,
equal to c is nk kc n−k

                    k−c . Thus we derive Equation (153):
                                                −1 Xk
                                              n        k   n−k
                                   Var(U ) =                    ηc .                                     (272)
                                              k    c=1
                                                       c   k−c


                                                          40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The proof of the second part follows from along the lines of Hoeffding’s canonical decomposition
and bares resemblance to the asymptotic normality proofs in Fan et al. (2018); Wager & Athey
(2018b). Consider the following projection functions:
               h1 (z1 ) = E[h(z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zk )] ,                               h̃1 (z1 ) = h1 (z1 ) − E [h] ,          (273)
          h2 (z1 , z2 ) = E[h(z1 , z2 , Z3 , . . . , Zk )] ,                    h̃2 (z1 , z2 ) = h2 (z1 , z2 ) − E [h] ,
                                                                                                                              (274)
                             ..
                              .                                                                                               (275)
hk (z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ) = E[h(z1 , z2 , z3 , . . . , zk )] ,      h̃k (z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ) = hk (z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ) − E [h] ,
                                                                                                                                (276)
where E [h] = E [h(Z1 , . . . , Zk )]. Then we define the canonical terms of Hoeffding’s U -statistic
decomposition as:
                     g1 (z1 ) = h̃1 (z1 ) ,                                                                                   (277)
                g2 (z1 , z2 ) = h̃2 (z1 , z2 ) − g1 (z1 ) − g2 (z2 ) ,                                                        (278)
                                                          3
                                                          X                     X
            g3 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) = h̃2 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) −            g1 (zi ) −              g2 (zi , zj ) ,                     (279)
                                                          i=1                  1≤i<j≤3
                                  ..
                                   .                                                                                          (280)
                                                                   k
                                                                   X                    X
      gk (z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ) = h̃k (z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ) −         g1 (zi ) −             g2 (zi , zj ) − . . .         (281)
                                                                   i=1                1≤i<j≤k
                                                                         X
                                                    ... −                               gk−1 (zi1 , zi2 , . . . , zik−1 ) .   (282)
                                                            1≤i1 <i2 <...<ik−1 ≤k

The key property is that all the canonical terms in the latter expression are uncorrelated and mean
zero.
Subsequently the kernel of the U -statistic can be re-written as a function of the canonical
terms:
                                                      k
                                                      X            X
 h̃(z1 , . . . , zk ) = h(z1 , . . . , zk ) − E [h] =   g1 (zi ) +   g2 (zi , zj ) + . . . + gk (z1 , . . . , zk ) .
                                                         i=1                 1≤i<j≤k

By the uncorrelatedness of the canonical terms we have:

                                           k                 k                            k
                                               E g12 +             E g22 + . . . +            E gk2 .

             Var [h(Z1 , . . . , Zk )] =                                                                                      (283)
                                           1                  2                           k
We can now re-write the U statistic also as a function of canonical terms:
                      −1
                     n                 X
     U − E [U ] =                                 h̃(Zi1 , . . . , Zik )                                                      (284)
                     k
                              1≤i1 <i2 <...<ik ≤n
                      −1                   n                             X
                     n            n−1 X                         n−2
                =                               g1 (Zi ) +                             g2 (Zi , Zj ) + . . .                  (285)
                     k            k − 1 i=1                     k−2
                                                                         1≤i<j≤n

                                        n−k              X
                                  +                                     gk (Zi1 , . . . , Zik ) .                             (286)
                                        k−k
                                                            1≤i1 <i2 <...<ik ≤n

Now we define the Hájek projection to be the leading term in the latter decomposition:
                                       −1             n
                                      n        n−1 X
                              U1 =                         g1 (Zi ) .
                                      k        k − 1 i=1
The variance of the Hajek projection is:
                                                               k2                  k2
                                       σ12 = Var [U1 ] =          Var [h1 (z1 )] =    η1 .
                                                               n                   n

                                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, since the canonical terms are un-correlated and mean-zero, we also have:
                                                                 h                   i
                                                                                   2
    Var(U ) = Var(U1 ) + Var(U − E[U ] − U1 ) = Var(U1 ) + E (U − E[U ] − U1 )                  (287)
From an inequality due to Wager & Athey (2018a):
                                  −2 (             2                                2          )
     h
                         2
                           i    n          n−2        n         2             n−k      n    2
   E (U − E [U ] − U1 ) =                                   E[g2 ] + . . . +             E[gk ]
                                k          k−2         2                       k−k     k
                                                                                                (288)
                                k
                                   (                                     )
                                           −2           2
                               X      n        n−r           n
                             =                                   E[gr2 ]                        (289)
                               r=2
                                       k        k − r        r
                                s
                               X     k!(n − r)! k           2
                             =                        E[gr ]                                    (290)
                               r=2
                                     n!(k − r)! r
                                          k
                               k(k − 1) X k
                             ≤                     E[gr2 ]                                      (291)
                               n(n − 1) r=2 r
                                k2
                              ≤     Var [h(Z1 , . . . , Zk )]                                   (292)
                                n2
                                  2
                                k
                              ≤ 2 ηk .                                                          (293)
                                n
From the above we get that:
               k2                                            k2     k2      k2
                  η1 = Var(U1 ) ≤ Var(U ) ≤ Var(U1 ) + 2 ηk =          η1 + 2 ηk .              (294)
               n                                             n      n       n
Moreover, from Equation (283), we have that:

                                            k                   k
           ηm = Var(h(Z1 , . . . , Zk )) ≥    E[g1 (Z1 )2 ] =     Var(h1 (Z1 )) = k η1 .        (295)
                                            1                   1
which completes the proof of the Lemma.

G    M ULTI -R EJECTION S AMPLING
G.1 R EVIEW: S TANDARD R EJECTION S AMPLING
Recall that to simulate draws from a distribution p using samples from another sequence of
distribution {qi }ki=1 , the standard rejection sampling procedure accepts a sample Si if ξi ≤
p(Si )/(qi (Si )C), where C = maxs,i p(s)/qi (s) and ξ ∼ U . While it is well-known in the literature,
for completeness, we show that the samples drawn using the above rejection sampling procedure will
simulate draws from p(x),
                                                 K
                                            1X
                           Pr(X = x) =            Pr(Accept x; qi )qi (x)                       (296)
                                            k i=1
                                               k
                                            1X              p(x)
                                          =       Pr U ≤               qi (x)                   (297)
                                            k i=1         Cqi (x)
                                                 k
                                              1 X p(x)
                                          =                 qi (x)                              (298)
                                              k i=1 Cqi (x)
                                                 k
                                              1 X p(x)
                                          =                                                     (299)
                                              k i=1 C
                                            p(x)
                                          =                                                     (300)
                                             C
                                          ∝ p(x).                                               (301)
An instantiation of standard rejection sampling for our setup is provided in 13.


                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2 P ROPOSED : M ULTI -R EJECTION S AMPLING
Here, we consider discussing the proposed multiple-importance sampling procedure more generally.
Consider the case when we have samples from multiple proposal distributions {qi }ki=1 , we can
either treat each of them independently to sample from p, as discussed above. Alternatively, as
we show below, we can treat them as a mixture jointly, such that even if a sample X ∼ qi , we
                                 p(X)                                Pk
form the acceptance ratio as C 1 P  q (X)
                                          , where C := maxx p(x)/( k1 j=1 qj (x)). The following
                                k   j   j

provides proof that the proposed procedure draws samples that simulates sampling from the desired
distribution p(x) :
                                             k
                                        1X
                      Pr(X = x) =             Pr(Accept x; qi )qi (x)                             (302)
                                        k i=1
                                         k
                                                                 !
                                      1X              p(x)
                                    =       Pr U ≤ 1 Pk           qi (x)                          (303)
                                      k i=1       C k j=1 qj (x)
                                             k
                                        1X         p(x)
                                    =             Pk           qi (x)                             (304)
                                        k i=1 C 1
                                                    j=1 qj (x)
                                                k
                                                               k
                                               p(x)         1X
                                    =         Pk                  qi (x)                          (305)
                                        Ck  1
                                                 j=1 qj (x)
                                                            k i=1
                                      p(x)
                                    =                                                             (306)
                                       C
                                    ∝ p(x).                                                       (307)
An instantiation of multi-rejection sampling for our setup is provided in 15.
Remark 10. Validity of rejection sampling requires the support assumption, that is for X := {x :
p(x) > 0} it hods that qi (x) > 0, ∀i ∈ {1, ..., k}, ∀x ∈ X . Multiple-rejection sampling replaces
                                                                                          Pk
the support condition from all qi ’s to at least one qi . That is, we only require that k1 i=1 qi (x) >
0, ∀x ∈ X . Alternatively, we only require that ∀x ∈ X , {∃i ∈ {1, ..., k}, s.t. qi (x) > 0}.
For instance, if q1 (the first exploration policy) is uniform, then subsequent qi ’s can even be deter-
ministic and the data from it can still be used for multiple rejection sampling. This would not have
been possible if we had used single-rejection sampling.
Remark 11. Multiple-rejection sampling can often also reduce the value of the normalizing constant
significantly as now
                                                    p(x)
                                    ρ̄max := max 1 Pk                                             (308)
                                              x
                                                 k  j=1 qj (x)

which can reduce the failure rate of rejection sampling significantly.
It can be shown that the expected number of samples accepted using multiple-rejection sampling
will always be more than or equal to the number of samples accepted under individual rejection
sampling, irrespective of how different are the proposal distributions {qi }ki=1 to the target p. To see
this, recall that for individual rejection sampling, the expected number of samples accepted from N
samples drawn from a proposal q is N/ρmax as

                                                       p(X)
                       Pr(Accept X) = Pr U ≤                                                       (309)
                                                    ρmax q(X)
                                         Z
                                                          p(x)
                                       = Pr U ≤                   X = x q(x) dx                    (310)
                                                       ρmax q(x)
                                         Z
                                               p(x)
                                       =               q(x) dx                                     (311)
                                             ρmax q(x)
                                            1
                                       =       .                                                   (312)
                                          ρmax


                                                      43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let there be k proposal distributions, with N samples drawn from each distributions. Therefore, the
expected number of samples accepted would be
              k          k          k                k
             X   N      X    1     X      1         X          qi (x)
                     =N         =N               =N     minx            .                      (313)
                ρi
             i=1 max
                           ρi
                        i=1 max    i=1 maxx
                                            p(x)
                                                    i=1
                                                               p(x)
                                                           qi (x)

Contrast this with the expected number of samples accepted under multiple-rejection sampling,
where all the N k samples are treated equally,
                                                 Pk                   k
                                                                                !
                                               1
        Nk             Nk                         i=1 qi (x)             qi (x)
                                                                     X
                                               k
              =                     = N k min                = N min             .     (314)
       ρ̄max     maxx 1 Pp(x)
                           k
                                             x    p(x)            x
                                                                     i=1
                                                                         p(x)
                        k     i=1 qi (x)


Now,
                                 k            k
                                 X qi (x)     X            qi (x)
                        ∀x,           ≥     minx                                               (315)
                                p(x)
                                 i=1    i=1
                                                           p(x)
                          k
                                    !    k
                         X   qi (x)     X          qi (x)
                   ∴ min              ≥     minx                                               (316)
                      x
                         i=1
                             p(x)       i=1
                                                   p(x)
                                                 k
                                         Nk     X    N    N
                                    ∴         ≥     i
                                                        ≥ i             ∀i ∈ {1, ..., k}.      (317)
                                        ρ̄max      ρ
                                                i=1 max
                                                         ρmax

Example 1. consider the case where N samples are drawn from each of the two proposal distribu-
tions q1 and q2 over {0, 1}, such that q1 (x = 1) = q2 (x = 0) = 0.75 and q1 (x = 0) = q2 (x =
1) = 0.25. Let target distribution be p(x = 0) = p(x = 1) = 0.5. In this case, it can be observed
that individual rejection sampling will reject 50% of the samples! In contrast, multiple-rejection
sampling will accept all the samples as the average proposal distribution (q1 + q2 )/2 = p.
Example 2. Consider the other extreme case where one of the proposal distribution is exactly the
same as the target distribution and the other is completely opposite. We will see that multiple-
rejection sampling stays robust against such settings as well.
Let N samples be drawn from each of the two proposal distributions q1 and q2 over {0, 1}, such that
q1 (x = 1) = q2 (x = 0) ≈ 0 and q1 (x = 0) = q2 (x = 1) ≈ 1 (here we use ‘≈’ instead of ‘=’
to ensure that individual rejection sampling satisfies support assumption (note: multiple rejection
sampling will be valid in the case of equality as well)). Let the target distribution be p = q1 .
In this case, both individual rejection sampling and multiple-rejection sampling accept 50% of all
the samples drawn (i.e., 100% of the samples drawn from q1 ). This can be worked out by observing
that (a) Since p(x = 1) = 0, no samples will be selected from the samples drawn from q2 . (b) The
average proposal distribution is q̄ = [0.5, 0.5], therefore maxx p(x)/q̄(x) = 2. Since q1 (x = 0) = 1
only 0’s are sampled from q1 . Probability of accepting zero under multiple rejection sampling is
(p(x = 0)/q̄(x = 0))/(ρ̄max ) = (1/0.5)/2 = 1.

H      A LGORITHM
H.1    P SEUDO - CODE
Algorithm 1: DIA: Designing Instruments Adaptively
1 Input Number of allocations K, Size of each allocation n, Subsampling factor α
2 π = uniform
3 D = GetData(π, n)                                             ▷ Sample n new data using π
4 for i ∈ [1, ..., K − 1] do
5     π = Optimize(D, α, Kn)
6     D = GetData(π, n)
7 Return θ = Estimate(D)


                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2: Optimize
1 Input Dataset D, Sub-sampling factor α, Max-budget N
2 Initialize πφ
3 Initialize Θ                                                      ▷ Set of B parameters
4 n = |D|

5 θ̂0 = Estimate(D)                                  ▷ Compute estimate on the entire data
6 while πφ not converged do
                     n                    n

7      π eff (Z|X) ← N Pr(Z|X; D) + 1 − N     πφ (Z|X)                      ▷ Equation 16
         #Parallel For loops
 8       for b ∈ [1, ..., B] do
 9           Dk = Multi-Reject-Sampler(D, π eff , α)       ▷ Equation 15, with k = |D|α
10           Θ[b] = Estimate(Dk , Init = Θ[b])     ▷ Optional: Init from previous solution
11           MSE = (Θ[b] − θ̂0 )2
12           I = GetInfluences(MSE, Θ[b], Dk )                              ▷ Equation 12
               IF                    eff
                          P
13           ∇ [b] = s∈Dk ∇φ log π (s)I(s)                                  ▷ Equation 17
14    πφ ← Update(πφ , ∇IF )                                     ▷ Any optimizer: SGD, Adam, etc.
15 Return πφ


We provide a pseudo code for the proposed DIA algorithm in 1 and 2. In the following we provide
a short description of the functions used there-in.
• GetData: Uses the given policy to sample n new data samples
• Estimate: Uses 3 to solve for the required nuisances and the parameters of interest.
• Multi-Reject-Sampler: Takes as input dataset D of size n and returns a sub-sampled
  dataset of size k = nα using the proposed multi-rejection sampling 15. Since the data is col-
  lected by the algorithm itself, DIA has access to π and also all the prior policies (that are require
  for the denominator of ρ̄) and can directly estimate ρ̄. In practice, the max mutli-importance ratio
  ρ̄max may not be known. Therefore, we use the empirical supremum (Caffo et al., 2002), where
  empirical max of multi-importance ratios are used in the place of ρ̄max .
• GetInfluences: Uses 12 to return influence of each of the samples s ∈ Dk on the MSE.
  Here we discuss how to compute it efficiently using Hessian vector products (Pearlmutter, 1994).
  Recall, from 11 and 12,
              (1)        d             (1)
             IMSE (Si ) =   MSE(θ̂) Iθ (Si )                                                        (318)
                         dθ
                           ∂Mn −1                                       ∂Qn −1

               (1)                                       ∂Mn
              Iθ (Si ) = −     (θ̂, ϕ̂) m(Si , θ̂, ϕ̂) −     (θ̂, ϕ̂)       (ϕ̂)q(Si , ϕ̂) .        (319)
                            ∂θ                            ∂ϕ             ∂ϕ
                 d
     Note that dθ  can be computed directly as it is just the gradient of the MSE. Below, we focus on
       (1)
     Iθ (Si ). To begin, Let θ ∈ Rd1 and ϕ ∈ Rd2 . Let H = ∂Q    ∂ϕ ∈ R
                                                                   n     d2 ×d2
                                                                                and v = q(Si , ϕ̂) ∈ Rd2 ,
                                        −1
     such that we want to compute H v. Notice that this is a solution to the equation Hp = v,
     therefore we can solve for arg minp∈Rd2 ∥Hp − v∥2 using any method (we make use of conjugate
     gradients). Importantly, note that we no longer need to explicitly compute the inverse. Further, to
     avoid even explicitly computing or storing H, we use the ‘stop-gradient’ operator sg in auto-diff
     libraries and express
                                ∂Qn     ∂
                         Hp =       p=    ⟨Q, sg(p)⟩,                          ∈ Rd 2               (320)
                                 ∂ϕ    ∂ϕ
     which reduces to merely taking a derivative of the scalar ⟨Q, sg(p)⟩ ∈ R. Thus using hessian-
     vector product and conjugate gradients we can compute H −1 v, even for arbitrary neural networks
                                                                             (1)
     with d2 parameters. Similarly, we can compute all the terms in Iθ (Si ), by repeated use of
     Hessian-vector products. Other tricks can be used to scale up this computation to millions (Lor-
     raine et al., 2020) and billions of hyper-parameters (Grosse et al., 2023).


                                                     45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                         (2)
  Finally, we also observe that the higher order influence Iθ (Si ) can be partially estimated using
                   (1)
  the first order Iθ (Si ) terms. Recall from 68

        (1)          d
                                         (1)                                     (1)
                                                                                              dθ̂i,ϵ,ϕ̂i,ϵ
      IMSE (Si ) =      MSE θ̂i,ϵ,ϕ̂i,ϵ Iθ (Si )                 where,         Iθ (Si ) =                          .   (321)
                     dθ                                                                             dϵ        ϵ=0
                                                          ϵ=0
  Therefore,

                          (2)           d d
                                                               (1)
                         IMSE (Si ) =         MSE θ̂i,ϵ,ϕ̂i,ϵ Iθ (Si )                                                  (322)
                                        dϵ dθ
                                                                                       ϵ=0

                                         (1)             d2
                                                                                    (1)
                                     = Iθ (Si )⊤              MSE  θ̂ i,ϵ,ϕ̂       Iθ (Si )                             (323)
                                                         d2 θ                i,ϵ
                                                                                              ϵ=0

                                                    d                  d
                                                                          (1)
                                               +      MSE θ̂i,ϵ,ϕ̂i,ϵ    I (Si )                                        (324)
                                                   dθ                  dϵ θ
                                                                                 ϵ=0
                                                   |                {z             }
                                                                       Ignore

                                        (1)      d2         (1)
                                     ≈ Iθ (Si )⊤ 2 MSE(θ̂) Iθ (Si ).                                                    (325)
                                                d θ
                                                                                                             (2)
  Hessian-vector product can now again be used to copmute this approximation of IMSE (Si ) using
                         (1)
  the already computed Iθ (Si ).
• Update: Uses any optimizer to update the parameters of the policy.
H.2 I NFLUENCE FUNCTION USAGE WHEN THE ESTIMATES ARE STOCHASTIC
When using influence functions for deep-learning based estimators, prior works raise the caution that
influence function might not provide an accurate estimate of the leave-one-out loss (Basu et al., 2020;
Bae et al., 2022). One of the reasons is that the optimization process is susceptible to converge to
different (local) optimas based on the stochasticity in the training process. Therefore, the difference
between an estimate of θ(Dn ) and θ(Dn\i ) is not only due to the sample Si but also on the other
stochastic factors (e.g., what was the parameter initialization when computing θ(Dn ) vs θ(Dn\i )).
However, computing the influence of sample Si using influence functions does not account for
stochasticty in the training process. In the following, we discuss why this might be less of a concern
for our use-case.
Let ξ be a noise variable that governs all the stochastic factors (e.g., parameter initialization). Let
θ(Dn , ξ) be a deterministic function given a dataset Dn and ξ. Therefore, similar to (4),
                                    L(π) =          E      [MSE(θ(Dn , ξ))].                                            (326)
                                               Dn ∼π,ξ

Then similar to (5), (7), and (9)
                          "                        n
                                                                            #
                                                   X ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
      ∇L(π) =        E        MSE(θ(Dn , ξ))                                                                            (327)
                   Dn ∼π,ξ
                                                   i=1
                                                                ∂π
                             " n                                                                               #
                              X ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
               =     E                                   MSE(θ(Dn , ξ)) − MSE θ Dn\i , ξ                                (328)
                   Dn ∼π,ξ
                              i=1
                                        ∂π
                             " n                          #
                            ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
                              X
               ≈ E                           IMSE (Si , ξ)                                                              (329)
                Dn ∼π,ξ
                        i=1
                                  ∂π
where, IMSE (Si , ξ) is similar to (9) and (10), but θ is also a function of ξ. Therefore, from (328) it
can be observed that, for our setting, we indeed want to compute the difference from the leave-one-
out estimate, where there is no difference due to the stochasticity from ξ.
In practice, as we compute a sample estimate using a single sample of Dn and ξ,
                                        n
                           ˆ IF L(π) =
                                       X   ∂ log π(Zi |Xi )
                          ∇                                 IMSE (Si , ξ),                                              (330)
                                       i=1
                                                 ∂π


                                                           46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the resulting procedure is essentially the same as if running the DIA algorithm considering θ(Dn )
to be deterministic. Our experimental setup uses DIA from Algorithm 1 as-is for all the domains
considered. For instance, TripAdvisor setting uses deep learning based estimators whose outputs
are stochastic (e.g., due to parameter initialization), and the synthtetic IV domain uses closed form
solutions where there is no stochasticity in the learned estimator, given the data.
Beyond the initialization difference, Bae et al. (2022) also point out three other sources of issue with
practical influence function computation. (a) Linearization: or using first order influences in (9). For
our purpose, we formally characterize in Theorem 5 the bias due to such approximation. Further,
in (325), we discussed how second-order influence can also be estimated partially and be used to
obtain a better estimate of the leave-one-out difference. (b) Non-convergence of the parameters. As
experiment design is most useful when sample complexity is much more expensive than compute
complexity, this issue can be mitigated with longer training time. (c) Regularization when computing
the inverse hessian vector product. For our purpose, we used conjugate gradients with hessian
vector products to compute the inverse hessian vector product (see discussion around (320)). In our
experimental setup we did not use any additional regularization for this computation.
More importantly, contributions of our proposed DIA framework is complementary to the solutions
to the above mentioned challenges. Therefore, any advancements to resolve these challenges can
also potentially be incorporated in DIA.

H.3    P ROXY MSE ALTERNATIVES
Recall from 4 that under the knowledge of the oracle θ0 , the MSE can be expressed as,
                                         M
                                     1 X                                             2
                   MSE(θ(Dk )) =           (f (Xi , Ai ; θ0 ) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk ))) .           (331)
                                     M i=1

However, as we do not have access to either θ0 , or (unbiased estimates of) the outcomes of
f (Xi , Ai ; θ0 ), we cannot directly estimate (331). One way would be to decompose the MSE is
bias and variance, and only consider the variance component,
                                  M
                               1 X                                                   2
                Var(θ(D
                d       k )) =       (E[f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk ))] − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk )))             (332)
                               M i=1

Just optimizing for the variance is analogous to the objective considered by most prior work
(Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; Rainforth et al., 2023) and can also be easily used in our frame-
work. However, instead of discarding the bias term from the MSE’s decomposition, we consider the
proxy MSE
      [ where θ0 is substituted with θ(Dn ) (Lines 5 and 11 in Algorithm 2),
                                  M
                               1 X                                                2
                 MSE(θ(D
                 [      k )) =       (f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dn )) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk )))                (333)
                               M i=1

Intuitively, for a consistent estimator, θ(Dn ) can be considered a reasonable approximation of θ0 for
estimation of the MSE of θ(Dk ), where k is much smaller than n (for e.g., k = o(n)). This approach
is similar to MSE estimation using sub-sampling bootstrap (Romano, 1995) and we provide formal
justification for this in Theorem 8.
As we noticed above, there are multiple different choices of target quantity that can be used, and
this work focused on studying the one in (333). However, an important advantage of DIA is that the
target is easily customizable, and one can use any desired target quantity f? ,
                                           M
                                       1 X                                         2
                    MSE? (θ(Dk )) =          (f? (Xi , Ai ) − f (Xi , Ai ; θ(Dk ))) .             (334)
                                       M i=1


I     A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL D ETAILS
To demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed approach, we use DIA across various settings, with
different kinds of estimators,


                                                  47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• IV (synthetic): For this domain, we use 2SLS based linear regression for both the nuisance and
  ATE parameters, where the solutions can be obtained in a closed-form. The parameters φ of
  the instrument-sampling policy πφ correspond to logits for each instrument. The results for this
  setting are reported using 100 trials.
• CIV (synthetic): For this domain, we use moment conditions from (Hartford et al., 2017) and use
  logistic regression with linear parameters for both the nuisance and CATE parameters, and thus
  require gradient descent to search for the optimal parameters (no closed-form solution). Further,
  to account for covariates, the parameters φ of the instrument-sampling policy πφ correspond to the
  parameters of a non-linear function modeled using a neural network. The results for this setting
  are reported using 30 trials.
• TripAdvisor (semi-synthetic): For this domain, we use neural network based non-linear parame-
  terization of both θ and ϕ, for the CATE and the nuisance functions, respectively. The parameters
  φ of the instrument-sampling policy πφ also correspond to the parameters of a non-linear function
  modeled using a neural network. The results for this setting are reported using 30 trials.
The policy parameters φ in all the settings are searched using gradient expression in 17. Below, we
discuss details for each of these settings.
I.1 S YNTHETIC D OMAINS
For both the IV and the CIV setting, random 5% (or 1, whichever is more) of the instruments had
strong positive encouragement for treatment A = 0 and 5% (or 1, whichever is more) had strong
positive encouragement for treatment A = 1. The strength (γ) of other instruments was in between.
Below, |Z| denotes the number of instruments.
The following provides the data-generating process for the IV setting:

              θ 0 ∈ R2 ,     γ ∈ [0, 1]|Z| ,         π(·) ∈ ∆(Z)                                  (335)
                 (a)
              Z ∼ π(·)                                                          ∈ {0, 1}|Z|       (336)
              U ∼ N (0, σu )                                                           ∈R         (337)
               p = clip Z ⊤ γ + U, min = 0, max = 1

                                                                                   ∈ [0, 1]       (338)
              A ∼ Bernoulli(p)                                                    ∈ {0, 1}        (339)
                 (b)
               ξ ∼ AN (0, σ1 ) + (1 − A)N (0, σ0 )                                    ∈R          (340)
                               ⊤
              Y = [A, 1 − A] θ0 + U + ξ                                               ∈R          (341)
where (a) samples from a multinomial and Z is a one-hot vector that indicates the chosen instrument,
and (b) induces heteroskedastic noise in the outcomes based on the chosen treatment.
For the IV setting, we make use of 2SLS which makes use of linear functions in both the first
and the second stages of regression. The parameters for those settings can be obtained in closed
form. Additionally, the influence function can also be computed in closed-form (Kahn, 2015). The
instrument sampling policy πφ (·) is an (unconditional) distribution on ∆(Z).
The following provides the data-generating process for the CIV setting:

    θ0 ∈ R,       X ∈ Rd ,         γ ∈ [0, 1]|Z| ,         ∀x : π(·|x) ∈ ∆(Z)                     (342)
        (a)
     Z ∼ π(·|X)                                                                    ∈ {0, 1}|Z|    (343)
     U ∼ N (0, σu )                                                                       ∈R      (344)
        (b)
     C = X1 γ + (1 − X1 )(1 − γ)                                                    ∈ [0, 1]|Z|   (345)
      p = clip Z ⊤ C + U, min = 0, max = 1

                                                                                       ∈ [0, 1]   (346)
     A ∼ Bernoulli(p)                                                                 ∈ {0, 1}    (347)
        (c)
      ξ ∼ AN (0, σ1 ) + (1 − A)N (0, σ0 )                                                 ∈R      (348)
        (d)
     Y = X2 + Aθ0 + U + ξ                                                                 ∈R      (349)


                                                      48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (a) samples from a multinomial and Z is a one-hot vector that indicates the chosen instrument,
(b) induces heteroskedastic compliance by flipping the compliance factor of the instruments based
on the covariates (by construct, X1 ∈ {0, 1}), (c) induces heteroskedastic noise in the outcomes
based on the chosen treatment, and (d) induces heteroskedastic outcomes based on the covariates
(by construct, X2 ∈ R).
For the CIV setting, d = 2 and we parameterize θ such that g(X, A; θ) as a linear function of
X, A. Similarly, we ϕ is linearly parametrized to estimate the nuisance function dP (A|X, Z; ϕ)
using logistic regression. Parameters for both g and dP are obtained using gradient descent and the
moment conditions in 3. The instrument sampling policy πφ (·|x) is modeled using a two-layered
neural network with 8 hidden units.

I.2   T RIPA DVISOR DOMAIN ( SEMI - SYNTHETIC )
Adaptivity and learning the distribution of instruments are most relevant when there are a lot of in-
struments. Our paper is developed for the setting where online sampling is feasible. Unfortunately,
simulators for real-world scenarios that we are aware of and could access publicly (e.g., TripAdvi-
sor’s (Syrgkanis et al., 2019)) only consider a single/binary instrument. These simulator domains
are modeled to represent the setting where expert knowledge was used to find optimal instruments
(e.g., better/easier sign-up strategy to make the membership process easier). However, in reality,
there could be multiple ways to encourage membership (emails, notifications, sign-up bonuses, etc.)
that can all serve as instruments. Adaptivity is more relevant in such a setting to discover an opti-
mal strategy for instrument selection, while minimizing the need for expert knowledge. Therefore,
given the above considerations, we created a semi-synthetic TripAdvisor with varying numbers of
potential instruments to simulate such settings.
The original data-generating process for TripAdvisor domain is available on Github. The co-variates
X ∈ Rd correspond to how many times the user visited web pages of different categories (hotels,
restaurants, etc.), how many times they visited the webpage through different modes (direct-search,
ad-click, etc.), and other demographic features (geo-location, laptop operating system, etc.). The
original setting only had a binary instrument. To make it resemble realistic settings that are more
broadly applicable (e.g., where there are a multitude of different instruments, each corresponding
to a different way to encourage a user to uptake the treatment), we incorporated several weak in-
struments. The compliance strength of the instrument varies non-linearly with the covariates. Our
semi-synthetic version is available in the supplementary material.
For the TripAdvisor setting, we parameterize θ such that g(X, A; θ) as a non-linear function of X, A.
Similarly, we ϕ is non-linearly parametrized to estimate the nuisance function dP (A|X, Z; ϕ). In
both cases, the non-linear function is a two-layered neural network with 8 hidden nodes and sigmoid
activation units. Parameters for both g and dP are obtained using gradient descent and the moment
conditions in 3. The instrument sampling policy πφ (·|x) is modeled using a two-layered neural
network with 8 hidden units.

I.3   H YPER - PARAMETERS :
The choice of sub-sampling size k is used as a hyper-parameter in our work. We parametrize k as
nα . For our empirical results, we searched over the hyper-parameter settings of α ∈ [0.5, 0.8] and
report the best-performing setting.
Auto-tuning suggestion for α: As the expected number of samples that get accepted via rejection
sampling from a set of n samples is n/ρmax , it would be ideal for α to be such that nα > n/ρmax .
Empirical supremum can be used as a proxy for ρmax .
Further, doing rejection sampling in higher dimensions can be challenging as ρmax can be very large.
A standard technique for density ratio estimation (i.e., ρ that governs acceptance-rejection ratio in
13) in higher dimensions is through performing density ratio estimation on a lower dimensional sub-
space (Sugiyama et al., 2009, 2011). We believe that incorporating similar ideas into our framework
can provide further improvements.

I.4   D ETAILS OF OTHER PLOTS :
Figure 1: This figure provides a comparison with conventional experiment design (that assumes
that there is no confounding between what group (treatment/control) the user was recommended to

                                                 49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     104


                              Variance
                                     103                             RS
                                     102                             IS
                                     101
                                           1   2   3    4   5
                                               Samples×102
Figure 8: Log-scale version of Figure 4 to better visualize the difference in variances at smaller
values of n.


be a part of (i.e., Z), and the group that the user actually became a part of (i.e., A)), and the proposed
method DIA on the following data-generating process:
                 θ0 ∈ R 2 ,   π(·) ∈ ∆(Z)                                                           (350)
                 Z∼π(·)                                                        ∈ {0, 1}             (351)
                 U ∼ N (0, σu )                                                    ∈R               (352)
                  p = clip(Z + U, min = 0, max = 1)                             ∈ [0, 1]            (353)
                 A ∼ Bernoulli(p)                                              ∈ {0, 1}             (354)
                     (b)
                   ξ ∼ AN (0, σ1 ) + (1 − A)N (0, σ0 )                             ∈R               (355)
                                     ⊤
                  Y = [A, 1 − A] θ0 + U + ξ                                        ∈R               (356)
The confounder strength corresponds to σu . Observe that when σu = 0, then the binary treatment’s
value is the same as that of the binary instrument’s value, i.e., A = Z.
Figure 3:    For the illustrative plots regarding bias and variance trade-offs of different gradient
estimators and sampling strategies, we make use of the following data-generating process where the
treatment A ∈ R is real-valued, the outcomes Y are quadratic in A, and |Z| = 2,
               θ0 ∈ R,       γ ∈ [0, 1]|Z| ,       π(·) ∈ ∆(Z)                                      (357)
                                                                                       |Z|
               Z ∼ π(·)                                                       ∈ {0, 1}              (358)
               U ∼ N (0, σu )                                                        ∈R             (359)
               A ∼ Z ⊤ γ + U + N (0, σa )                                             ∈R            (360)
                       2
               Y ∼ A θ0 + U + N (0, σy )                                              ∈R            (361)

This figure illustrates the bias and variance of different gradient estimators when the function ap-
proximator is mis-specified, i.e., Y is modeled as a linear function of treatment A but it is actually a
quadratic function of treatment. We use the standard 2SLS estimator for this setting.
Figure 4: This domain also uses a 2SLS estimator and binary instrument with the data generating
process in (357)-(361). (Left) Illustration of how the policy orderings are preserved when using
different values of α in k = nα . π0 (1) = 0.2, π1 (1) = 0.5, and π2 (1) = 0.8, where the data
collection policy is β(1) = 0.5. (Right) Variance of evaluating MSE under different sampling
strategies. The data collection policy β(1) = 0.5 and the target policy π(1) = 0.6. Sub-sample size
k = o(n) = n0.75 . To better visualize the difference in the variance for small sample sizes, we have
also included a log-scale version of the plot in Figure 8


                                                       50
