Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RLLTE: L ONG -T ERM E VOLUTION P ROJECT OF R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We present RLLTE: a long-term evolution, extremely modular, and open-source
         framework for reinforcement learning (RL) research and application. Beyond de-
         livering top-notch algorithm implementations, RLLTE also serves as a toolkit for
         developing algorithms. More specifically, RLLTE decouples the RL algorithms
         completely from the exploitation-exploration perspective, providing a large num-
         ber of components to accelerate algorithm development and evolution. In particu-
         lar, RLLTE is the first RL framework to build a complete and luxuriant ecosystem,
         which includes model training, evaluation, deployment, benchmark hub, and large
         language model (LLM)-empowered copilot. RLLTE is expected to set standards
         for RL engineering practice and be highly stimulative for industry and academia.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a highly significant research topic, garnering con-
siderable attention due to its remarkable achievements in diverse fields, including smart manu-
facturing and autonomous driving (Mnih et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2018; Yarats et al., 2021). However, the efficient and reliable engineering imple-
mentation of RL algorithms remains a long-standing challenge. These algorithms often possess
sophisticated structures, where minor code variations can substantially influence their practical per-
formance. Academia requires a stable baseline for algorithm comparison, while the industry seeks
convenient interfaces for swift application development (Raffin et al., 2021). However, the design
and maintenance of an RL library prove costly, involving substantial computing resources, making
it prohibitive for most research teams.
To tackle this problem, several open-source projects were proposed to offer reference implementa-
tions of popular RL algorithms (Liang et al., 2018; D’Eramo et al., 2021; Fujita et al., 2021; Raffin
et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022). For instance, Raffin et al. (2021) developed a stable-baselines3
(SB3) framework, which encompasses seven model-free deep RL algorithms, including proximal
policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) and asynchronous actor-critic (A2C) (Mnih et al.,
2016). SB3 prioritizes stability and reliability, and rigorous code testing has been conducted to mini-
mize implementation errors and ensure the reproducibility of results. Weng et al. (2022a) introduced
Tianshou, a highly modularized library emphasizing flexibility and training process standardization.
Tianshou also provides a unified interface for various algorithms, such as offline and imitation learn-
ing. In contrast, Huang et al. (2022) introduced CleanRL, which focuses on single-file implemen-
tations to facilitate algorithm comprehension, new features prototyping, experiment analysis, and
scalability.
Despite their achievements, most of the existing benchmarks have not established a long-term evo-
lution plan and have proven to be short-lived. Firstly, the consistent complexity of RL algorithms
naturally results in distinct coding styles, posing significant obstacles to open-source collaborations.
Complete algorithm decoupling and modularization have yet to be well achieved, making mainte-
nance challenging and limiting extensibility. Secondly, these projects are deficient in establishing a
comprehensive application ecosystem. They primarily concentrate on model training, disregarding
vital aspects like model evaluation and deployment. Furthermore, they frequently lack exhaustive
benchmark testing data, including essential elements like learning curves and trained models. This
deficiency makes replicating algorithms demanding in terms of computational resources.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Env                        Evaluation                    Hub

                                 Env Wrappers                     Pe ormance                 Datasets
         Tool
                                  Game APIs                       Comparison                  Models

                                      ...                         Visualization                 ...



                        Common                         Xploit                     Xplore

                                  Prototypes                        Encoder                Distribution
         Core
                                  Auxiliaries                        Policy                Augmentation

                                      ...                           Storage                  Reward


         App.            Deployment             Pre-training             Agent           Copilot


                        Figure 1: Overview of the architecture of RLLTE.


Inspired by the discussions above, we propose RLLTE, a long-term evolution, extremely modular,
and open-source framework of RL. We summarize the highlighted features of RLLTE as follows:

      • Module-oriented. RLLTE decouples RL algorithms from the exploitation-exploration per-
        spective and breaks them down into minimal primitives, such as encoder for feature extrac-
        tion and storage for archiving and sampling experiences. RLLTE offers a rich selection
        of modules for each primitive, enabling developers to utilize them as building blocks for
        constructing algorithms. As a result, the focus of RLLTE shifts from specific algorithms
        to providing more handy modules like PyTorch. In particular, each module in RLLTE is
        customizable and plug-and-play, empowering users to develop their own modules. This
        decoupling process also contributes to advancements in interpretability research, allowing
        for a more in-depth exploration of RL algorithms.
      • Long-term evolution. RLLTE is a long-term evolution project, continually involving ad-
        vanced algorithms and tools in RL. RLLTE will be updated based on the following tenet:
        (i) generality; (ii) improvements in generalization ability and sample efficiency; (iii) ex-
        cellent performance on recognized benchmarks; (iv) promising tools for RL. Therefore,
        this project can uphold the right volume and high quality resources, thereby inspiring more
        subsequent projects.
      • Data augmentation. Recent approaches have introduced data augmentation techniques
        at the observation and reward levels to improve the sample efficiency and generalization
        ability of RL agents, which are cost-effective and highly efficient. In line with this trend,
        RLLTE incorporates built-in support for data augmentation operations and offers a wide
        range of observation augmentation modules and intrinsic reward modules.
      • Abundant ecosystem. RLLTE considers the needs of both academia and industry and de-
        velops an abundant project ecosystem. For instance, RLLTE designed an evaluation toolkit
        to provide statistical and reliable metrics for assessing RL algorithms. Additionally, the
        deployment toolkit enables the seamless execution of models on various inference devices.
        In particular, RLLTE attempts to introduce the large language model (LLM) to build an
        intelligent copilot for RL research and applications.
      • Comprehensive benchmark data. Existing RL projects typically conduct testing on a lim-
        ited number of benchmarks and often lack comprehensive training data, including learning


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         curves and test scores. While this limitation is understandable, given the resource-intensive
         nature of RL training, it hampers the advancement of subsequent research. To address
         this issue, RLLTE has established a data hub utilizing the Hugging Face platform. This
         data hub provides extensive testing data for the included algorithms on widely recognized
         benchmarks. By offering complete and accessible testing data, RLLTE will facilitate and
         accelerate future research endeavors in RL.
       • Multi-hardware support. RLLTE has been thoughtfully designed to accommodate di-
         verse computing hardware configurations, including graphic processing units (GPUs) and
         neural network processing units (NPUs), in response to the escalating global demand for
         computing power. This flexibility enables RLLTE to support various computing resources,
         ensuring optimal trade-off of performance and scalability for RL applications.

2     A RCHITECTURE
Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of RLLTE, which contains the core layer, application
layer, and tool layer. The following sections will detail the design concepts and usage of the three
layers.

2.1   C ORE L AYER

In the core layer, we decouple an RL algorithm from the exploitation-exploration perspective and
break them down into minimal primitives. Figure 2 illustrates a typical forward and update workflow
of RL training. At each time step, an encoder first processes the observation to extract features.
       Architecture             (Decoupling)
Then, the features are passed to a policy module to generate actions. Finally, the transition will be
inserted into the storage, and the agent will sample from the storage to perform the policy update. In
particular, we can use data augmentation techniques such as observation augmentation and intrinsic
reward shaping to improve the sample efficiency and generalization ability.


        Observation         Encoder         Features          Dist.

                                                             Policy               Action


                                       (a) Forward workflow

                                                       Int. Reward
           Storage             Samples                                            Update
                                                       Obs. Aug.


                                       (b) Update workflow


Figure 2: Forward and update workflow of an RL algorithm. Aug.: Augmentation. Dist.: Distribu-
tion for sampling actions. Int.: Intrinsic. Obs.: Observation.

We categorize these fundamental components into two parts: xploit and xplore, and Table 1 illus-
trates their architectures. The modules within the xploit component primarily focus on exploiting
the current collected experiences. For instance, the storage module defines the methods for stor-
ing and sampling experiences, while the policy module is updated based on the sampled data. In
contrast, modules in xplore focus on exploring unknown domains. When policy is stochastic,
distribution specifies the methods for sampling actions from the action space. In the case of
a deterministic policy, the distribution module introduces noise to the current action to en-
hance the exploration of the action space. The augmentation and reward modules contribute to
exploring the state and action space by augmenting observations and providing additional intrinsic
rewards, respectively. Each submodule in Table 1 is accompanied by many pre-defined components,
which are listed in Appendix A.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Six primitives in RLLTE. Note that the action noise is implemented via a distribution
manner to keep unification in RLLTE.
             Module             Submodule           Remark
                                policy              Policies for interaction and learning.
             rllte.xploit       encoder             Encoders for feature extraction.
                                storage             Storages for collected experiences.
                                distribution        Distributions for sampling actions.
             rllte.xplore       augmentation        Observation augmentation modules.
                                reward              Intrinsic reward modules.



2.2     A PPLICATION L AYER

Equipped with modules of the core layer, we can efficiently develop RL algorithms and applica-
tions with simple steps, and Table 2 illustrates the architecture of the application layer. See all the
corresponding code examples in Appendix C.


                      Table 2: Architecture of the application layer in RLLTE.
      Module             Remark
                         Top-notch implementations of highly-recognized RL algorithms, in
                         which convenient interfaces are designed to realize fast application
      rllte.agent        construction. In particular, the module-oriented design allows devel-
                         opers to replace settled modules of implemented algorithms to make
                         performance comparisons and algorithm improvements.
                         Since RLLTE is designed to support intrinsic reward modules na-
                         tively, developers can conveniently realize pre-training. The pre-
      Pre-training       trained weights will be saved automatically after training, and it suf-
                         fices to perform fine-tuning by loading the weights in the .train()
                         function.
                         A toolkit that helps developers run their RL models on inference de-
                         vices, which consistently have lower computational power. RLLTE
      Deployment         currently supports two inference frameworks: NVIDIA TensorRT and
                         HUAWEI CANN. RLLTE provides a fast API for model transforma-
                         tion and inference, and developers can invoke it directly with their
                         models.
                         A promising attempt to introduce the LLM into an RL framework.
                         The copilot can help users reduce the time required for learning
      Copilot            frameworks and assist in the design and development of RL appli-
                         cations. We are developing more advanced features to it, including
                         RL-oriented code completion and training control.



2.2.1    FAST A LGORITHM C ONSTRUCTION

Developers only need three steps to implement an RL algorithm with RLLTE: (i) select an algorithm
prototype; (ii) select desired modules; (iii) define an update function. Currently, RLLTE provides
three algorithm prototypes: OnPolicyAgent, OffPolicyAgent, and DistributedAgent. Fig-
ure 3 demonstrates how to write an A2C agent for discrete control tasks with RLLTE:
As shown in this example, developers can effortlessly choose the desired modules and create an
.update() function to implement a new algorithm. At present, the framework includes a collec-
tion of 13 algorithms, such as data-regularized actor-critic (DrAC) (Raileanu et al., 2021) and data
regularized Q-v2 (DrQ-v2), and the detailed introduction can be found in Appendix B.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      from rllte.common.prototype import OnPolicyAgent
      from rllte.xploit.encoder import MnihCnnEncoder
                                                                      # import `env` and `agent`
      from rllte.xploit.policy import OnPolicySharedActorCritic
                                                                      from rllte.env import make_dmc_env
      from rllte.xploit.storage import VanillaRolloutStorage
                                                                      from rllte.agent import DrQv2
      from rllte.xplore.distribution import Categorical
                                                                      if __name__ == "__main__":
      class A2C(OnPolicyAgent):
                                                                          device = "cuda:0"
          def __init__(self, ...) -> None:
                                                                          # create env, `eval_env` is optional
              super().__init__(...)
                                                                          env = make_dmc_env(env_id="cartpole_balance",
              # create essential modules
                                                                                              device=device)
              encoder = MnihCnnEncoder(...)
                                                                          eval_env = make_dmc_env(env_id="cartpole_balance",
              policy = OnPolicySharedActorCritic(...)
                                                                                                   device=device)
              storage = VanillaRolloutStorage(...)
                                                                          # create agent
              dist = Categorical()
                                                                          agent = DrQv2(env=env,
              # set all the modules
                                                                                         eval_env=eval_env,
              self.set(encoder=encoder, policy=policy,
                                                                                         device=device,
                       storage=storage, distribution=dist)
                                                                                         tag="drqv2_dmc_pixel")
                                                                          # start training
          def update(self) -> Dict[str, float]:
                                                                          agent.train(num_train_steps=500000,
              batch = self.storage.sample()
                                                                                      log_interval=1000)
              # A2C update rule
              ...


Figure 3: Left: Implement A2C algorithm with dozens of lines of code, and the complete code
example can be found in Appendix C.1. Right: Simple interface to invoke implemented RL algo-
rithms.

2.2.2    M ODULE R EPLACEMENT
For an implemented algorithm, developers can replace its settled modules using the .set() method
to realize performance comparisons and algorithm improvements. Moreover, developers can utilize
custom modules as long as they inherit from the base class, as demonstrated in the code example
in Appendix C.2. By decoupling these elements, RLLTE also empowers developers to construct
prototypes and perform quantitative analysis of algorithm performance swiftly.

2.2.3    C OPILOT


Figure 4: Left: The workflow of the copilot. Right: A conversation example of training an PPO
agent using RLLTE.

Copilot is the first attempt to integrate an LLM into an RL framework, which aims to help devel-
opers reduce the learning cost and facilitate application construction. We follow the design of (Toro,
2023) that interacts privately with documents using the power of GPT, and Figure 4 illustrates its ar-
chitecture. The source documents are first ingested by an instructor embedding tool to create a local
vector database. After that, a local LLM is used to understand questions and create answers based
on the database. In practice, we utilize Vicuna-7B (Chiang et al., 2023) as the base model and build
the database using various corpora, including API documentation, tutorials, and RL references. The
powerful understanding ability of the LLM model enables the copilot to accurately answer questions
about the use of the framework and any other questions of RL. Moreover, no additional training is
required, and users are free to replace the base model according to their computing power. In fu-
ture work, we will further enrich the corpus and add the code completion function to build a more
intelligent copilot for RL.

2.3     T OOL L AYER

The tool layer provides practical toolkits for task design, model evaluation, and benchmark data.
rllte.env allows users to design task environments following the natural Gymnasium pattern with-


                                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Architecture of the tool layer in RLLTE. Code example for each toolkit can be found in
Appendix D.
   Toolkit                   Remark
                             Provides a large number of packaged environments (e.g., Atari games)
                             for fast invocation. RLLTE is designed to natively support Gymna-
   rllte.env                 sium (Towers et al., 2023), which is a maintained fork of the Gym
                             library of OpenAI (Brockman et al., 2016). Moreover, developers are
                             allowed to use their custom environments with built-in wrappers in
                             RLLTE.
                             Provides reasonable and reliable metrics for algorithm evaluation fol-
                             lowing (Agarwal et al., 2021). Performance module for evaluating a
   rllte.evaluation
                             single algorithm. Comparison module for comparing multiple algo-
                             rithms. Visualization for visualizing computed metrics.
                             Provides a large number of reusable datasets (.datasets) and trained
                             models (.models) of supported RL algorithms. Developers can also
   rllte.hub
                             reproduce the training process via the pre-defined RL applications
                             (.applications).


                    MEAN                    MEDIAN                                              IQM                        OG
 ucb-drac
       plr
    idaac
      ppo
  mixreg
      ppg
           1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75       1.05 1.20 1.35        1.05                                 1.20     1.35        0.02 0.04 0.06
                                          PPO-Normalized Score
  (a) Aggregate metrics with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). IQM: Interquartile mean. OG: Optimality gap.
                                                             IQM Human Normalized Score


 Algorithm X                                 Algorithm Y                                  2.0
    mixreg                               ppo
   ucb-drac                              mixreg                                           1.5
         plr                             mixreg
   ucb-drac                              plr                                              1.0
        ppg                              ppo
      idaac                              ppo                                              0.5
      idaac                              ucb-drac
      idaac                              ppg                                              0.0
               0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                                                      0        50        100       150      200
                         P(X > Y)                                                                      Number of Frames (in millions)
(b) Left: Each row shows the probability of improvement, with 95% bootstrap CIs, that the algorithm X on the
left outperforms algorithm Y on the right. Right: Sample-efficiency of agents as a function of number of frames
measured via IQM human-normalized scores.


Figure 5: Performance metrics computed and visualized by rllte.evaluation, and the code ex-
ample can be found in Appendix D.2.


out additional effort. All the environments in RLLTE are set to be vectorized to guarantee sample
efficiency, and many different observation and action spaces (e.g., box, discrete, multi-binary, etc.)
are supported. In particular, users can also use EnvPool (Weng et al., 2022b) to realize ultra-fast
operational acceleration. See code example in Appendix D.1.
Beyond providing efficient task design and training interfaces, RLLTE further investigates the model
evaluation problem in RL and develops a simple evaluation toolkit. RLLTE reconstructs and im-
proves the code of (Agarwal et al., 2021) to realize a more convenient and efficient interface. Fig-
ure 5 illustrates several metrics computed and visualized by the toolkit.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, rllte.hub can accelerate academic research by providing practically available benchmark
data, including training data and trained models. This toolkit will save much time and computational
resources for researchers, and the code example can be found in Appendix D.3. RLLTE is the
first open-source RL project that aims to build a complete ecosystem. Developers can perform task
design, model training, model evaluation, and model deployment within one framework. As a result,
RLLTE is highly stimulative for both industry and academia.

3   P ROJECT E VOLUTION
As a long-term evolution project, RLLTE is expected to consistently provide high-quality and timely
engineering standards and development components for RL. To that end, RLLTE sets the following
tenet for updating new features:
       • Generality is the most important;
       • Improvements in sample efficiency or generalization ability;
       • Excellent performance on recognized benchmarks;
       • Promising tools for RL.
Firstly, RLLTE only accepts general algorithms that can be applied in many distinct scenarios and
tasks. For example, PPO is a general RL algorithm that can solve tasks with arbitrary action spaces,
and random network distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019) is a general intrinsic reward module
that can be combined with arbitrary RL agents. This rule can effectively control the volume of the
project while ensuring its adaptability to a wide range of requirements. Moreover, generality ex-
emplifies the potential for future enhancements (e.g., the various variants of PPO), which can also
reduce the difficulty of open-source collaboration and maintain community vitality. Furthermore,
the algorithm is expected to improve sample efficiency or generalization ability (e.g., better intrinsic
reward shaping approaches), two long-standing and critical problems in RL. Accordingly, the algo-
rithm must be evaluated on multiple recognized benchmarks like Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013) and
Procgen games (Cobbe et al., 2020) to guarantee practical performance across tasks. In particular,
RLLTE also accepts various promising tools (e.g., operational efficiency optimization, model eval-
uation, and deployment) to maintain a comprehensive ecosystem. In summary, RLLTE will keep
evolving to adapt to changing needs and produce a positive impact on the RL community.

Table 4: Architecture comparison with existing projects. Modularized: The project adopts a modu-
lar design with reusable components. Parallel: The project supports parallel learning. Decoupling:
The project supports algorithm decoupling and module replacement. Backend: Which machine
learning framework to use? License: Which open-source protocol to use? Note that the short line
represents partial support.
       Framework       Modularized       Parallel       Decoupling    Backend         License
        Baselines            ✓              ✗               -        TensorFlow       MIT
          SB3                ✓              ✗               -         PyTorch         MIT
        CleanRL              -              ✗               ✗         PyTorch         MIT
        Ray/rllib            ✓              ✓               -        TF/PyTorch     Apache-2.0
          rlpyt              ✓              ✓               ✗         PyTorch         MIT
        Tianshou             ✓              ✓               -         PyTorch         MIT
       ElegantRL             ✓              ✓               -         PyTorch       Apache-2.0
       SpinningUp            ✗              ✗               ✗         PyTorch         MIT
         ACME                ✗              ✓               ✗         TF/JAX        Apache-2.0
         RLLTE               ✓              ✓               ✓         PyTorch         MIT



4   R ELATED W ORK
We compare RLLTE with eleven representative open-source RL projects, namely Baselines (Dhari-
wal et al., 2017), SB3 (Raffin et al., 2021), CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022), Ray/rllib (Liang et al.,


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2018), and rlpyt (Stooke & Abbeel, 2019), Tianshou (Weng et al., 2022a), ElegantRL (Liu et al.,
2021), SpinningUp (Achiam, 2018), and ACME (Hoffman et al., 2020), respectively. The following
comparison is conducted from three aspects: architecture, functionality, and engineering quality.
This project references some other open-source projects and adheres to their open-source protocols.

Table 5: Functionality comparison with existing projects. Custom Env.: Support custom environ-
ments? Since Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) is no longer maintained, it is critical to make the project
adapt to Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2023). Custom Module: Support custom modules? Data Aug.:
Support data augmentation techniques like intrinsic reward shaping and observation augmentation?
Data Hub: Have a data hub to store benchmark data? Deploy.: Support model deployment? Eval.:
Support model evaluation? Multi-Device: Support hardware acceleration of different computing
devices (e.g., GPU and NPU)? Note that the short line represents partial support.
                  Number         Custom        Custom Data Data               Multi-
    Framework                                                   Deploy. Eval.
                  of Algo.        Env.         Module Aug. Hub                Device
     Baselines        9           ✓(gym)           -        ✗       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
       SB3            7        ✓(gymnasium)        -        -       ✓       ✗        ✗       ✗
     CleanRL          9             ✗              ✓        -       ✓       ✗        ✗       ✗
     Ray/rllib       16           ✓(gym)           -        -       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
       rlpyt         11             ✗              -        ✗       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
     Tianshou        20        ✓(gymnasium)        ✗        -       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
    ElegantRL         9           ✓(gym)           ✗        ✗       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
    SpinningUp        6           ✓(gym)           ✗        ✗       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
      ACME           14         ✓(dm env)          ✗        ✗       -       ✗        ✗       ✗
      RLLTE         13↗        ✓(gymnasium)        ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓       ✓



Table 6: Engineering quality comparison with existing projects. Note that the short line represents
unknown.
     Framework Documentation Code Coverage Type Hints Last Update Used by
      Baselines            ✗                  ✗                 ✗         01/2020        508
        SB3                ✓                 96%                ✓         09/2023        3.3k
      CleanRL              ✓                   -                ✗         09/2023         27
      Ray/rllib            ✓                   -                ✗         09/2023          -
        rlpyt              ✓                 15%                ✗         09/2020          -
      Tianshou             ✓                 91%                ✓         09/2023        169
     ElegantRL             ✓                   -                ✓         07/2023        256
     SpinningUp            ✓                  ✗                 ✗         02/2020          -
       ACME                ✓                   -                ✗         07/2023        149
       RLLTE               ✓                 97%                ✓         09/2023        2↗



5   D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we introduced a novel RL framework entitled RLLTE, which is a long-term evolution,
extremely modular, and open-source project for advancing RL research and applications. With a
rich and comprehensive ecosystem, RLLTE enables developers to accomplish task design, model
training, evaluation, and deployment within one framework seamlessly, which is highly stimulative
for both academia and industry. Moreover, RLLTE is an ultra-open framework where developers
can freely use and try many built-in or custom modules, contributing to the research of decoupling
and interpretability of RL. As a long-term evolution project, RLLTE will keep tracking the latest
research progress and provide high-quality implementations to inspire more subsequent research.
In particular, there are some remaining issues that we intend to work on in the future. Firstly, RLLTE
plans to add more algorithm prototypes to meet the task requirements of different scenarios, includ-
ing multi-agent RL, inverse RL, imitation learning, and offline RL. Secondly, RLLTE will enhance


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the functionality of the pre-training module, which includes more prosperous training methods and
more efficient training processes, as well as providing downloadable model parameters. Thirdly,
RLLTE will further explore the combination of RL and LLM, including using LLM to control the
construction of RL applications and improving the performance of existing algorithms (e.g., reward
function design and data generation). Finally, RLLTE will optimize the operational efficiency of
modules at the hardware level to reduce the computational power threshold, promoting the goal of
RL for everyone.


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning. https://github.com/
  openai/spinningup, 2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Steven
  Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martin Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andrew Bolt, and Charles
  Blundell. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, pp.
  1–17, 2019.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Petros Christodoulou. Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07207,
  2019.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2048–
  2056. PMLR, 2020.
Karl W Cobbe, Jacob Hilton, Oleg Klimov, and John Schulman. Phasic policy gradient. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2020–2027. PMLR, 2021.
Carlo D’Eramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Mushroomrl:
  Simplifying reinforcement learning research. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):
  5867–5871, 2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford,
  John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, Yuhuai Wu, and Peter Zhokhov. Openai baselines. https:
  //github.com/openai/baselines, 2017.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yasuhiro Fujita, Prabhat Nagarajan, Toshiki Kataoka, and Takahiro Ishikawa. Chainerrl: A deep
  reinforcement learning library. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):3557–3570,
  2021.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Matthew W. Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Nikola Momchev,
 Danila Sinopalnikov, Piotr Stańczyk, Sabela Ramos, Anton Raichuk, Damien Vincent, Léonard
 Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Manu Orsini, Alexis Jacq, Johan Ferret, Nino
 Vieillard, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Feryal Behbahani,
 Tamara Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson,
 Abe Friesen, Ruba Haroun, Alex Novikov, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Caglar
 Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Andrew Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando
 de Freitas. Acme: A research framework for distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.00979, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00979.

Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand JulienDossa Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty,
  Kinal Mehta, and João GM Araújo. Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of deep
  reinforcement learning algorithms. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):12585–
  12602, 2022.

Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 19884–19895, 2020.

Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph Gon-
  zalez, Michael Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Rllib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3053–3062. PMLR, 2018.

Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In ICLR
  (Poster), 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971.

Xiao-Yang Liu, Zechu Li, Ming Zhu, Zhaoran Wang, and Jiahao Zheng. ElegantRL: Massively
  parallel framework for cloud-native deep reinforcement learning. https://github.com/
  AI4Finance-Foundation/ElegantRL, 2021.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 16–17, 2017.

Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. The Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(1):12348–12355, 2021.

Roberta Raileanu and Rob Fergus. Decoupling value and policy for generalization in reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8787–8798. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Roberta Raileanu, Tim Rocktäschel, and Roberta Raileanu. Ride: Rewarding impact-driven ex-
  ploration for procedurally-generated environments. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rkg-TJBFPB.
Roberta Raileanu, Maxwell Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Automatic
  data augmentation for generalization in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:5402–5415, 2021.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  ICLR (Poster), 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Younggyo Seo, Lili Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. State en-
  tropy maximization with random encoders for efficient exploration. In Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9443–9454, 2021.
Adam Stooke and Pieter Abbeel. rlpyt: A research code base for deep reinforcement learning in
  pytorch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01500, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Iván Martı́nez Toro. privategpt: Interact privately with your documents using the power of gpt.
   https://github.com/imartinez/privateGPT, 2023.
Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, An-
 drea Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymna-
 sium, March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025.
Jiayi Weng, Huayu Chen, Dong Yan, Kaichao You, Alexis Duburcq, Minghao Zhang, Yi Su, Hang
   Su, and Jun Zhu. Tianshou: A highly modularized deep reinforcement learning library. The
   Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):12275–12280, 2022a.
Jiayi Weng, Min Lin, Shengyi Huang, Bo Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Zichen
   Liu, Yufan Song, Ting Luo, Yukun Jiang, et al. Envpool: A highly parallel reinforcement learning
   environment execution engine. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22409–
   22421, 2022b.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous con-
  trol: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Xingrui Yu, Yueming Lyu, and Ivor Tsang. Intrinsic reward driven imitation learning via generative
  model. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10925–10935,
  2020.
Mingqi Yuan, Bo Li, Xin Jin, and Wenjun Zeng. Rewarding episodic visitation discrepancy for
 exploration in reinforcement learning. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2022, 2022a.
Mingqi Yuan, Man-On Pun, and Dong Wang. Rényi state entropy maximization for exploration
 acceleration in reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 2022b.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      F UNCTION L IST
A.1     X PLOIT: M ODULES THAT F OCUS ON E XPLOITATION IN RL.


             Table 7: rllte.xploit.policy: Policies for interaction and learning.
       Module                               Type            Remark
                                                                 Actor-Critic networks
       OnPolicySharedActorCritic                   On-policy
                                                                 with a shared encoder.
                                                                 Actor-Critic networks
       OnPolicyDecoupledActorCritic                On-policy
                                                                 with two separate encoders.
       OffPolicyDoubleQNetwork                     Off-policy    Double Q-network.
                                                                 Deterministic actor network
       OffPolicyDetActorDoubleCritic               Off-policy
                                                                 and double-critic network.
                                                                 Double-actor network
       OffPolicyDoubleActorDoubleCritic            Off-policy
                                                                 and double-critic network.
                                                                 Stochastic actor network
       OffPolicyStochActorDoubleCritic             Off-policy
                                                                 and double-critic network.
                                                                 Memory-shared actor and
       DistributedActorLearner                     Distributed
                                                                 learner networks.



Table 8: rllte.xploit.encoder: Neural nework-based encoders for processing observations.
Naming Rule: Surname of the first author + Backbone + Encoder. Target Task: The testing tasks
reported in their paper or potential tasks.
    Module                                             Input     Target Task
      EspeholtResidualEncoder (Espeholt et al., 2018)      Images    Atari or Procgen games
      MnihCnnEncoder (Mnih et al., 2013)                   Images    Atari games
      TassaCnnEncoder (Tassa et al., 2018)                 Images    DMC Suite: pixel
      PathakCnnEncoder (Pathak et al., 2017)               Images    Atari or MiniGrid games
      IdentityEncoder                                      States    DMC Suite: state
      VanillaMlpEncoder                                    States    DMC Suite: state
      RaffinCombinedEncoder (Raffin et al., 2021)          Dict      Highway



               Table 9: rllte.xploit.storage: Experience storage and sampling.
                 Module                                           Type
                VanillaRolloutStorage                                  On-policy
                DictRolloutStorage                                     On-policy
                VanillaReplayStorage                                   Off-policy
                DictReplayStorage                                      Off-policy
                NStepReplayStorage (Sutton & Barto, 2018)              Off-policy
                PrioritizedReplayStorage (Schaul et al., 2016)         Off-policy
                HerReplayStorage (Andrychowicz et al., 2017)           Off-policy
                VanillaDistributedStorage                              Distributed


A.2     X PLORE : M ODULES THAT FOCUS ON EXPLORATION IN RL.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: rllte.xploit.augmentation: PyTorch.nn-like modules for observation augmentation.
                 Module                                         Input
                  GaussianNoise (Laskin et al., 2020)                    States
                  RandomAmplitudeScaling (Laskin et al., 2020)           States
                  GrayScale (Laskin et al., 2020)                        Images
                  RandomColorJitter (Laskin et al., 2020)                Images
                  RandomConvolution (Laskin et al., 2020)                Images
                  RandomCrop (Laskin et al., 2020)                       Images
                  RandomCutout (Laskin et al., 2020)                     Images
                  RandomCutoutColor (Laskin et al., 2020)                Images
                  RandomFlip (Laskin et al., 2020)                       Images
                  RandomRotate (Laskin et al., 2020)                     Images
                  RandomShift (Yarats et al., 2021)                      Images
                  RandomTranslate (Laskin et al., 2020)                  Images


Table 11: rllte.xploit.distribution: Distributions for sampling actions. In RLLTE, the ac-
tion noise is implemented via a distribution manner to realize unification.
                           Module                            Type
                         NormalNoise                      Noise
                         OrnsteinUhlenbeckNoise           Noise
                         TruncatedNormalNoise             Noise
                         Bernoulli                        Distribution
                         Categorical                      Distribution
                         MultiCategorical                 Distribution
                         DiagonalGaussian                 Distribution
                         SquashedNormal                   Distribution


    Table 12: rllte.xploit.reward: Intrinsic reward modules for enhancing exploration.
    Type                    Modules
    Count-based                PseudoCounts (Badia et al., 2020), RND (Burda et al., 2019)
                               ICM (Pathak et al., 2017) (Pathak et al., 2017),
    Curiosity-driven
                               GIRM (Yu et al., 2020), RIDE (Raileanu et al., 2020)
    Memory-based               NGU (Badia et al., 2020)
                               RE3 (Seo et al., 2021), RISE (Yuan et al., 2022b),
    Information theory-based
                               REVD (Yuan et al., 2022a)


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    I MPLEMENTED RL A LGORITHMS

Table 13: Implemented RL algorithms using RLLTE modules. Dis., M.B., and M.D.: Discrete,
multi-binary, and multi-discrete action space. M.P.: Multi processing. I.R.: Support intrinsic reward
shaping. O.A.: Support observation augmentation.
    Type           Algo.             Box Dis. M.B. M.D. M.P. NPU I.R. O.A.
    On-Policy      A2C              ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    On-Policy      PPO              ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    On-Policy      DrAC             ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✓
    On-Policy      DAAC             ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    On-Policy      DrDAAC           ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✓
    On-Policy      PPG              ✓      ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✓
    Off-Policy     DQN              ✓      ✗      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    Off-Policy     DDPG             ✓      ✗      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    Off-Policy     TD3              ✓      ✗      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    Off-Policy     SAC              ✓      ✗      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    Off-Policy     SAC-Discrete     ✗      ✓      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✓        ✓      ✗
    Off-Policy     DrQ-v2           ✓      ✗      ✗        ✗       ✗       ✓        ✓      ✓
    Distributed    IMPALA           ✓      ✓      ✗        ✗       ✓       ✗        ✗      ✗

Full names and references of all algorithms:

      • A2C: Advantage Actor-Critic (Mnih et al., 2016).
      • PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017).
      • DrAC: Data-Regularized Actor-Critic (Raileanu et al., 2021).
      • DAAC: Decoupled Advantage Actor-Critic (Raileanu & Fergus, 2021).
      • DrDAAC: The combination of DrAC and DAAC.
      • PPG: Phasic Policy Gradient (Cobbe et al., 2021).
      • DQN: Deep Q-Network (Mnih et al., 2013).
      • DDPG: Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (Lillicrap et al., 2016).
      • TD3: Twin Delayed DDPG (Fujimoto et al., 2018).
      • SAC: Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
      • SAC-Discrete: Soft Actor-Critic (Discrete) (Christodoulou, 2019).
      • DrQ-v2: Data-Regularized Q-v2 (Yarats et al., 2021).
      • IMPALA: Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architecture (Espeholt et al., 2018).


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     C ODE E XAMPLES OF THE A PPLICATION L AYER
C.1   FAST A LGORITHM C ONSTRUCTION


 from rllte.common.prototype import OnPolicyAgent
 from rllte.xploit.encoder import MnihCnnEncoder
 from rllte.xploit.policy import OnPolicySharedActorCritic
 from rllte.xploit.storage import VanillaRolloutStorage
 from rllte.xplore.distribution import Categorical

 from torch import nn
 import torch as th

 class A2C(OnPolicyAgent):
     def __init__(self, env, tag, seed, device, num_steps) -> None:
         super().__init__(env=env, tag=tag, seed=seed, device=device, num_steps=num_steps)
         # create modules
         encoder = MnihCnnEncoder(observation_space=env.observation_space, feature_dim=512)
         policy = OnPolicySharedActorCritic(observation_space=env.observation_space,
                                           action_space=env.action_space,
                                           feature_dim=512,
                                           opt_class=th.optim.Adam,
                                           opt_kwargs=dict(lr=2.5e-4, eps=1e-5),
                                           init_fn="xavier_uniform"
                                           )
         storage = VanillaRolloutStorage(observation_space=env.observation_space,
                                        action_space=env.action_space,
                                        device=device,
                                        storage_size=self.num_steps,
                                        num_envs=self.num_envs,
                                        batch_size=256
                                        )
         dist = Categorical()
         # set all the modules
         self.set(encoder=encoder, policy=policy, storage=storage, distribution=dist)

      def update(self):
          for _ in range(4):
              for batch in self.storage.sample():
                  # evaluate the sampled actions
                  new_values, new_log_probs, entropy = \
                      self.policy.evaluate_actions(obs=batch.observations, actions=batch.actions)
                  # policy loss part
                  policy_loss = - (batch.adv_targ * new_log_probs).mean()
                  # value loss part
                  value_loss = 0.5 * (new_values.flatten() - batch.returns).pow(2).mean()
                  # update
                  self.policy.optimizers['opt'].zero_grad(set_to_none=True)
                  (value_loss * 0.5 + policy_loss - entropy * 0.01).backward()
                  nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(self.policy.parameters(), 0.5)
                  self.policy.optimizers['opt'].step()


                 Figure 6: Implement A2C algorithm with dozens of lines of code.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2     M ODULE R EPLACEMENT

C.2.1     U SE B UILT- IN M ODULES

                                                                          from rllte.agent import PPO
                                                                          from rllte.env import make_atari_env
                                                                          from rllte.xploit.encoder import EspeholtResidualEncoder

                                                                          if __name__ == "__main__":
      from rllte.agent import PPO
                                                                              # env setup
      from rllte.env import make_atari_env
                                                                              device = "cuda:0"
                                                                              env = make_atari_env(device=device)
      if __name__ == "__main__":
                                                                              eval_env = make_atari_env(device=device)
          # env setup
                                                                              # create agent
          device = "cuda:0"
                                                                              feature_dim = 512
          env = make_atari_env(device=device)
                                                                              agent = PPO(env=env,
          eval_env = make_atari_env(device=device)
                                                                                          eval_env=eval_env,
          # create agent
                                                                                          device=device,
          agent = PPO(env=env,
                                                                                          tag="ppo_atari",
                      eval_env=eval_env,
                                                                                          feature_dim=feature_dim)
                      device=device,
                                                                              # create a new encoder
                      tag="ppo_atari")
                                                                              encoder = EspeholtResidualEncoder(
          # start training
                                                                                  observation_space=env.observation_space,
          agent.train(num_train_steps=5000)
                                                                                  feature_dim=feature_dim)
                                                                              # set the new encoder
                                                                              agent.set(encoder=encoder)
                                                                              # start training
                                                                              agent.train(num_train_steps=5000)


Figure 7: Left: Train an PPO agent on the Atari games. Right: Replace the default encoder with
EspeholtResidualEncoder.


C.2.2     U SE C USTOM M ODULES

                   from rllte.agent import PPO
                   from rllte.env import make_atari_env
                   from rllte.common.prototype import BaseEncoder
                   from gymnasium.spaces import Space
                   from torch import nn
                   import torch as th

                   class CustomEncoder(BaseEncoder):
                       """Custom encoder.

                       Args:
                           observation_space (Space): The observation space of environment.
                           feature_dim (int): Number of features extracted.

                       Returns:
                           The new encoder instance.
                       """
                       def __init__(self, observation_space: Space, feature_dim: int = 0) -> None:
                           super().__init__(observation_space, feature_dim)

                           obs_shape = observation_space.shape
                           assert len(obs_shape) == 3

                           self.trunk = nn.Sequential(
                               nn.Conv2d(obs_shape[0], 32, 3, stride=2), nn.ReLU(),
                               nn.Conv2d(32, 32, 3, stride=2), nn.ReLU(),
                               nn.Flatten(),
                           )

                           with th.no_grad():
                               sample = th.ones(size=tuple(obs_shape)).float()
                               n_flatten = self.trunk(sample.unsqueeze(0)).shape[1]

                           self.trunk.extend([nn.Linear(n_flatten, feature_dim), nn.ReLU()])

                       def forward(self, obs: th.Tensor) -> th.Tensor:
                           h = self.trunk(obs / 255.0)

                           return h.view(h.size()[0], -1)


Figure 8: Define a custom CNN-based encoder with RLLTE. This encoder can automatically com-
pute the dimension of the extracted features of observations.


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     C ODE E XAMPLES OF THE T OOL L AYER
D.1   E NVIRONMENT D ESIGN


 from rllte.agent import DrQv2
 from rllte.env.utils import make_rllte_env
 import gymnasium as gym
 import numpy as np

 class CustomEnv(gym.Env):
     def __init__(self, total_length) -> None:
         super().__init__()
         self.observation_space = gym.spaces.Box(shape=(9, 84, 84),
             high=255.0, low=0., dtype=np.uint8)
         self.action_space = gym.spaces.Box(shape=(7,),
             high=1., low=-1., dtype=np.float32)
         self.total_length = total_length
         self.count = 0

      def step(self, action):
          obs = self.observation_space.sample()
          reward = np.random.rand()
          if self.count < self.total_length:
              terminated = truncated = False
          else:
              terminated = truncated = True
          info = {"discount": 0.99}
          self.count += 1

         return obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info

      def reset(self, seed=None, options=None):
          self.count = 0
          return self.observation_space.sample(), {"discount": 0.99}

 if __name__ == "__main__":
     # env setup
     device = "cuda:0"
     env = make_rllte_env(env_id=CustomEnv,
                         device=device,
                         env_kwargs={'total_length': 499} # set env arguments
                         )
     eval_env = make_rllte_env(env_id=CustomEnv,
                             device=device,
                             env_kwargs={'total_length': 499} # set env arguments
                             )
     agent = DrQv2(env=env,
                 eval_env=eval_env,
                 device=device,
                 tag="drqv2_dmc_pixel")
     agent.train(num_train_steps=5000)


         Figure 9: Define a custom environment and perform training using DrQ-v2 agent.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   M ODEL E VALUATION

Firstly, Suppose we want to evaluate algorithm performance on the Procgen (Cobbe et al., 2020)
benchmark. First, download the data from rllte.hub:

 # load packages
 from rllte.evaluation import Performance, Comparison, min_max_normalize
 from rllte.hub.datasets import Procgen, Atari
 import numpy as np
 # load scores
 procgen = Procgen()
 procgen_scores = procgen.load_scores()
 print(procgen_scores.keys())
 # get ppo-normalized scores
 ppo_norm_scores = dict()
 MIN_SCORES = np.zeros_like(procgen_scores['ppo'])
 MAX_SCORES = np.mean(procgen_scores['ppo'], axis=0)
 for algo in procgen_scores.keys():
     ppo_norm_scores[algo] = min_max_normalize(procgen_scores[algo],
                                             min_scores=MIN_SCORES,
                                             max_scores=MAX_SCORES)


                     Figure 10: Download benchmark data from rllte.hub.


 # initialize the performance evaluator
 perf = Performance(scores=ppo_norm_scores['ppo'],
                   get_ci=True # get confidence intervals
                   )
 # computes mean of sample mean scores per task
 print(perf.aggregate_mean())
 # computes median of sample mean scores per task
 print(perf.aggregate_median())
 # computes optimality gap across all runs and tasks
 print(perf.aggregate_og())
 # computes the interquartile mean across runs and tasks
 print(perf.aggregate_iqm())


                     Figure 11: Performance evaluation of single algorithm.


 # initialize the performance comparer
 comp = Comparison(scores_x=ppo_norm_scores['ppg'],
                  scores_y=ppo_norm_scores['ppo'],
                  get_ci=True)
 # compute the overall probability of imporvement of algorithm `X` over `Y`.
 print(comp.compute_poi())



                   Figure 12: Performance comparison of multiple algorithms.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 from rllte.evaluation import (plot_interval_estimates,
                              plot_probability_improvement,
                              plot_sample_efficiency_curve,
                              plot_performance_profile)

 # 1. plot various performance metrics of algorithms with stratified confidence intervals
 # construct a performance dict
 aggregate_performance_dict = {
     "MEAN": {},
     "MEDIAN": {},
     "IQM": {},
     "OG": {}
 }
 for algo in ppo_norm_scores.keys():
     perf = Performance(scores=ppo_norm_scores[algo], get_ci=True)
     aggregate_performance_dict['MEAN'][algo] = perf.aggregate_mean()
     aggregate_performance_dict['MEDIAN'][algo] = perf.aggregate_median()
     aggregate_performance_dict['IQM'][algo] = perf.aggregate_iqm()
     aggregate_performance_dict['OG'][algo] = perf.aggregate_og()

 fig, axes = plot_interval_estimates(aggregate_performance_dict,
                                   metric_names=['MEAN', 'MEDIAN', 'IQM', 'OG'],
                                   algorithms=['ppg', 'mixreg', 'ppo', 'idaac', 'plr', 'ucb-drac'],
                                   xlabel="PPO-Normalized Score")
 fig.savefig('./plot_interval_estimates1.png', format='png', bbox_inches='tight')



 # 2. plots probability of improvement with stratified confidence intervals.
 # construct a comparison dict
 pairs = [['idaac', 'ppg'], ['idaac', 'ucb-drac'], ['idaac', 'ppo'],
     ['ppg', 'ppo'], ['ucb-drac', 'plr'],
     ['plr', 'mixreg'], ['ucb-drac', 'mixreg'], ['mixreg', 'ppo']]

 probability_of_improvement_dict = {}
 for pair in pairs:
     comp = Comparison(scores_x=ppo_norm_scores[pair[0]],
                      scores_y=ppo_norm_scores[pair[1]],
                      get_ci=True)
     probability_of_improvement_dict['_'.join(pair)] = comp.compute_poi()

 fig, ax = plot_probability_improvement(poi_dict=probability_of_improvement_dict)
 fig.savefig('./plot_probability_improvement.png', format='png', bbox_inches='tight')


           Figure 13: Two examples of the visualization tool of rllte.evaluation.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   RLLTE H UB


 from rllte.hub.datasets import Procgen

 procgen = Procgen()
 # load final scores
 # For each algorithm, this will return a `NdArray` of size (10 x 16)
 # where `scores[n][m]` represent the score on run `n` of task `m`.
 procgen_scores = procgen.load_scores()
 print(procgen_scores['ppo'].shape)

 # load learning curves
 # this will return the learning curves by a Python `Dict` like:
 # curves = {
 #     "ppo": {
 #         "train": {"bigfish": np.ndarray(shape=(Number of seeds, Number of points)), ...},
 #         "eval": {"bigfish": np.ndarray(shape=(Number of seeds, Number of points)), ...},
 #     },
 #     "daac": {
 #         "train": {"bigfish": np.ndarray(shape=(Number of seeds, Number of points)), ...},
 #         "eval": {"bigfish": np.ndarray(shape=(Number of seeds, Number of points)), ...},
 #     },
 #     ...
 # }
 curves = procgen.load_curves()
 print(curves['ppo']['train']['bigfish'].shape)
 print(curves['ppo']['eval']['bigfish'].shape)


Figure 14: rllte.hub.datasets provides test scores and learning cures of various RL algorithms
on different benchmarks.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 from rllte.hub.models import Procgen
 from rllte.env import make_procgen_env
 import torch as th
 import numpy as np

 if __name__ == "__main__":
     # env setup
     device = "cuda:0"
     env_id = "starpilot"
     seed = 1
     # download the model
     procgen = Procgen()
     agent = procgen.load_models(agent="ppo",
                                env_id=env_id,
                                seed=seed,
                                device=device)
     # create env
     env = make_procgen_env(env_id=env_id, device=device, num_envs=1, seed=seed)
     # evaluate the model
     obs, infos = env.reset(seed=seed)
     # run the model
     episode_rewards, episode_steps = list(), list()
     while len(episode_rewards) < 10:
         # the exported model outputs logits of the action distribution
         action = th.softmax(agent(obs), dim=1).argmax(dim=1)
         obs, rewards, terminateds, truncateds, infos = env.step(action)

        if "episode" in infos:
            indices = np.nonzero(infos["episode"]["l"])
            episode_rewards.extend(infos["episode"]["r"][indices].tolist())
            episode_steps.extend(infos["episode"]["l"][indices].tolist())

     print(f"mean episode reward: {np.mean(episode_rewards)}")
     print(f"mean episode length: {np.mean(episode_steps)}")

 # output:
 # mean episode reward: 30.0
 # mean episode length: 296.1


Figure 15: rllte.hub.models provides trained models of various RL algorithms on different
benchmarks.


                                                 22
