Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EASON FOR F UTURE , ACT FOR N OW: A P RINCIPLED
A RCHITECTURE FOR AUTONOMOUS LLM AGENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive reasoning abilities, but
         translating reasoning into actions in the real world remains challenging. In partic-
         ular, it is unclear how to complete a given task provably within a minimum number
         of interactions with the external environment, e.g., through an internal mechanism
         of reasoning. To this end, we propose the first framework with provable regret
         guarantees to orchestrate reasoning and acting, which we call “reason for future,
         act for now” (RAFA). Specifically, we design a prompt template for reasoning that
         learns from the memory buffer and plans a future trajectory over a long horizon
         (“reason for future”). At each step, the LLM agent takes the initial action of the
         planned trajectory (“act for now”), stores the collected feedback in the memory
         buffer, and reinvokes the reasoning routine to replan the future trajectory from the
         new state. The key idea is to cast reasoning in LLMs as learning and planning
         in Bayesian adaptive Markov decision processes (MDPs). Correspondingly, we
         prompt LLMs to form an updated posterior of the unknown environment from
         the memory buffer (learning) and generate an optimal trajectory for multiple fu-
         ture steps that maximizes a value function (planning). The learning and planning
         subroutines are performed in an “in-context” manner to emulate√      the actor-critic
         update for MDPs. Our theoretical analysis establishes a T regret, while our
         experimental validation demonstrates superior empirical performance.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable reasoning abilities, which open a new avenue for
agents to interact with the real world autonomously. However, turning reasoning into actions remains
challenging. Specifically, although LLMs are equipped with the prior knowledge obtained through
pretraining, it is stateless in nature and ungrounded in the real world, which makes the resulting
action suboptimal. To bridge the reasoning-acting gap, we aim to design an internal mechanism of
reasoning on top of LLMs, which optimizes actions iteratively by incorporating feedbacks from the
external environment. In particular, we focus on the sample efficiency of autonomous LLM agents
in interactive decision-making tasks, which plays a key role in their practical adoption, especially
when interactions are costly and risky. Our primary goal is to enable agents to complete a given
task in a guaranteed manner through reasoning within a minimum number of interactions with the
external environment.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a well-studied paradigm for improving actions by collecting feed-
backs. However, to tailor existing RL techniques for autonomous LLM agents, we lack a rigorous
mapping between RL and LLMs, which leads to various conceptual discrepancies. For example, RL
operates in a numerical system, where rewards and transitions are defined by scalars and probabili-
ties. In comparison, the inputs and outputs of LLMs are described by tokens in a linguistic system.
As another example, LLMs are trained on a general-purpose corpus and remain fixed throughout
the interactive process. In contrast, RL trains actors and critics on the collected feedback iteratively.
Thus, it appears inappropriate to treat LLMs as actors or critics under the RL framework, although
all of them are parameterized by deep neural networks. Moreover, it remains unclear what reasoning
with LLMs means under the RL framework, e.g., what are the inputs and outputs of a reasoning rou-
tine and how reasoning should be coordinated with acting. Such conceptual discrepancies prevent


                                                   1
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Agent
                                                                                                       Learning                  depth-3 tree-search                                 Planning
                                                                               :
                                                                 {         }                                                t        t+1        t+2             t+3       t+4                     Figure 1: Illustra-
   memory bu er                           V̂
                                     r̂                                                                                                                                                           tion of the RAFA
       s0, a0, s1, r0
                                P̂                                                                                                               ̂
                                                                                                                                                st+2                   breadth-2
             ⋯                                      prior                                  posterior                                                     at+2
   stk−1, atk−1, stk, rtk−1
                                                                        update
                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                                at
                                                                                                                                      ̂
                                                                                                                                     st+1
                                                                                                                                              at+1                    tree-search                 (“reason for fu-
                                                                                                                                                                 ̂
                                                                                                                                                                Vt+3                “reason
                                                                                                                                                                                    for future”   ture, act for now”)
   append
                                                                                                                                       st+1
                                                                                                                                                       discarded                                  framework.
                                          stk, atk, stk+1, rtk                                         “act for now”

                                                 ⋯
                  −                                                  rt ← r(st, at), st+1 ∼ P( ⋅ | st, at)   Environment
                                           st, at, st+1, rt


  us from establishing a principled framework beyond borrowing the “trial and error” concept from
  RL straightforwardly and make it difficult to achieve provable sample efficiency guarantees. For in-
  stance, it is known in RL that an improper design of agents may induce an exponential dependency
  on horizons in the sample complexity. Without the RL-LLM correspondence, it is hard to avoid the
  same flaw in autonomous LLM agents.
  To address such conceptual discrepancies, we formalize reasoning and acting with LLMs under a
  Bayesian adaptive Markov decision process (MDP) framework, where the latent variable of interest
𝙸𝚏is 𝚏𝚎𝚎𝚍𝚋𝚊𝚌𝚔𝚜
     the
𝚂𝚠𝚒𝚝𝚌𝚑
𝚈𝚘𝚞𝚛
𝚊𝚗𝚍
 𝚎𝚡𝚊𝚖𝚙𝚕𝚎𝚜unknown𝚊𝚛𝚎
      𝚊𝚝𝚝𝚎𝚖𝚙𝚝𝚎𝚍     environment. The starting point is to cast the full history of states (of the external
                    𝚊𝚗𝚜𝚠𝚎𝚛𝚜

  environment), ff actions, rewards, and their linguistic summaries in the memory buffer as the infor-


  mation state of Bayesian adaptive MDPs. Throughout the interactive process, the information state
  accumulates a growing collection of feedbacks from the external environment, which is mapped to
  an optimized action at each step by an internal mechanism of reasoning. As detailed below, we
  construct the reasoning routine through two key subroutines, namely learning and planning, which
  are instantiated by LLMs with specially designed prompts. (a) The learning subroutine forms an
  updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory buffer. Depending on whether we
  emulate the model-based or model-free approach of RL, the learning subroutine infers the transition
  and reward models (model) or/and the value function (critic). (b) The planning subroutine generates
  an optimal policy (actor) or trajectory for multiple future steps, which maximizes the value function
  (up to a certain error). Depending on the specific configuration of the state and action spaces (con-
  tinuous versus discrete) and the transition and reward models (stochastic versus deterministic), the
  planning subroutine emulates the value iteration algorithm, the random shooting algorithm, or the
  Monte-Carlo tree-search algorithm.
  Although LLMs remain fixed throughout the interactive process, they are prompted to utilize the
  growing collection of feedbacks from the external environment as contexts. Through the learning
  subroutine, the collected feedback reduces the posterior uncertainty in models or values, which
  allows the planning subroutine to obtain an improved policy at each step. In other words, we emulate
  the actor-model or actor-critic update for Bayesian adaptive MDPs in an in-context manner, where
  LLMs function as an internal mechanism that improves models, values, and policies iteratively.
  Specifically, existing RL methods use deep neural networks to parameterize models, values, and
  policies, which map states (of the external environment) and actions to scalars and probabilities.
  In comparison, we use LLMs to represent the learning and planning algorithms in RL, which are
  composed to map data in the memory buffer to actions. Here, data and actions are allowed to be
  tokens in a linguistic system.
  We conclude our contributions√in this paper from two perspectives. (a) Our theoretical analysis
  proves that RAFA achieves a T regret. In particular, the regret bound highlights an intriguing
  interplay between the prior knowledge obtained through pretraining and the uncertainty reduction
  achieved by reasoning and acting. (b) Our empirical validation shows that RAFA outperforms var-
  ious existing frameworks in interactive decision-making tasks, including ALFWorld, BlocksWorld,
  Game of 24, and a new benchmark based on Tic-Tac-Toe.
  1.1              L ITERATURE
  Due to the page limit, we defer the detailed discussion on large language model (LLM), in-context
  learning (ICL), and reinforcement learning (RL) under a Bayesian framework to Appendix A.
  Reasoning with LLM. We build on a recent line of work that develops various prompting schemes
  to improve the reasoning performance of LLMs. “Chain of thoughts” (“CoT”) [67] decomposes


                                                                                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a challenging problem into several reasoning stages and guides LLMs to solve them one by one.
As generalizations, “tree of thoughts” [73], “graph of thoughts” [74], “algorithm of thoughts” [50],
and “cumulative reasoning” [76] provide different graph-search schemes to guide LLMs. See also
[63, 16, 15]. Also, “reasoning via planning” (“RAP”) [23] emulates the Monte-Carlo tree-search
(MCTS) algorithm to reduce the search complexity. For embodied LLM agents, [25] propose to
decompose a complex task into multiple executable steps. Most of them focus on general reasoning
tasks, e.g., solving a mathematical or logic puzzle, where LLMs generate a detailed trace (trajectory)
of arguments through an internal mechanism to reach a final answer. Here, LLMs play the same
role as the planning subroutine in RAFA. In contrast, we focus on interactive decision-making tasks,
where autonomous LLM agents collect feedbacks from the external environment to optimize actions
iteratively. In particular, we aim to complete a given task within a minimum number of interactions
with the external environment. To this end, it is essential to operate three interleaved modules,
namely learning, planning, and acting, in a closed loop. While it is feasible to incorporate existing
graph-search or MCTS schemes as the planning subroutine for generating trajectories, our core
contribution is a principled framework that executes a selected subset of the planned trajectory to
collect feedbacks (“act for now”) and replans an improved trajectory from the new state by learning
from feedbacks (“reason for future”). From an RL perspective, existing graph-search or MCTS
schemes are analogous to an open-loop method, e.g., motion planning or trajectory optimization
[8], which does not involve interactions with the external environment. To integrate them into a
closed-loop approach, e.g., model predictive control [43], one has to specify how to act given the
planned trajectory and when to reinvoke the reasoning (learning and planning) routine, which is
the key technique of RAFA. Another recent line of work tackles more complex tasks by allowing
LLMs to access various additional modules, e.g., tools, programs, and other learning algorithms
[4, 51, 35, 34, 11], or by finetuning LLMs on the collected feedback [75, 31, 41]. Integrating them
with RAFA is left as a future direction of research.
Acting (and Reasoning) with LLM. We build on a recent line of work that develops various closed-
loop frameworks for interacting with the external environment. “Inner monologue” [26] and “Re-
Act” [72] combine reasoning and acting to refine each other for the first time. In comparison, RAFA
provides a specific schedule for orchestrating reasoning and acting (as discussed above). As gen-
eralizations, “Reflexion” [53] enables autonomous LLM agents to revise the current action of a
pregenerated trajectory by learning from feedbacks, especially when they make mistakes. See also
[28]. However, making a local revision to the pregenerated trajectory is myopic because it fails to
consider the long-term consequence of actions. Consequently, the obtained policy may get trapped
by a local optimum. From an RL perspective, “Reflexion” [53] is an oversimplified version of RAFA,
where the planning subroutine revises the current action to maximize the reward function (“reason
for now”) instead of planning multiple future steps to maximize the value function (“reason for fu-
ture”), which measures the expected cumulative future reward. To remedy this issue, “AdaPlanner”
[58] regenerates the whole trajectory at each step, which yields a global improvement. See also
[64]. However, the reasoning routine of “AdaPlanner” requires a handcrafted set of programs to
reject suboptimal candidate trajectories. Without the domain knowledge of a specific task, the re-
generated trajectory is not necessarily optimal, i.e., maximizing the value function (up to a certain
error). In contrast, the reasoning routine of RAFA is designed following the principled approach
in RL. In particular, the learning subroutine infers the transition and reward models (model) or/and
the value function (critic), while the planning subroutine emulates the value iteration algorithm, the
random shooting algorithm, or the MCTS algorithm, none of which use any domain knowledge. As
a result, RAFA achieves provable sample efficiency guarantees for the first time and outperforms
those existing frameworks empirically.

2   B RIDGING LLM AND RL
Interaction Protocol. We use Markov decision processes (MDPs) to model how autonomous
LLM agents interact with the external environment. We consider an infinite-horizon MDP M =
(S, A, P, r, ρ, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, P : S × A 7→ ∆(S) is the
transition kernel, r : S × A 7→ [0, 1] is the reward function, ρ is the initial distribution of states,


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. Here, P gives the probability distribution of the next state
given the current state and action, while r is assumed to be deterministic without loss of generality.
For notational simplicity, we parameterize P and r by a shared parameter θ⋆ ∈ Θ and denote them
as Pθ⋆ and rθ⋆ . At the t-th step, the LLM agent receives a state st ∈ S, takes an action at ∈ A
following the current policy πt : S 7→ A, and receives a reward rt = rθ⋆ (st , at ). Subsequently, the
external environment transits to the next state st+1 ∼ Pθ⋆ (·|st , at ), while the LLM agent computes
the updated policy πt+1 through an internal mechanism of reasoning (as discussed below). Note that
S and A are represented by tokens in a linguistic system. Here, π ∈ Π is assumed to be deterministic
without loss of generality, where Π is the feasible set of policies.
Value Function. For a policy π and a parameter θ of the transition and reward models, we define
the state-value and action-value functions
              hX∞                        i                  hX∞                                   i
    π                t                          π
  Vθ (s) = E       γ rθ (st , at ) s0 = s , Qθ (s, a) = E         γ t rθ (st , at ) s0 = s, a0 = a , (2.1)
               t=0                                            t=0
where E is taken with respect to at = π(st ) and st+1 ∼ Pθ (·|st , at ) for all t ≥ 0. In other words,
Vθπ (and Qπθ ) gives the expected cumulative future reward from the current state s (and action a). To
define the optimal policy πθ⋆ with respect to a given parameter θ, we define the Bellman optimality
equation as
                 Q⋆θ (s, a) = rθ (s, a) + γ (Pθ Vθ⋆ ) (s, a) , Vθ⋆ (s) = max Q⋆θ (s, a),         (2.2)
                                                                         a∈A
where Q⋆θ and Vθ⋆ are the fixed-point solutions Here, we define (Pθ Vθ⋆ )(s, a) = E[Vθ⋆ (s′ )], where E
is taken with respect to s′ ∼ Pθ (·|s, a). Let πθ⋆ (s) = arg maxa∈A Q⋆θ (s, a). We define PL⋆ : Θ 7→
Π as the planning oracle that maps θ to πθ⋆ . See [59] for the existence and uniqueness guarantees for
Q⋆θ , Vθ⋆ , and πθ⋆ .
Sample Efficiency. Let θ⋆ be the underlying parameter that generates states and rewards. As the
performance metric, we define the Bayesian regret
                                 −1
                               hTX                          i
                                        ⋆
                      R(T ) = E     Vθπ⋆ (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st ) , where π ⋆ = PL⋆ (θ⋆ ).             (2.3)
                                t=0
Here, E is taken with respect to the prior distribution p0 of θ⋆ , the stochastic outcome of st , and
the iterative update of πt , which involves states, actions, and rewards until the t-th step, i.e., the
full history Dt = {(si , ai , si+1 , ri )}t−1
                                          i=0 . We aim to design a sample-efficient agent that satisfies
R(T ) = o(T ), i.e., the Bayesian regret is sublinear in the total number of interactions T .
What Reasoning Means and Role of LLM. We formalize reasoning and acting with LLMs under a
Bayesian adaptive MDP framework [19], where the underlying parameter θ⋆ is the latent variable of
interest and the full history Dt (and its linguistic summary) is the information state. In particular, we
aim to design an internal mechanism on top of LLMs that maps Dt to an optimized action at or the
corresponding policy πt (reasoning), which is executed in the external environment (acting). To this
end, we construct the reasoning routine through two key subroutines, which emulate the learning and
planning algorithms in RL. Specifically, the learning subroutine maps Dt to the posterior distribution
pt of θ⋆ , while the planning subroutine maps pt or a sampled parameter θ ∼ pt to πt . In other words,
the learning subroutine forms an updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory
buffer, while the planning subroutine approximates the planning oracle PL⋆ . As shown in Section 3,
we invoke the ICL ability of LLMs to achieve the former goal (implicitly), while we design a prompt
template for LLMs to achieve the latter goal (explicitly). Following the principled approach in RL,
we develop a specific schedule for orchestrating reasoning (learning and planning) and acting, which
is proven as sample-efficient in Section 4.

3    A LGORITHM
Architecture of RAFA. By leveraging the LLM-RL correspondence in Section 2, we provide a
principled framework for orchestrating reasoning and acting, namely “reason for future, act for
now” (RAFA), in Algorithms 1 and 2. In Section 4, we present the RL counterpart of RAFA in
Algorithm 3 to illustrate the design rationale and establish the theoretical foundation. At the t-th
step of Algorithm 1, the LLM agent invokes the reasoning routine, which learns from the memory
buffer and plans a future trajectory over a long horizon (“reason for future” in Line 6), takes the


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Reason for future, act for now (RAFA): The LLM version.
 1: input: An LLM learner-planner LLM-LR-PL, which aims at generating an optimal trajectory given an
    initial state and returns the initial action (e.g., Algorithm 2), and a switching condition If-Switch.
 2: initialization: Sample the initial state s0 ∼ ρ, set t = 0, and initialize the memory buffer D0 = ∅.
 3: for k = 0, 1, . . . , do
 4:    Set tk ← t.
 5:    repeat
 6:        Learn and plan given memory Dtk to get action at ← LLM-LR-PL(Dtk , st ). (“reason for future”)
 7:        Execute action at to receive reward rt and state st+1 from environment.                 (“act for now”)
 8:        Update memory Dt+1 ← Dt ∪ {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}.
 9:        Set t ← t + 1.
10:    until If-Switch(Dt ) is True.                                           (the switching condition is satisfied)
11: end for


initial action of the planned trajectory (“act for now” in Line 7), and stores the collected feedback
(state, action, and reward) in the memory buffer (Line 8). Upon the state transition of the external
environment, the LLM agent reinvokes the reasoning routine to replan another future trajectory from
the new state (Line 6 following Line 9). To ensure the learning and planning stability, we impose
the switching condition (Line 10) to decide whether to incorporate the newest chunk of history, i.e.,
the set difference Dt − Dtk , into the information state, which is used in the reasoning routine as
contexts. In other words, the reasoning routine uses the same history Dtk for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 until
the (k + 1)-th switch at the (tk+1 − 1)-th step, which guarantees that the posterior distribution and
the optimized action or the corresponding policy are updated in a conservative manner. We specify
the switching condition in Sections 4 and 5.
“Reason for Future” (Line 6 in Algorithm 1 and Lines 3-11 in Algorithm 2). As detailed below,
the reasoning routine composes the learning and planning subroutines to map the full history Dtk
(until the tk -th step) to an optimized action at . Note that the reasoning routine does not interact with
the external environment throughout the learning and planning subroutines.
• The learning subroutine (Lines 3-4 in Algorithm 2) maps Dtk to a transition kernel (Model)
and a value function (Critic), which are used in the planning subroutine. Intuitively, we prompt
LLMs to form an updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory buffer. Here,
the updated posterior is instantiated by Model and Critic, which estimate their ground-truth
counterparts in association with the data-generating parameter. From an RL perspective (Sections 2
and 4), the learning subroutine maps Dtk to the posterior distribution pt of the underlying parameter
θ⋆ , which generates states and rewards, and returns the transition kernel Pθ and the value function
Vθπt , where θ ∼ pt is the sampled parameter and πt is the current policy. On the other hand, the ICL
ability of LLMs allows us to bypass the posterior update of pt , sampling θ from pt , and the explicit
parameterization of Pθ and Vθπt in RL. Instead, we represent Pθ and Vθπt using two LLM instances
with specially designed prompts, which instruct them to use Dtk as contexts to generate the next
state and evaluate a given trajectory or the corresponding policy. As Dtk accumulates a growing
collection of feedbacks from the external environment, it reduces the posterior uncertainty about the
unknown environment, which yields more accurate versions of Model and Critic. Consequently,
the planning subroutine is able to use them to assess the long-term outcome of actions with a higher
accuracy. Depending on whether we emulate the model-based or model-free approach of RL, we
may choose to emulate Model or Critic individually. For illustration, we consider a deterministic
setting of transitions and rewards with discrete state and action spaces, where we emulate both of
them in a tree-search example.
• The planning subroutine (Lines 5-11 in Algorithm 2) maps Model and Critic to a future tra-
jectory (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†U , a†U ), where s†0 is the current state st and a†0 is executed in the external envi-
ronment as the current action at during the acting phase. Intuitively, we prompt LLMs to generate
an optimal policy (actor) for multiple future steps, which maximizes the value function (Critic).
From an RL perspective (Sections 2 and 4), the planning subroutine approximates the planning or-
acle PL⋆ , which maps a given parameter θ to the optimal policy πθ⋆ or the corresponding action
at = πθ⋆ (st ). As two LLM instances from the learning subroutine, Model and Critic instanti-
ate the transition kernel Pθ and the value function Vθπt in association with the sampled parameter


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 The LLM learner-planner (LLM-LR-PL): A tree-search example. (the deterministic case)
 1: input: The memory buffer D, the initial state s, the search breadth B, and the search depth U .
 2: initialization: Initialize the state array S0 ← {s} and the action array A0 ← ∅.
    ———————————————— (the learning subroutine) ———————————–
 3: Set Model as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate the next state.
 4: Set Critic as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to estimate the value function.
    ———————————————— (the planning subroutine) ———————————–
 5: Set Elite as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate multiple candidate actions.
 6: for u = 0, . . . , U do
 7:    For each current state in Su , invoke Elite to generate B candidate actions and store them in Au .
 8:    For each candidate action in Au , invoke Model to generate the next state and store it in Su+1 .
 9: end for
10: For all resulting rollouts in S0 × A0 × · · · × SU × AU , invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cumulative
    future reward and select the best one (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†U , a†U ), where s†0 = s.
                                  †
11: output: The initial action a0 of the selected rollout.


θ ∼ pt (as discussed above). Hence, we are able to simulate a given number of trajectories with
Model, evaluate them with Critic, and obtain an improved policy, which is achieved by specially
designed prompts instead of a numerical algorithm. By maximizing the expected cumulative future
reward (instead of the immediate reward), the planning subroutine returns an optimized action that
improves the long-term outcome. In Section 4, we identify two error sources that affect the planning
subroutine, namely the posterior uncertainty, which is inherited from Model and Critic due to
the finite size of Dtk , and the planning suboptimality, which is induced by the limited capacity for
computation, e.g., the bounded width and depth of tree-search (Lines 6-9 in Algorithm 2). Depend-
ing on the specific configuration of the state and action spaces (continuous versus discrete) and the
transition and reward models (stochastic versus deterministic), we may choose to emulate the value
iteration algorithm, the random shooting algorithm, or the Monte-Carlo tree-search algorithm. All of
them allow RAFA to achieve provable sample efficiency guarantees as long as they satisfy a specific
requirement of optimality (Definition 4.2). For illustration, we emulate the tree-search algorithm
and defer its stochastic variant to Appendix B.
“Act for Now” (Lines 7-10 in Algorithm 1). At the current state st , the LLM agent executes
the optimized action at in the external environment, which is obtained from the reasoning routine.
Specifically, we take the initial action a†0 of the planned trajectory (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†U , a†U ), where s†0 =
st and a†0 = at , and discard the remaining subset. At the next state st+1 , the LLM agent replans
another future trajectory (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†U , a†U ) with s†0 = st+1 and a†0 = at+1 . In other words,
the acting phase follows a short-term subset of the long-term plan, which is regenerated at every
new state. The LLM agent stores the collected feedback (st , at , rt , st+1 ) in the memory buffer
Dt and queries a switching condition If-Switch to decide when to update the information state
Dtk ⊆ Dt , which is used in the reasoning routine as contexts for learning and planning. Intuitively,
we incorporate the newest chunk of history Dt − Dtk to improve the current policy only in the
case that it carries significant novel information, e.g., when the LLM agent loses for the first time
following a winning streak. In Section 4, we provide a principled implementation of the switching
condition, which measures the posterior uncertainty given Dt with entropy and compares it against
that given Dtk . From an RL perspective, the lazy update ensures the learning and planning stability
and plays a pivotal role in the regret analysis. In Section 5, we develop several practical variants that
achieve superior empirical performance.

4     T HEORY
We establish provable sample efficiency guarantees for RAFA (Algorithms 1 and 2) through its RL
counterpart (Algorithm 3 in Appendix B). In Line 6 of Algorithm 3, the reasoning routine forms an
updated posterior of the unknown environment (learning) and generates an optimized action from
an improved policy (planning), mirroring RAFA. Here, we emulate the model-based approach of RL
and cast RAFA as a Thompson sampling (TS) method. The following assumption and definition
formalize the learning and planning subroutines of RAFA (Lines 3-4 and 5-11 in Algorithm 2).



                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning. Let LLMD,g be an LLM instance with D as contexts and g as instructions to perform
a specific task. Specifically, g † prompts LLMs to predict the next state s′ and the received reward
r from the current state s and the current action a, i.e., LLMD,g† : S × A → S × [0, 1], where
the generated state is stochastic. We denote the Markov kernel in association with LLMD,g† as
PLLMD,g† (s′ , r|s, a). Also, we denote the posterior distribution of the transition and reward models
as Pmodel (Pθ , rθ |D).
Assumption 4.1 (LLMs Perform Implicit Bayesian Inference). The Markov kernel PLLMD,g† follows
the posterior distribution Pmodel (·|D).
Assumption 4.1 states that LLMs perform implicit Bayesian inference, which is verified both the-
oretically and empirically as the underlying mechanism of ICL [69, 77, 78, 62, 68, 27, 30]. In
particular, [69, 62] validate it in a general setting for generating texts, while [30] prove it in the imi-
tation setting of RL to develop a new framework for pretrained decision transformers. We consider
a related setting for predicting states and rewards that are described by texts. Here, the pretrain-
ing dataset is a general-purpose corpus covering a wide variety of D and g, whereas (Pθ , rθ ) or θ
is the latent concept of interest. In comparison, [30] consider the imitation setting for predicting
the optimal action without an explicit planner, where the pretraining dataset contains the numerical
trajectory labeled by experts. In Appendix D, we prove that Assumption 4.1 holds for a specific
parameterization of (Pθ , rθ ) under three regularity conditions, namely (a) LLMs are trained to repli-
cate the pretraining distribution, which is assumed in [48, 66, 69] to simplify the statistical analysis,
(b) the pretraining dataset is generated through a Bayesian mechanism with a latent concept, which
is a simplified version of the latent variable model in [69] and resembles that in [62], and (c) LLMs
are able to parameterize an implicit Bayesian inference mechanism, which is proved in [77, 78] for
the attention architecture. Note that, if Assumption 4.1 holds approximately, the regret analysis can
be relaxed to accommodate the additional error in the posterior distribution.
Planning. Assumption 4.1 allows us to bridge RAFA and TS. In the learning subroutine of RAFA,
we emulate Pθ with Model (Line 3 in Algorithm 2) and Vθπ with Critic (Line 4 in Algorithm
2), which is determined by Pθ , rθ , and π. At the t-th step, θ is sampled from pt , i.e., the updated
posterior given the full history Dtk (until the tk -th step). To formalize the planning subroutine of
RAFA, we define the planning suboptimality. Recall that Θ is the parameter space, Π is the policy
space, and PL⋆ is the planning oracle, which is defined in Section 2.
Definition 4.2 (ϵ-Optimality of Planner). A planning algorithm PLϵ : Θ 7→ Π is an ϵ-optimal
                     PL⋆ (θ)         PLϵ (θ)
planner if maxs∈S [Vθ        (s) − Vθ        (s)] ≤ ϵ for all θ ∈ Θ.
As a special case of Definition 4.2, we present the value iteration algorithm in Appendix F, where
we use a truncated horizon U , i.e., a finite length of the lookahead window. Here, ϵ decreases as U
increases. See a detailed discussion in Appendix C.1.
Switching. We consider an implementation of the switching condition (Line 10 in Algorithms 1 and
3). Let H(p) be the differential entropy of p. WeZ define the posterior entropy given Dt as
                               Ht = H(pt ) = −          pt (θ) · log pt (θ)dθ.                       (4.1)
                                                    Θ
As long as Htk − Ht > log 2, i.e., the memory buffer accumulates one extra bit of information,
we incorporate Dt − Dtk into the information state and use it to improve the current policy. The
switching condition ensures that πt is switched for a logarithmic number of times, which is a key
step in establishing the sublinear regret. Intuitively, the lazy update of policies ensures the learning
and planning stability. On the other hand, calculating the posterior entropy is challenging in practice.
In Section 5, we develop several practical variants that achieve superior empirical performance.
Regret. We define the information ratio to characterize the tail behavior of the posterior distribution
                                                                                                    −1
[1, 40, 46, 45, 47, 36]. Let δ ∈ (0, 1) be the confidence level, DT = {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}Tt=0      be
                                                                    T −1
an arbitrary dataset collected in the underlying MDP, and {Vt }t=0 be a value function sequence
                       −1
adapted to {σ(Dt )}Tt=0   , where σ(Dt ) is the sigma-algebra of Dt ⊆ DT . We define the information
gain as I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ) = Ht − Ht+1 . Here, ξt+1 denotes (st , at , st+1 , rt ) and Ht is defined in (4.1),
where pt is the posterior distribution given Dt .


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Reasoning                           2*5=10                                            8/6=1.33
                                                      2*5                                  8/6                                                                     Impossible
                                                                         (left: 8 10 11)                                    (left: 2 1.33)

                    Input: 2 5 8 11
                                         Elite LLM
                                                      11-5
                                                             Model LLM      11-5=6
                                                                                           2*2
                                                                                                                                2*2=4                Critic LLM
                                                                                                                                                                        Likely
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 2: RAFA for
                                                                         (left: 2 6 8)                                       (left: 4 6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Game of 24. Actions
 Acting             Acting                                                   2+5=7                                              8-2=6
      4-6=24
                              11-5
                                                      2+5
                                                                         (left: 7 8 11)
                                                                                           8-2
                                                                                                                             (left: 6 6)
                                                                                                                                                                   Impossible
                                                                                                                                                                                                         are proposed (dotted)
    (left: 24)
          Env                Env
                                                                                                                                                                                                         and selected (green).
            4*6         11-5=6
                     (left: 2 6 8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hallucinations that the
                                         Reasoning                          8/6=1.33                                               6/4=2

       8/2=4
                                                      8/6
                                                                         (left: 2 1.33)
                                                                                           6-4
                                                                                                                                 (left: 2)
                                                                                                                                                                   Impossible
                                                                                                                                                                                                         same number can be
                               2*2
    (left: 4 6)
          Env                Env
                                                      8/2
                                                                              8/2=4
                                                                           (left: 4 6)
                                                                                           4*6
                                                                                                                                4*6=24
                                                                                                                              (left: 24)
                                                                                                                                                                        Likely                           reused are mitigated
            8/2
                        11-5=6
                     (left: 2 6 8)                                            8-6=2                                             4+6=10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         through interactions.
                                                      8-6                                  4+6                                                                     Impossible
                                                                           (left: 2 2)                                        (left: 10)
                                      I repeatedly
                                     used 2. 2*2=4:
                                       Impossible


Definition 4.3 (Information Ratio). The information ratio Γt† (δ) is the smallest number for which,
if Ht† − Ht ≤ log 2, then it holds for all t ∈ {t† , . . . , T − 1} with probability
                                                                             p       at least 1 − δ that

           (rθ⋆ − rθt† )(st , at ) + (Pθ⋆ − Pθt† )Vt (st , at ) ≤ Γt† (δ) · I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ),          (4.2)
where θ⋆ is the data-generating parameter and θt† ∼ pt† is a sampled parameter.
Definition 4.3 quantifies the estimation error of the sampled parameter θt† in terms of approximating
the data-generating parameter θ⋆ . To achieve this, we use the information gain I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ) as
a benchmarking quantity. Intuitively, the information ratio Γt† (δ) characterizes how exploration
reduces uncertainty. See a detailed discussion in Appendix C.2.
We characterize the Bayesian regret of Algorithm 1 by connecting it to Algorithm 3. Recall that the
Bayesian regret is defined in (2.3) and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.

Theorem 4.4  (Bayesian Regret). Under √ Assumption 4.1, the Bayesian regret of RAFA satisfies
             γ · supt† <T Γt† (δ) · E[ H0 − HT ] √             γδ                    γ · E[H0 − HT ]
R(T ) = O                                           · T+              ·T +ϵ·T +                       .
                             1−γ                            (1 − γ)2                     (1 − γ)2
                                                                     √
We provide the proof in Appendix E. Theorem 4.4 establishes the T regret of RAFA (Algorithms
1 and√3) for a proper choice√ of the confidence level δ and the planning suboptimality ϵ, e.g., δ =
O(1/ T ) and ϵ = O(1/ T ). Here, the first term in the upper bound in Theorem 4.4 is the
leading term and involves several multiplicative factors, namely the effective horizon 1/(1 − γ),
the information ratio Γt† (δ), and the information gain H0 − HT throughout the T steps, which are
common in the RL literature [1, 40, 46, 45, 47, 36]. In particular, H0 highlights the prior knowledge
obtained through pretraining, as H0 quantifies the prior uncertainty of LLMs before incorporating
any collected feedback. Hence, H0 −HT highlights the uncertainty reduction achieved by reasoning
and acting, as HT quantifies the posterior uncertainty of LLMs after incorporating the collected
                    √ F, we prove that H0 − HT = O(d · log T ) for linear kernel MDPs, which
feedback. In Appendix
implies R(T ) = O( T ). Here O
                  e               e hides the logarithmic factor.

5           E XPERIMENT
We evaluate RAFA in several text-based benchmarks, e.g., Game of 24, ALFWorld, BlocksWorld,
and Tic-Tac-Toe. The detailed setups, results, and ablations are provided in Appendix G, while the
detailed prompts are found in Appendix H.
                                                                                                                                    Game of 24, gpt-4                                                            Game of 24, gpt-3.5-turbo
                                                                                                                  100                                                                           50

5.1             G AME OF 24                                                                                        80                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RAFA(b = 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RAFA(b = 2)
                                                                                                                                                                             Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                   RAFA(b = 1)                                             Reflexion
                                                                                               Success Rate (%)


Game of 24 [73] is a mathematical puzzle to ob-                                                                    60                              RAFA(b = 2)
                                                                                                                                                   Reflexion
                                                                                                                                                                                                30         ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
tain 24 from four natural numbers through basic                                                                    40                              ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
                                                                                                                                                   ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
                                                                                                                                                                                                20


arithmetic operations. The state is the (possibly                                                                  20                                                                           10



unfinished) current formula and the action is the                                                                   0   3    6        9
                                                                                                                                          Step
                                                                                                                                              12         15        18                            0   3       6         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Step
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12      15    18


next formula (or the modified part).                   Figure 3: Sample efficiency on Game of 24.
Setup. We emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B ∈ {1, 2}). At the t-th step, RAFA learns
from the memory buffer and switches to a new policy upon receiving an unexpected reward, which
is the switching condition. After the t-th step, RAFA digests the collected feedback and generates a
linguistic summary, which is saved into the memory buffer to avoid similar previous mistakes.
Result. RAFA attains SOTA performances as shown in Table 1. RAFA achieves superior sample
efficiency by mitigating hallucinations and avoid careless trials (Figures 2 and 3).


                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  gpt-4 gpt-3.5                                                                              Pick                               Clean                  Heat          Cool                                   Exam                 Pick2                 Total
     RAFA (B = 1)                                   89%                   29%                                BUTLER     46.00 39.00                                                                    74.00 100.00 22.00 24.00                                                                        37.00
     RAFA (B = 2)                                   93%                   46%                                ReAct      66.67 41.94                                                                    91.03 80.95 55.56 35.29                                                                         61.94
     ToT (B = 1)                                    73%                   10%                                AdaPlanner 100.00 96.77                                                                   95.65 100.00 100.00 47.06                                                                       91.79
     ToT (B = 2)                                    81%                   17%                                Reflexion 100.00 90.32                                                                    82.61 90.48 100.00 94.12                                                                        92.54
     Reflexion                                      21%                   16%                                RAFA       100.00 96.77                                                                   100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00                                                                     99.25
                         Table 1: Game of 24 results.                                                                                     Table 2: ALFWorld results (success rates %).
5.2                          ALFW ORLD
ALFWorld [54] is an interactive environment for embodied agent simulations, which encompasses
134 household tasks in six overall categories (Table 2). We use gpt-3 (text-davinci-003).
Setup. We emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B = 2). RAFA invokes Critic to evaluate
the completed portion of the desired goal and switches to a new policy after 20 consecutive failures.
Result. RAFA outperforms various existing frameworks (right figure).                                                                                                                                                                                               ALFWorld, gpt-3 for RAFA

The better performance of AdaPlanner at the initial episode is at-                                                                                                                                                                                96


tributed to a handcrafted set of programs for rejecting suboptimal can-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  88


didate trajectories, which is challenging to construct without the domain                     RAFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80


knowledge of a specific task. One such example is the PickTwo category.                       Reflexion
                                                                                              AdaPlanner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  72


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  64                                          ReAct
5.3                          B LOCKSWORLD                                                                                                                                                                                                               0     2            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Episode
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6         8     10



BlocksWorld [23] is a rearrangement puzzle. For the RAFA algorithm, we use the Vicuna [79]
model and emulate the MCTS algorithm to plan (see Figure 16 in Appendix). RAFA achieves su-
perior success rates across multiple Vicuna versions (Figure 4). Comparisons with CoT and RAP
demonstrate how the learning subroutine improves the planning optimality.
                              BlocksWorld (4-step), Vicuna-13B                                         BlocksWorld (4-step), Vicuna-33B                                           BlocksWorld (6-step), Vicuna-13B                                                BlocksWorld (6-step), Vicuna-33B
                   100                                                                       100                                                                     100                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                               RAFA                                                                         RAFA
                    80                                                                        80                                                                      80       CoT(gpt-4)                                                          80       CoT(gpt-4)
                                                                                                                                                                               RAP(trial=10)                                                                CoT(LLaMA-33B)
Success Rate (%)


                                                                          Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                  Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Success Rate (%)
                    60                                                                        60                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                               RAP(trial=20)                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                               CoT(LLaMA-33B)
                                                                                                                                RAFA
                    40                                                                        40                                                                      40                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                CoT(gpt-4)
                                                         RAFA                                                                   CoT(LLaMA-33B)
                    20                                   RAP(trial=10)                        20                                RAP(trial=10)                         20                                                                           20
                                                         RAP(trial=20)                                                          RAP(trial=20)
                     0                                                                         0                                                                       0                                                                            0
                         0     15           30            45         60                            0    15           30            45        60                            0       15           30            45     60                                 0          15            30           45         60
                                           Step                                                                     Step                                                                        Step                                                                             Step


Figure 4: Sample efficiency on BlocksWorld (4 and 6 are the minimum numbers of steps for solving a specific
task). CoT is prompted by four in-context examples.
5.4                          T IC -TAC -T OE
Tic-Tac-Toe [7] is a competitive game where the X and O sides take turns to place marks. RAFA
invokes Model to simulate the transition and opponent dynamics (see Figure 17 in Appendix).
Setup. We use gpt-4 and emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B ∈ {3, 4}). RAFA switches
to a new policy when (a) the predicted state differs from the observed one, (2) the predicted action
of opponents differs from the observed one, or (3) Critic gives the wrong prediction of the game
status. Here, X has an asymmetric advantage (winning surely if played properly).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tic-Tac-Toe (Player O), gpt-4
Result. RAFA (playing O) matches                  X       gpt-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.9
                                         O                                       RAFA(B = 3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
and beats gpt-4 for T = 5 and T =                                                RAFA(B = 4)

                                         gpt-4            90%, 0%, 10%                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
7 (Table 3), although O is destined to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Score


                                         RAFA(T = 1)      90%, 0%, 10%                                                                                                                                                                        0.0

lose. The ablation study (B = 3 ver-     RAFA(T = 5)      50%, 0%, 50%                                                                                                                                                            −0.3


sus B = 4) illustrates how the plan-     RAFA(T = 7)      0%, 0%, 100%                                                                                                                                                            −0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −0.9 0
ning suboptimality affects the sample Table 3: Tic-Tac-Toe Results. We                                                                                                                                                                                        2            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Episode
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6     8        10



efficiency (Figure 5).                                                   Figure 5: Sample effi-
                                       set B = 4 and report the winning                                                                                          ciency on Tic-Tac-Toe (0
                                                                                                                           rate of X, the tie rate, and the win- means tie).
                                                                                                                           ning rate of O.
6                            C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we establish the LLM-RL correspondence and propose a principled framework RAFA
for orchestrating reasoning and acting, which achieves provable sample efficiency guarantees in
autonomous LLM agents for the first time. RAFA’s outstanding empirical performance underscores
its potential for autonomous and adaptive decision-making in various complex environments, which
we remain for future work.


                                                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
 [1] Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori and Csaba Szepesvári. Bayesian optimal control of smoothly parame-
     terized systems. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2015.

 [2] Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear
     stochastic bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2011.

 [3] Jacob Abernethy, Alekh Agarwal, Teodor V Marinov, and Manfred K Warmuth. A mech-
     anism for sample-efficient in-context learning for sparse retrieval tasks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2305.17040, 2023.

 [4] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David,
     Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as I can, not
     as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.

 [5] Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What
     learning algorithm is in-context learning? Investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2211.15661, 2022.

 [6] Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based rein-
     forcement learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2020.

 [7] József Beck. Combinatorial games: Tic-Tac-Toe theory. 2008.

 [8] John T Betts. Survey of numerical methods for trajectory optimization. Journal of Guidance,
     Control, and Dynamics, 1998.

 [9] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
     wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language mod-
     els are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901,
     2020.

[10] Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy
     optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

[11] Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models
     as tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.

[12] Yuanzhou Chen, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. On the sample complexity of learning infinite-
     horizon discounted linear kernel MDPs. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
     2022.

[13] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
     Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. PaLM:
     Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

[14] Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforce-
     ment learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 31, 2018.

[15] Antonia Creswell and Murray Shanahan. Faithful reasoning using large language models.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14271, 2022.

[16] Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large
     language models for interpretable logical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09712, 2022.

[17] Kefan Dong, Yuanhao Wang, Xiaoyu Chen, and Liwei Wang. Q-learning with UCB explo-
     ration is sample efficient for infinite-horizon MDP. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09311, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[18] Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers
     learn in-context? A case study of simple function classes. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2022.

[19] Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Shie Mannor, Joelle Pineau, Aviv Tamar, et al. Bayesian reinforce-
     ment learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 8(5-6):359–483,
     2015.

[20] Malay Ghosh. Exponential tail bounds for chisquared random variables. Journal of Statistical
     Theory and Practice, 15(2):35, 2021.

[21] Nate Gruver, Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Large language models are
     zero-shot time series forecasters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07820, 2023.

[22] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and
     James Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International confer-
     ence on machine learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.

[23] Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhit-
     ing Hu. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2305.14992, 2023.

[24] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
     Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
     Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

[25] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
     zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

[26] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng,
     Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied
     reasoning through planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.

[27] Hui Jiang. A latent space theory for emergent abilities in large language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2304.09960, 2023.

[28] Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer
     tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.

[29] Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-
     context learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.

[30] Jonathan N Lee, Annie Xie, Aldo Pacchiano, Yash Chandak, Chelsea Finn, Ofir Nachum, and
     Emma Brunskill. Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2306.14892, 2023.

[31] Belinda Z Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Language modeling with latent situations.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10012, 2022.

[32] Yingcong Li, M Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as
     algorithms: Generalization and implicit model selection in in-context learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2301.07067, 2023.

[33] Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Ya-
     sunaga, Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation
     of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[34] Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter
     Stone. LLM+P: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.11477, 2023.
[35] Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun
     Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large lan-
     guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
[36] Xiuyuan Lu and Benjamin Van Roy. Information-theoretic confidence bounds for reinforce-
     ment learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
[37] Krikamol Muandet, Kenji Fukumizu, Bharath Sriperumbudur, Bernhard Schölkopf, et al. Ker-
     nel mean embedding of distributions: A review and beyond. Foundations and Trends® in
     Machine Learning, 10(1-2):1–141, 2017.
[38] Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom
     Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning
     and induction heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
[39] OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2023.
[40] Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (More) efficient reinforcement learning via
     posterior sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013.
[41] Debjit Paul, Mete Ismayilzada, Maxime Peyrard, Beatriz Borges, Antoine Bosselut, Robert
     West, and Boi Faltings. REFINER: Reasoning feedback on intermediate representations. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.01904, 2023.
[42] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
     Language models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.
[43] James B Rawlings. Tutorial overview of model predictive control. IEEE Control Systems
     Magazine, 2000.
[44] Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining
     term frequencies on few-shot reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07206, 2022.
[45] Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathe-
     matics of Operations Research, 2014.
[46] Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via information-directed sampling.
     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014.
[47] Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis of Thompson sam-
     pling. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
[48] Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why
     language models help solve downstream tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03648, 2020.
[49] Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak
     Pathak. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on
     Machine Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
[50] Bilgehan Sel, Ahmad Al-Tawaha, Vanshaj Khattar, Lu Wang, Ruoxi Jia, and Ming Jin. Algo-
     rithm of thoughts: Enhancing exploration of ideas in large language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2308.10379, 2023.
[51] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
     HuggingGPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in HuggingFace. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[52] Seongjin Shin, Sang-Woo Lee, Hwijeen Ahn, Sungdong Kim, HyoungSeok Kim, Boseop
     Kim, Kyunghyun Cho, Gichang Lee, Woomyoung Park, Jung-Woo Ha, et al. On the effect
     of pretraining corpora on in-context learning by a large-scale language model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2204.13509, 2022.

[53] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.

[54] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and
     Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020.

[55] Le Song, Kenji Fukumizu, and Arthur Gretton. Kernel embeddings of conditional distributions:
     A unified kernel framework for nonparametric inference in graphical models. IEEE Signal
     Processing Magazine, 30(4):98–111, 2013.

[56] Malcolm Strens. A Bayesian framework for reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
     ence on Machine Learning, 2000.

[57] Hao Sun. Reinforcement learning in the era of llms: What is essential? what is needed? an rl
     perspective on rlhf, prompting, and beyond, 2023.

[58] Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang. AdaPlanner: Adaptive
     planning from feedback with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16653, 2023.

[59] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 2018.

[60] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Tim-
     othée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. LLaMa:
     Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

[61] Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander
     Mordvintsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by
     gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

[62] Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, and William Yang Wang. Large language models are implic-
     itly topic models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2301.11916, 2023.

[63] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
     Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in lan-
     guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.

[64] Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
     select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023.

[65] Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, Hiteshi Sharma, and Rahul Jain. Model-
     free reinforcement learning in infinite-horizon average-reward Markov decision processes. In
     International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

[66] Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in
     downstream tasks? An analysis of head and prompt tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09226,
     2021.

[67] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[68] Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. The learnability of in-context learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2303.07895, 2023.

[69] Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-
     context learning as implicit Bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.

[70] Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Sample-optimal parametric q-learning using linearly additive
     features. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

[71] Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels,
     and regret bound. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

[72] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.

[73] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.

[74] Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought
     reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582, 2023.

[75] Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. STaR: Bootstrapping reasoning
     with reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

[76] Yifan Zhang, Jingqin Yang, Yang Yuan, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Cumulative reasoning
     with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04371, 2023.

[77] Yufeng Zhang, Boyi Liu, Qi Cai, Lingxiao Wang, and Zhaoran Wang. An analysis of attention
     via the lens of exchangeability and latent variable models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14852,
     2022.

[78] Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. What and how does in-
     context learning learn? Bayesian model averaging, parameterization, and generalization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2305.19420, 2023.

[79] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao
     Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with
     MT-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.

[80] Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvári. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement
     learning for linear mixture Markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory,
     2021.

[81] Dongruo Zhou, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning for
     discounted MDPs with feature mapping. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
     2021.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                    1
    1.1 Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2

2   Bridging LLM and RL                                                                             3

3   Algorithm                                                                                      4

4   Theory                                                                                         6

5   Experiment                                                                                      8
    5.1 Game of 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
    5.2 ALFWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      9
    5.3 Blocksworld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9
    5.4 Tic-Tac-Toe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

6   Conclusions                                                                                     9

A More Literature                                                                                  16

B More Algorithms                                                                                  17
  B.1 Proof of Proposition B.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

C Discussion on Definitions                                                                        21
  C.1 Discussion on Definition 4.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  C.2 Discussion on Definition 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21

D LLM Samples Posterior                                                                            22

E Proof of Theorem 4.4                                                                             27

F Linear Special Case                                                                              31
  F.1 Proof of Proposition F.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35

G More Experiments                                                                                 38
  G.1 Game of 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       38
  G.2 ALFWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       40
  G.3 BlocksWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        41
  G.4 Tic-Tac-Toe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41

H Prompts                                                                                          43
  H.1 Game of 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       43
  H.2 ALFWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       47
  H.3 Blocksworld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54
  H.4 Tic-Tac-Toe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      62


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX A         M ORE L ITERATURE
Large Language Model (LLM) and In-Context Learning (ICL). LLMs [42, 9, 24, 13, 39, 60]
display notable reasoning abilities. A pivotal aspect of reasoning is the ICL ability [33, 44, 52,
38, 5, 29, 18, 61, 32, 3], which allows LLMs to solve a broad range of tasks with only a few in-
context examples instead of finetuning parameters on a specific dataset. We focus on harnessing
the ICL ability of LLMs to optimize actions in the real world, which is crucial to autonomous
LLM agents. In particular, we build on a recent line of work [69, 77, 78, 62, 68, 27, 30, 57] that
attributes the ICL ability to implicit Bayesian inference, i.e., an implicit mechanism that enables
LLMs to infer a latent concept from those in-context examples, which is verified both theoretically
and empirically. In RAFA, the latent concept is the transition and reward models (model) of the
unknown environment or/and the value function (critic), which is inferred from the memory buffer
in the learning subroutine.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) under a Bayesian Framework. We build on a recent line of work
on the infinite-horizon [1, 17, 65, 80, 81, 12, 14, 22, 49] and Bayesian [56, 40, 46, 45, 47, 36]
settings of RL. The infinite-horizon setting allows RAFA to interact with the external environment
continuously without resetting to an initial state, while the Bayesian setting allows RAFA to invoke
the ICL ability of LLMs to form an updated posterior of the unknown environment. RL operates
in a numerical system, where rewards and transitions are defined by scalars and probabilities, and
trains actors and critics on the collected feedback iteratively. We focus on emulating the actor-
model or actor-critic update in RL through an internal mechanism of reasoning on top of LLMs,
which allows data and actions to be tokens in a linguistic system while bypassing the explicit update
of parameters in model-based RL [14, 22, 49]. In particular, the learning and planning subroutines
of RAFA emulate the posterior update and various planning algorithms in RL. Moreover, RAFA
orchestrates reasoning (learning and planning) and acting following the principled approach in RL,
i.e., (re)planning a future trajectory over a long horizon (“reason for future”) at the new state and
taking the initial action of the planned trajectory (“act for now”). As a result, RAFA inherits provable
sample efficiency guarantees from RL.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX B              M ORE A LGORITHMS
We present the RL counterpart of RAFA in Section 4 in the following algorithm.



Algorithm 3 Reason for future, act for now (RAFA): The RL counterpart.
 1: input: An ϵ-optimal planner PLϵ , which returns an ϵ-optimal policy that maximizes the value function up
    to an ϵ accuracy (Definition 4.2), and the prior distribution p0 of the parameter θ.
 2: initialization: Sample the initial state s0 ∼ ρ, set t = 0, and initialize the memory buffer D0 = ∅.
 3: for k = 0, 1, . . . , do
 4:    Set tk ← t.
 5:    repeat
 6:       Update posterior ptk given memory Dtk , sample parameter θt ∼ ptk ,
          obtain policy πt ← PLϵ (θt ), and sample action at ← πt (st ).                   (“reason for future”)
 7:       Execute action at to receive reward rt and state st+1 from environment.                (“act for now”)
 8:       Update memory Dt+1 ← Dt ∪ {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}.
 9:       Set t ← t + 1.
10:    until Htk − Ht > log 2. (the switching condition is satisfied, where Htk and Ht are defined in (4.1))
11: end for


Depending on the specific configuration of the state and action spaces (continuous versus discrete)
and the transition and reward models (stochastic versus deterministic), we may choose to emulate the
tree-search algorithm, the value iteration algorithm, the random shooting algorithm, or the MCTS
algorithm. All of them allow RAFA to achieve provable sample efficiency guarantees as long as they
satisfy a specific requirement of optimality (Definition 4.2). For illustration, we emulate the beam-
search algorithm (an advanced version of the tree-search algorithm) in Algorithm 4 and the MCTS
algorithm in Algorithm 5. For the theoretical discussion, we present the value iteration algorithm in
Algorithm 6.



Algorithm 4 The LLM learner-planner (LLM-LR-PL): A beam-search example (for the determin-
istic case).
 1: input: The memory buffer D, the initial state s, the proposal width L, the search breadth B, and the search
    depth U .
 2: initialization: Initialize the state array S0 ← {s} and the action array A0 ← ∅.
    ———————————————— (the learning subroutine) ———————————–
 3: Set Model as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate the next state.
 4: Set Critic as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to estimate the value function.
    ———————————————— (the planning subroutine) ———————————–
 5: Set Elite as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate multiple candidate actions.
 6: for u = 0, . . . , U do
 7:    For each current state su in Su , invoke Elite to generate L candidate actions.
                                      (ℓ)                                                (ℓ)
 8:    For each candidate action au , invoke Model to generate the next state su+1 and the received reward
         (ℓ)
       ru .
                                          (ℓ) (ℓ)     (ℓ)
 9:    For each resulting tuple (su , au , su+1 , ru ), invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cumulative fu-
                             (ℓ)       (ℓ)
                      b u , au ) ← ru + γ Vb (s     (ℓ)
       ture reward Q(s                              u+1 ), where V is given by Critic.
                                                                   b
                                     (ℓ) (ℓ)                              b u , a(ℓ)
10:    Select B best tuples (su , au , su+1 ) with the highest value Q(s           u ) and write them to Su × Au ×
       Su+1 .
11: end for
12: For B preserved rollouts in S0 ×A0 ×· · ·×SU ×AU ×SU +1 , invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cu-
                                       u (b)
                                                       V (sU +1 ) and select the best one (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†U , a†U , s†U +1 ),
                                                           (b)
    mulative future reward U                      U +1 b
                             P
                                 u=0 γ ru + γ
                                             †
    where Vb is given by Critic and s0 = s.
13: output: The initial action a†0 of the selected rollout.



                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 5 LLM learner-planner (LLM-PL) for RAFA: A Monte-Carlo tree-search example (for
the stochastic case).
 1: input: The memory buffer D, the initial state s, the proposal width L, L′ , and the expansion budget E.
 2: initialization: Initialize the root node n ← s and the child function c(·) ← ∅.
    ———————————————— (the learning subroutine) ———————————–
 3: Set Model as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate the next state.
 4: Set Critic as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to estimate the value function.
    ———————————————— (the planning subroutine) ———————————–
 5: Set Elite as an LLM instance prompted to use D as contexts to generate multiple candidate actions.
 6: for e = 0, . . . , E do
 7:    Set se ← n.
 8:    while se is not a leaf node, i.e., c(se ) ̸= ∅, do
 9:       Invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cumulative future reward and select the child node ae in
          c(se ) with the highest value Q(s   b e , ae ).
10:        Set se as a child node in c(ae ).
11:    end while
12:    For the current state se , invoke Elite to generate L candidate actions.
                                            (ℓ)                            (ℓ)
13:    Write each candidate action ae to c(se ), i.e., c(se ) ← {ae }L           ℓ=1 .
                                         (ℓ)
14:    For each candidate action ae , invoke Model to sample L′ next states.
                                 (ℓ,ℓ′ )          (ℓ)         (ℓ)       (ℓ,ℓ′ ) L′
15:    Write each next state se           to c(ae ), i.e., c(ae ) ← {se         }ℓ′ =1 .
                                           ′
                                     (ℓ,ℓ )
16:    For each generated state se           , invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cumulative future reward and
       update the estimated value Vb for all ancestor nodes.                                             (Optional)
17: end for
18: Set s†0 ← n and i ← 0.
19: while s†i is not a leaf node, i.e., c(s†i ) ̸= ∅, do
20:    Invoke Critic to evaluate the expected cumulative future reward and select the child node a†i+1 in
       c(s†i ) with the highest value Q(s  b † , a† ).
                                                i   i
21:    Set si+1 as a child node in c(a†i ) and i ← i + 1.
              †

22: end while
23: output: The initial action a†0 of the selected rollout (s†0 , a†0 , . . . , s†i , a†i ).


We also present the value iteration algorithm (Algorithm 6) with a truncated horizon U , i.e., a finite
length of the lookahead window as the ϵ-optimal planner in Algorithm 3. The following proposition
ensures that Algorithm 6 satisfies Definition 4.2.

Proposition B.1. Algorithm 6 is an ϵ-optimal planner as long as we set U ≥ ⌈log((2L/(ϵ(1 −
γ))))/ log(1/γ)⌉ + 1 and any value function is upper bounded by L ≥ 0.


Proof. See Appendix B.1 for a detailed proof.



Algorithm 6 ϵ-Optimal planner: The value iteration algorithm with a truncated horizon.
 1: input: The model parameter θ and the truncated horizon U .
                                             (U )
 2: initialization: Set the value function Vθ (·) ← 0.
 3: for u = U − 1, . . . , 1 do
                                (u)                (u)          (u)                         (u+1)
 4:    Set the value function Vθ (·) ← maxa∈A Qθ (·, a), where Qθ (·, ·) ← rθ (·, ·)+γ(Pθ Vθ      )(·, ·).
 5: end for
                                                      (1)
 6: output: The greedy policy π(·) = arg maxa∈A Qθ (·, a).



B.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION B.1

Proof of Proposition B.1. We prove that Algorithm 6 satisfies Definition 4.2, where U is dependent
on ϵ. Let πθ (θ) be the output policy of Algorithm 6 for the given θ. For notational simplicity, we


                                                        18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


denote maxs∈S and maxa∈A as maxs and maxa . Then we have

                          PL⋆ (θ)                        PL⋆ (θ)            (1)
                                  (s) − Vθπθ (s) ≤ max Vθ

                     max Vθ                                      (s) − max Qθ (s, a)
                      s                              s                  a
                                                   |                {z              }
                                                                                        term (A)
                                                                              (1)
                                                                   + max max Qθ (s, a) − Vθπθ (s) ,

                                                                                                                       (B.1)
                                                                       s   a
                                                                     |           {z              }
                                                                                             term (B)


            (1)
where Qθ is defined in Algorithm 6.

Analysis of Term (A). For any 1 ≤ u < U and s ∈ S, we have

         PL⋆ (θ)                  (u)                       PL⋆ (θ)                           (u)
      Vθ           (s) − max Qθ (s, a) = max Qθ                       (s, a) − max Qθ (s, a)
                         a                          a                               a
                                                            PL⋆ (θ)            (u)
                                               ≤ max Qθ       (s) − Qθ (s, a)
                                                    a
                                                                            PL⋆ (θ) ′          (u+1) ′ ′
                                               ≤ γ · max Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,a) Vθ      (s ) − max
                                                                                           ′
                                                                                              Qθ    (s , a )
                                                        a                                                 a
                                                           PL⋆ (θ) ′          (u+1) ′ ′
                                               ≤ γ · max Vθ       (s ) − max Qθ    (s , a ) ,                          (B.2)
                                                      s′                  a′


where the first equality uses the definition of PL⋆ in Section 2, the first inequality uses the contrac-
tion property of the max operator, and the second equality uses the Bellman equation in (E.7) and
Algorithm 6. By induction, we have

                                                                   PL⋆ (θ)                         (U )
                             term (A) ≤ γ U −1 max · Vθ                      (s) − max Qθ (s, a)
                                                        s                                a

                                         ≤ γ U −1 L,                                                                   (B.3)

                                        (U )
where the last equality uses Qθ                = 0 and the fact that any value function is upper bounded by L.
                                                                              (1)
Analysis of Term (B). Recall that πθ (s) = arg maxa Qθ (s, a) in Algorithm 6. We have

                                               (1)
                               term (B) = max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s)) .

                                                                                                                       (B.4)
                                                    s


Let

                                 (1)                                     (1)
                       ϵ† = max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − rθ (s, πθ (s)) − γ(Pθ Vθ )(s, πθ (s)) .

                                                                                                                       (B.5)
                              s


We have

   (1)                                                                                       (1)
 Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s)) ≤ ϵ† + rθ (s, πθ (s)) + γ(Pθ Vθ )(s, πθ (s))
                                                   − rθ (s, πθ (s)) − γ(Pθ Vθπθ )(s, πθ (s))
                                                                                  (1)
                                               = ϵ† + γ · Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,πθ (s)) Qθ (s′ , πθ (s′ )) − Qπθ θ (s′ , πθ (s′ ))


                                                                        (1)
                                               ≤ ϵ† + γ · max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s)) .                     (B.6)
                                                               s



                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, the first inequality is based on the definition of ϵ† and the Bellman equation in (E.7) in the proof
                                                                      (1)                               (1)   (1)
of Theorem 4.4, where the first equality uses fact that Qθ (s, πθ (s)) = maxa Qθ (s, a) = Vθ (s)
for all s ∈ S. Taking the sups∈S in the left-hand side of (B.6), we obtain

             (1)                                                                 (1)
     max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s)) ≤ ϵ† + γ · max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s)) ,
       s                                                                  s


which implies

                                                       (1)
                             term (B) ≤ max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − Qπθ θ (s, πθ (s))
                                                   s

                                           ≤ ϵ† /(1 − γ).                                                     (B.7)


Meanwhile, the convergence analysis of the value iteration algorithm in [59] gives

                       (1)                 (2)                                (U −1)             (U )
             max Qθ (s, a) − Qθ (s, a) ≤ γ U −2 max Qθ                                 (s, a) − Qθ (s, a) ,
              s,a                                                   s,a


which implies

                                                 (1)          (2)
                                    max Qθ (s, a) − Qθ (s, a) ≤ γ U −1 L.
                                     s,a


We have

                                (1)                                           (2)
                    ϵ† = max Qθ (s, πθ (s)) − rθ (s, πθ (s)) − γ(Pθ Vθ )(s, πθ (s))
                           s
                                                            (1)           (2)
                                 + γEs′ ∼Pθ (· | s,πθ (s)) Vθ (s′ ) − Vθ (s′ )

                                                     (1)         (2)
                       = γ · Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,πθ (s)) Vθ (s′ ) − Vθ (s′ )


                                                          (1)                   (2)
                       = γ · Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,πθ (s)) max Qθ (s′ , a) − max Qθ (s′ , a)

                                                     a                   a
                                                           (1) ′          (2)
                       ≤ γ · Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,πθ (s)) max Qθ (s , a) − Qθ (s′ , a)

                                                         a
                             U −1
                      ≤γ            L,                                                                        (B.8)


where the first and third equalities are based on Algorithm 6, the second last inequality uses the
contraction property of the max operator.
Plugging (B.3), (B.7), and (B.8) into (B.1), we obtain

                         PL⋆ (θ)
                                 (s) − Vθπθ (s) ≤ γ U −1 L + γ U −1 L/(1 − γ) ≤ ϵ,

                    max Vθ
                      s


for U ≥ ⌈log((2L/(ϵ(1 − γ))))/ log(1/γ)⌉ + 1. Thus, we prove Proposition B.1.


                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX C             D ISCUSSION ON D EFINITIONS
C.1    D ISCUSSION ON D EFINITION 4.2

Definition 4.2 (ϵ-Optimality of Planner). A planning algorithm PLϵ : Θ 7→ Π is an ϵ-optimal planner
              PL⋆ (θ)          PLϵ (θ)
if maxs∈S [Vθ           (s) − Vθ         (s)] ≤ ϵ for all θ ∈ Θ.

As a special case of Definition 4.2, we present the value iteration algorithm (Algorithm 6) in Ap-
pendix B, where we use a truncated horizon U , i.e., a finite length of the lookahead window. Al-
ternatively, we may choose to emulate the tree-search algorithm, the random shooting algorithm,
or the Monte-Carlo tree-search algorithm. In the tree-search example (Lines 5-11 in Algorithm 2),
ϵ decreases as the search breadth B and depth U increase. Note that, as long as we emulate an
ϵ-optimal planner, we are able to establish provable sample efficiency guarantees.

C.2    D ISCUSSION ON D EFINITION 4.3

Definition 4.3 (Information Ratio). The information ratio Γt† (δ) is the smallest number for which,
if we have Ht† − Ht ≤ log 2, then it holds for all t ∈ {t† , . . . , T } with probability at least 1 − δ that

                                                                            p
            (rθ⋆ − rθt† )(st , at ) + (Pθ⋆ − Pθt† )Vt (st , at ) ≤ Γt† (δ) · I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ),          (C.1)


where θ⋆ is the data-generating parameter and θt† ∼ pt† is a sampled parameter.

Definition 4.3 quantifies the estimation error of the sampled parameter θt† in terms of approximating
the data-generating parameter θ⋆ . To achieve this, we use the information gain I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ) as
a benchmarking quantity. Intuitively, the information ratio Γt† (δ) characterizes how exploration
reduces uncertainty. As long as Γt† (δ) is finite, collecting a better dataset Dt† reduces the estimation
error of θt† by decreasing I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ). To see this, we consider the limiting case that Dt† ⊆ Dt is
already sufficiently informative. As the collected feedback ξt+1 provides little new information, we
know that I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ) is small, which implies that the estimation error of θt† is small. Note that
Γt† (δ) is an intrinsic property of the underlying MDP, which is independent of the agent design. In
Appendix F, we study a general class of MDPs, namely linear kernel MDPs [6, 10, 81], and prove
that the information ratio is O(d · log(dT /δ)), where d is the feature dimension.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX D          LLM S AMPLES P OSTERIOR
Verification of Assumption 4.1. We prove that Assumption 4.1 holds for a specific parameterization
of (Pθ , rθ ) under three regularity conditions, namely (a) LLMs are trained to replicate the pretraining
distribution, which is assumed in [48, 66, 69] to simplify the statistical analysis, (b) the pretraining
dataset is generated through a Bayesian mechanism with a latent concept, which is a simplified
version of the latent variable model in [69] and resembles that in [62], and (c) LLMs are able to
parameterize an implicit Bayesian inference mechanism, which is proved in [77, 78] for the attention
architecture. Note that, if Assumption 4.1 holds approximately, the regret analysis can be relaxed to
accommodate the additional error in the posterior distribution.

Assumption D.1 (Model Class). We assume that (Pθ , rθ ) is parameterized under the following
conditions.

Factorization: For any (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G, it holds that


                                        Pθ (s′ | s, a; g) = ϕg (s′ , s, a)⊤ fg (θ),


         where ϕg : S × S × A 7→ Rdg is the feature mapping, fg : Θ 7→ Rdg is the parameter
         transformation, and dg is the feature dimension.
                                                                                      d
No Redundant Feature: For any g ∈ G, there exists a set {(s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )}i=1
                                                                                 g
                                                                                    ⊆ S × S × A such
                                             d
         that the set {ϕg (s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )}i=1
                                                  g
                                                     forms a basis of Rdg .

Identification: For two probability distributions q1 and q2 over Θ, if it holds for all g ∈ G that


                                           Eθ∼q1 [fg (θ)] = Eθ∼q2 [fg (θ)],


         then we have q1 = q2 .

The factorization condition in Assumption D.1 is common in the RL literature [71, 10, 81]. As long
as ϕg has sufficient expressive power, (Pθ , rθ ) is able to represent a broad range of models.
The redundancy condition states that ϕg does not have any redundant dimension. In other words,
we are able to construct a basis of Rdg by choosing dg different tuples (s′ , s, a). We provide the
following example. Let G be {1, . . . , |G|} and dg = d for all g ∈ G. We assume that there exists a
surjective mapping k : S × S × A 7→ B|G|d , where B|G|d is the unit ball under the Euclidean norm
in R|G|d . Let pg : R|G|d 7→ Rd be a projection operator, which outputs the ((g − 1)d + 1)-th to gd-th
entries of the input vector. We define ϕg as pg ◦ k. Since k is surjective, we are able to construct
                 |G|d
{(s′(i) , s(i) a(i) )}i=1 as the tuple set in association with the canonical basis of R|G|d . As a result,
{ϕg (s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )}gd                                       dg
                           i=(g−1)d+1 forms the canonical basis of R .

The identification condition ensures that the parameter distribution has a one-to-one correspondence
to its mean embedding [55, 37]. For example, the Gaussian distribution is determined by its first-
order and second-order moments.


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following assumption specifies the data-generating process, which is a simplified version of the
latent variable model in [69] and resembles that in [62].


Assumption D.2 (Data Generation). We assume that each individual rollout {(st , at , rt )}∞
                                                                                          t=0 in the

pretraining dataset D is generated through the following process.


Instruct: Choose a specific instruction g ∈ G and sample an underlying parameter θ⋆ from the prior
          distribution p0 . Store g in D.

Initialize: Sample the initial state s0 from the initial distribution ρ.

Interact: At the t-th step, take an action at given the history {(si , ai , si+1 , ri )}ti=0 and receive the
          reward rt and the next state st+1 , where rt = rθg⋆ (st , at ) and st+1 ∼ Pθg⋆ (· | st , at ).



The following assumption states that LLMs parameterize an implicit Bayesian inference mechanism,
which is proved in [77, 78] for the attention architecture.


Assumption D.3 (Parameterization of Implicit Bayesian Inference). We assume that LLMs
parameterize the following mechanism, which is summarized by the conditional distribution
PLLM (s′ | s, a, D, g).


  Infer: Sample a latent concept θ ∼ PLLM (· | D), where PLLM is the conditional distribution in
          association with the given LLM.

Generate: Generate the next state s′ and the received reward r via s′ ∼ Pθ (· | s, a; g) and r =
          rθ (s, a; g) given a specific instruction g and the current state s and action a.


The following assumption states that LLMs are trained to replicate the pretraining distribution,
which covers a wide variety of D and g. The same assumption is employed by [48, 66, 69, 30]
to simplify the statistical analysis. Let PData be the pretraining distribution.


Assumption D.4 (Pretraining Consistency). We assume that


                                 PLLM (s′ | s, a, D, g) = PData (s′ | s, a, D, g)


for all D and (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G.


In the following, we prove that Assumption 4.1 holds. By the implicit Bayesian inference mecha-
nism in Assumption D.3, we have
                                                    Z
                                 ′
                          PLLM (s | s, a, D, g) =       Pθ (s′ | s, a; g) · PLLM (θ | D)dθ,                (D.1)


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all D and (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G. By the data-generating mechanism in Assumption D.2,
we have
                                                     Z
                     PData (s′ | s, a, D, g) =           Pθ⋆ (s′ | s, a; g) · PData (θ⋆ | s, a, D, g)dθ⋆
                                                     Z
                                                 =       Pθ⋆ (s′ | s, a; g) · PData (θ⋆ | D)dθ⋆                       (D.2)


for all D and (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G. Let PData (· | D) be the posterior distribution of the
underlying parameter θ⋆ . By the pretraining consistency in Assumption D.4, we have
                 Z                                                   Z
                                ′
                      Pθ (s | s, a; g) · PLLM (θ | D)dθ =                    Pθ (s′ | s, a; g) · PData (θ | D)dθ      (D.3)


for all D and (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G. By the factorization condition in Assumption D.1, we
transform (D.3) into
                            Z                                                          Z
             ′          ⊤                                                ′         ⊤
        ϕg (s , s, a)           fg (θ) · PLLM (θ | D)dθ = ϕg (s , s, a)                    fg (θ) · PData (θ | D)dθ   (D.4)


for all D and (s′ , s, a, g) ∈ S × S × A × G. By the redundancy condition in Assumption D.1 and
the property of a basis, we have

Z                             dg                             Z
                              X
                                       ′                   ⊤
    fg (θ) · PLLM (θ | D)dθ =     ϕg (s(i) , s(i) , a(i) )     fg (θ) · PLLM (θ | D)dθ · ϕg (s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )
                                        i=1
                                        dg                            Z
                                        X
                                    =       ϕg (s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )⊤ fg (θ) · PData (θ | D)dθ · ϕg (s′(i) , s(i) , a(i) )
                                        i=1
                                        Z
                                    =       fg (θ) · PData (θ | D)dθ,                                                 (D.5)


which implies


                                    Eθ∼PLLM (· | D) fg (θ) = Eθ∼PData (· | D) fg (θ)


for all g ∈ G and D. By the identifiability condition in Assumption D.1, we have


                                                 PLLM (θ | D) = PData (θ | D)


which shows that the implicit Bayesian inference mechanism in Assumption D.3 matches the data-
generating process in Assumption D.2. Thus, we verify Assumption 4.1.


To numerically verify Assumption 4.1, we conduct three experiments on Bayesian linear regression,
the ALFWorld environment, and multi-arm bandit, respectively. Since the predictions given by
posterior sampling have the contraction property and the variance heterogeneity, we examine these
two properties of LLM predictions in multiple settings to study if the distribution of LLM predictions
matches the one given by posterior sampling.


                                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bayesian Linear Regression. We test if GPT-3 can make an implicit Bayesian inference for the
linear regression problem from the perspectives of unbiasedness, contraction property, and Variance
heterogeneity of Predictions.
      • Unbiasedness and contraction property. The unbiasedness and contraction property
        ensure LLMs give a responsible answer given enough prompts and we consider a one-
        dimensional Bayesian linear regression setting to verify them. We first generate i.i.d.
        data {(xi , yi )}N i=1 from xi ∼ N (0.8, 1), yi ∼ N (βxi , 0.04), where we take β = 0.5.
        Then, we query GPT-3 API to obtain 200 predictions when xpred = 1 (we set tem-
        perature as 1.0 and top-p as 0.8, where these parameter configurations can be found
        in [21]). Specifically, the prompts are “The following data is for linear regression:
        (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN ), (1.000000,”. Then, we plot the histogram of the LLM-
        generated predictions and the density function of the calculated ypred by posterior sampling,
        where we choose the prior of the coefficient β as N (0, 0.5). We report the results in Figure
        6. We find that the histogram of LLM predictions approximately matches the theoretical
        distribution of the prediction given by the posterior sampling. Also, with an increasing
        number of generated data, the variance of LLM predictions decays, which shows the con-
        traction property.
      • Variance heterogeneity of Predictions. The variance heterogeneity of predictions helps
        LLMs give more diverse answers when the current prompt contains less relevant in-
        formation. RAFA relies on the diversity of LLM predictions to guarantee the explo-
        ration for those states less explored, hence we wish the variance of LLM predictions
        for the less explored states is higher. We consider a two-dimensional Bayesian lin-
        ear regression setting to study the variance heterogeneity of LLM predictions. We
                                                  (1)   (2)                                 (1)    (2) ⊤
        first generate i.i.d. data D = {((xi , xi ), yi )}N           i=1 from xi = (xi , xi )              ∼
                       ⊤                             ⊤
        N ((0.8, 0.8) , diag(4, 0.1)), yi ∼ N (xi β, 0.04), where we set N = 60 and β =
        (0.25, 0.25)⊤ . Then, we query GPT-3 API to obtain 200 predictions given the covariate
        xpred (we set temperature as 1.0 and top-p as 0.8, where these parameter configurations
        can be found in [21]). Specifically, the prompts are “The following data is for linear re-
                       (1)   (2)         (1)  (2)                  (1)   (2)         (1)      (2)
        gression: ((x1 , x1 ), y1 ), (x2 , x2 ), y2 ), . . . , ((xN , xN ), yN ), ((xpred , xpred )”. Theo-
        retically, the variance of predictions given by posterior sampling is σ 2 + (x⊤      pred Σ
                                                                                                    −1
                                                                                                       xpred ),
                  −1      −2
                                   P  N                      ⊤
        where Σ = σ Λ0 + i=1 (xi − x̄)(xi − x̄) is the covariance matrix of the posterior
        distribution of β and x̄ denotes the mean of {xi }N     i=1 . Here, we choose the prior distribu-
        tion of β is N ((0, 0)⊤ , Λ0 ) with Λ0 = diag(0.5, 0.5). To study the variance heterogeneity
        of predictions, we conduct a single-value decomposition on Σ−1 to obtain its eigenval-
        ues {λ1 , λ2 } and the corresponding unit eigenvectors {v1 , v2 }, where we let λ1 < λ2 (if
        λ1 = λ2 , we regenerate the data). Note that

                                              −1/2
                 V[ypred | D, xpred = x̄ + λ1        · v1 ] = σ 2 + ∥v1 ∥22
                                                          > σ 2 + (λ2 /λ1 ) · ∥v2 ∥22
                                                                                          −1/2
                                                          = V[ypred | D, xpred = x̄ + λ1         · v2 ].

         Thus, we examine the sample variance of LLM predictions given different covariates and
        present the results in Table 4. Results show that LLM predictions reveal variance hetero-
        geneity, which helps RAFA explore the unknown environment.

ALFWorld. We also test if the LLM performs an implicit Bayesian inference in the ALFWorld
environment.
      • Contraction property. We begin by examining the contraction property in the ALFWorld
        environment. Specifically, the model LLM is prompted to predict the observation of a
        certain action “go to countertop 1”. The prediction result is provided in Figure 7. We
        find that as more action-observation paris are added to the GPT-3 prompt when timestep


                                                     25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                               1.6                                                               1.8
                                                                                                                     70                                                                                     80
            40                                                                                          1.2                                                                                    1.4                                                               1.6
                                                                                                                     60                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                               1.2                                                               1.4
                                                                                                        1.0                                                                                                 60
frequency   30                                                                                                       50                                                                                                                                          1.2


                                                                                                         frequency


                                                                                                                                                                                                frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0          50


                                                                                                           density


                                                                                                                                                                                                  density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  density
                                                                                                                     40                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                        0.8                                                                                    0.8          40
            20                                                                                                       30                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6          30
                                                                                                        0.6          20                                                                                                                                          0.6
            10                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4                                                               0.4
                                                                                                        0.4          10                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2                                                               0.2
             0 0.0                              0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8           1.0                 0 0.0     0.2      0.4           0.6                         0.8   1.0                 0 0.0   0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8      1.0
                                                          value of prediction                                                          value of prediction                                                                  value of prediction
                                                      (a) N = 10.                                                                     (b) N = 30.                                                                          (c) N = 60.

Figure 6: Histograms of LLM predictions and theoretical distribution of the prediction given by the
posterior sampling in the Bayesian linear regression problem.

                                                                                               xpred                           Sample Variance of LLM Predictions
                                                                                                 x̄                                                                            0.00496
                                                                                      −1/2
                                                                                x̄ + λ1    · v2                                                                                0.00752
                                                                                      −1/2
                                                                                x̄ + λ1    · v1                                                                                0.00864

                                                                       Table 4: Sample variance of LLM Predictions on different xpred .
                                                    increases, the number of distinct prediction responses decreases, i.e., the model LLM has
                                                    decreasing uncertainty of what objects a certain place has after observing the locations of
                                                    objects at other places. This corresponds to a decreasing entropy and contraction of the
                                                    posterior distribution, which supports Assumption 4.1.
                                               35                                                                                                                             35                                            Action 'go to countertop 1'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Action 'go to diningtable 1'
                                               30                                                                                                                             30

                                               25                                                                                                                             25
                     # of distinct obs preds


                                                                                                                                                    # of distinct obs preds


                                               20                                                                                                                             20

                                               15                                                                                                                             15

                                               10                                                                                                                             10

                                               5                                                                                                                              5

                                               0                                                                                                                              0
                                                      0     1      2     3      4         5      6 7           8        9     10 11 12                                             0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                                                                              timestep                                                                                            timestep

                          Figure 7: Contraction property in the                                                                                          Figure 8: Variance heterogeneity of pre-
                          ALFWorld environment.                                                                                                          dictions in the ALFWorld environment.

                                      • Variance heterogeneity of Predictions. To show the variance heterogeneity of the pre-
                                        dictions, we prompt the model LLM to predict the next observations when taking actions
                                        that the agent has less relevant information. Specifically, in the trajectory that the agent
                                        has never explored any dining table, we prompt the model LLM to predict the observation
                                        after taking the action “go to dining table 1” at different timesteps. The result is shown in
                                        Figure 8. We can observe that the number of distinct predictions of taking this action is
                                        much larger the “go to countertop 1” action where similar locations such as “countertop 2”
                                        and “countertop 3” are explored by the agent in this episode. This indicates the variance
                                        heterogeneity of the predictions.

Contextual Bandit. We also conduct an experiment on a two-arm contextual bandit setting to
compare the performance of LLMs, Thompson sampling (posterior sampling), and Bayesian model
averaging. At each step, the agent receives a context x sampled from N (0.8, 1) and pulls the first arm
or the second one. If she pulls the first arm, she will receive a reward sampled from N (β1 x, 0.04)
with β1 = 0.1. If she pulls the second arm, she will receive a reward sampled from N (β2 x, 0.04)
with β2 = 0.5. For the LLM agent, we use the GPT-4 model and prompt it to output the best
arm given the history of the context-reward pair when pulling different arms at different timesteps.


                                                                                                                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               TS
                                   5                                           BMA
                                                                               LLM

                                   4
              Cumulative rewards
                                   3

                                   2

                                   1

                                   0

                                        0        2        4          6     8
                                                          timestep

Figure 9: Performance of LLMs, Thompson sampling (posterior sampling), and Bayesian model
averaging in a two-arm bandit setting. Results are averaged under five random seeds, and the shaded
area represents a confidence band with one standard deviation.
Specifically, the LLM agent is first given the context and asked to determine the next arm to pull.
The context state [context], the pulled arm [arm], and the received reward [reward] are all added to
the prompt of the LLM. The system prompt we use is “You are a linear bandit expert. Output the
best arm based on the observed data. Output format: Best arm: [arm 0 or 1]. DO NOT generate
unnecessary text and always end with 0 or 1.” and the user prompt we use is “Consider the following
contextual linear bandit scenario with two arms. The following data is observed: state: [context],
arm: [arm], reward: [reward]; state: [context], arm: [arm], reward: [reward]; . . .. Will you try
arm 0 or arm 1 in the next step? Remember the exploration-exploitation tradeoff when generating
the response.”. For Thompson sampling, the agent first samples a parameter βei from the posterior
distribution of βi and samples an estimated reward yei given βei for all i ∈ {1, 2}. She will only pull
the first arm if ye1 > ye2 . For Bayesian averaging, the agent chooses the mean of the posterior of βi
as the parameter estimate βbi and samples an estimated reward ybi given βbi for all i ∈ {1, 2}. She will
also only pull the first arm if yb1 > yb2 . The prior distribution of βi in both Thompson sampling and
Bayesian model averaging is chosen as N (0, 1) for all i ∈ {1, 2} We report the cumulative rewards
across 10 steps in Figure. 9.
From Figure 9, we observe that the cumulative reward obtained by the LLMs approximately matches
the Thompson sampling, both of which perform better than the Bayesian model averaging. This
implies that both LLMs and Thompson sampling can make a more effective exploration, while
Bayesian model averaging is easier to get trapped in the suboptimality. This close relationship
between the Thompson sampling algorithm and LLMs also supports Assumption 4.1.

A PPENDIX E                            P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.4
Proof of Theorem 4.4. We specify the terminating condition for Algorithm 3 (and Algorithm 1). Let
(K − 1) be the total number of switches until t reaches (T − 1). Let tK = T . At the (T − 1)-th
step, Algorithm 3 samples θT −1 from ptK−1 and executes aT −1 = πT −1 (sT −1 ) , where we have
πT −1 = PLϵ (θT −1 ). Upon receiving rT −1 and sT from the external environment, Algorithm 3
                                       −1
updates DT = {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}Tt=0 and terminates. Throughout the following proof, we denote


                                                           27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the upper bound of the value function as L, i.e., maxθ∈Θ,π∈Π,s∈S |Vθπ (s)| ≤ L, for a positive
constant L.
Recall that the Bayesian regret R(T ) and the optimal planner PL⋆ (θ) are defined in Section 2. By
the tower property of the conditional expectation, we have



                            hK−1 X−1 ⋆
                             X tk+1                         i
                   R(T ) = E        Vθπ⋆ (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st )
                                 k=0   t=tk
                           hK−1     X−1 ⋆
                            X h htk+1                              iii
                         =E     E E    Vθπ⋆ (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st ) Fk
                                 k=0            t=tk
                           hK−1     X−1 PL⋆ (θ⋆ )
                            X h htk+1                                    iii
                         =E     E E    Vθ⋆        (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st ) Fk
                                 k=0            t=tk
                           hK−1     X−1 PL⋆ (θ )
                            X h htk+1                                   iii
                         =E     E E    Vθt    t
                                                 (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st ) Fk
                                 k=0            t=tk
                           hK−1 X−1 PL⋆ (θ )
                            X tk+1                              i
                         =E        Vθt    t
                                             (st ) − Vθπ⋆t (st ) ,                                      (E.1)
                                 k=0   t=tk


where we define


                                                                       t −1
                                                                         k
                                   Fk = σ        (st , at , st+1 , rt ) t=0                             (E.2)


and the fourth equality uses the fact that θ⋆ | Fk and θt | Fk follows the same distribution for all
                                                                   t   −1
tk ≤ t < tk+1 . Note that the parameter sequence {θt }t=t
                                                       k+1
                                                          k
                                                                            is sampled from ptk independently
                                            ϵ                      ϵ
and identically, while we have πt = PL (θt ), where PL is an ϵ-optimal planner in Definition 4.2.
Let θk = θtk and π k = πtk . We are able to rewrite (E.1) as

                                  hK−1 X−1 PL⋆ (θk )
                                   X tk+1                        k
                                                                       i
                         R(T ) = E        Vθ k       (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st ) .                               (E.3)
                                       k=0      t=tk


Meanwhile, Definition 4.2 gives

                                       PL⋆ (θ k )              k
                                     Vθk            (st ) − Vθπk (st ) ≤ ϵ.                             (E.4)


Here, we use π k = PLϵ (θk ).
To connect (E.3) and (E.4), we introduce the regret decomposition. For notational simplicity, we
denote by


                                (Bθ V )(s, a) = rθ (s, a) + γ(Pθ V )(s, a)                              (E.5)


for all (s, a) ∈ S × A and V .


                                                         28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma E.1 (Regret Decomposition). For Algorithm 3, it holds that


      1−γ   hK−1
             X          X−1 k
                     htk+1                  k
                                                   ii
          ·E     Eπk       Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
       γ               t=t
                   k=0                  k

           hK−1
            X          X−1
                    htk+1          k                       k
                                                                       ii
         =E     Eπk       (Bθk Vθπk )(st , at ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπk )(st , at )
                k=0              t=tk
            |                                          {z                                      }
                                            term (A): information gain
                  hK−1
                   X      h    k               k               k             k       ii
                       Eπk Vθπk (stk+1 ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk+1 ) − Vθπk (stk ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk ) ,

                +E                                                                                                     (E.6)
                       k=0
                  |                                                    {z                                          }
                                                        term (B): value inconsistency


where Eπk is taken with respect to the state-action sequence following st+1 ∼ Pθ⋆ (· | st , at ) and
at = π k (st ) for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 , while E is taken with respect to the prior distribution p0 of θ⋆ ,
the posterior distribution ptk of θk , and the iterative update of π k . Here, π k is determined by θk and
                                                      k −1
ptk is conditioned on Dtk = {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}tt=0   , which is generated by θ⋆ and Algorithm 3.


Proof of Lemma E.1. The Bellman equation [59] connects Qπθ (s, a) and Vθπ (s) by


                  Qπθ (s, a) = rθ (s, a) + γ (Pθ Vθπ ) (s, a) ,                      Vθπ (s) = Qπθ s, π(s) .

                                                                                                                       (E.7)


By (E.5), we rewrite (E.7) as Qπθ (s, a) = (Bθ Vθπ )(s, a). For the left-hand side of (E.6), we have

                  hK−1
                   X          X−1 k
                           htk+1                  k
                                                         ii
                 E     Eπk       Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
                      k=0           t=tk
                          hK−1
                           X          X−1
                                   htk+1          k                       k
                                         (Bθk Vθπk )(st , at ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπ⋆ )(st , at )

                      =γ·E     Eπk
                                  k=0              t=tk
                          hK−1
                           X          X−1
                                   htk+1          k                       k
                                                                                      ii
                      =γ·E     Eπk       (Bθk Vθπk )(st , at ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπk )(st , at )
                                  k=0              t=tk
                             |                                            {z                                   }
                                                                       term (A)

                                hK−1
                                 X          X−1
                                         htk+1          k                  k
                                                                                   ii
                            +γ·E     Eπk       (Bθ⋆ Vθπk )(st , at ) − Vθπk (st+1 )
                                        k=0               t=tk
                                   |                                        {z                            }
                                                                         term (C1)

                                hK−1
                                 X          X−1 k
                                         htk+1                         k
                                                                                   ii
                            +γ·E     Eπk       Vθπ⋆ (st+1 ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπ⋆ )(st , at )
                                        k=0               t=tk
                                   |                                        {z                            }
                                                                         term (C2)

                                hK−1
                                 X          X−1 k
                                         htk+1                    k
                                                                          ii
                            +γ·E     Eπk       Vθπk (st+1 ) − Vθπ⋆ (st+1 ) ,                                           (E.8)
                                        k=0               t=tk
                                   |                                   {z                          }
                                                                   term (D)



                                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the first equality uses at = π k (st ). Since we have


                            (Pθ⋆ V )(st , at ) = Est+1 ∼Pθ⋆ (· | st ,at ) V (st+1 ) ,


terms (C1) and (C2) in (E.8) are zero. Meanwhile, term (D) in (E.8) satisfies

              hK−1
               X          X−1
                       htk+1      k            k      ii
  term (D) = E     Eπk        Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
                  k=0          t=tk
                   hK−1
                    X      h    k               k               k             k       ii
                        Eπk Vθπk (stk+1 ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk+1 ) − Vθπk (stk ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk ) ,

                 +E                                                                                         (E.9)
                        k=0
                    |                                               {z                                 }
                                                                  term (B)


where term (B) is defined in Lemma E.1. Rearranging (E.8) and (E.9), we prove Lemma E.1.


We characterize terms (A) and (B) in (E.6). Let E be the high-probability event in Definition 4.3.
For the information gain in term (A), we have

                   hK−1    h     tk+1 −1                                             ii
                    X              X             k                       k
       term (A) ≤ E     Eπk 1E ·        (Bθk Vθπk )(st , at ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπk )(st , at ) + LδT
                        k=0                  t=tk
                   hK−1
                    X          X−1
                            htk+1           p                ii
                 ≤E     Eπk        Γtk (δ) · I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) + LδT
                        k=0           t=tk
                                  hK−1
                                   X          X−1 p
                                           htk+1                    ii
                 ≤ sup Γt† (δ) · E     Eπk          I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) + LδT
                    t† <T               k=0                t=tk
                                       −1
                                  h√  TX                 1/2 i
                 ≤ sup Γt† (δ) · E T ·    I(θ; ξt+1 Dt )       + LδT
                    t† <T                            t=0
                                   p
                 = sup Γt† (δ) · E T (H0 − HT ) + LδT.                                                     (E.10)
                    t† <T


The first inequality uses the fact that the value function is upper bounded by L and P(E) ≥ 1 − δ
in Definition 4.3. The last inequality invokes the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. The last equality is
derived from I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) = Ht − Ht+1 . We explain the second inequality as follows. For any
0 ≤ k < K, we consider t† = tk and θk = θtk , which is sampled from ptk given Dtk , and the value
                        t     −1             k   t   −1                                  t   −1
function sequence {Vt }t=t
                        k+1
                          k
                                   = {Vθπk }t=t
                                             k+1
                                                k
                                                           , which is adapted to {σ(Dt )}t=t
                                                                                          k+1
                                                                                             k
                                                                                                  since Dtk ⊆ Dt
for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 . Correspondingly, we have

                                                                           p
           (rθ⋆ − rθtk )(st , at ) + (Pθ⋆ − Pθtk )Vt (st , at ) ≤ Γtk (δ) · I(θ; ξt+1 |Dt ).


                                                            30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, we obtain the second inequality in (E.10). As the switching condition in Algorithm 3 implies
Htk − Htk+1 ≥ log 2, we have

                                         K−2
                                         X
                         H0 − HtK−1 =          Htk − Htk+1 ≥ (K − 1) · log 2,
                                         k=0


which implies


                         K − 1 ≤ (H0 − HtK−1 )/log 2 ≤ (H0 − HT )/ log 2.                         (E.11)


Recall that the value function is upper bounded by L. For the value inconsistency in term (B), we
have


                             term (B) ≤ (4L/log 2) · E[H0 − HT ] + 4L.                            (E.12)


Plugging (E.10) and (E.12) into Lemma E.1, we have


       1−γ    hXK         X−1 k
                       htk+1                    k
                                                       ii
            ·E     Eπk         Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
        γ                t=tk
               k=0
                                 p
         ≤ LδT + sup Γt† (δ) · E T (H0 − HT ) + (4L/log 2) · E[H0 − HT ] + 4L.                    (E.13)
                     t† <T


Combining (E.3), (E.4), and (E.13), we have
                                                        √
                               γ · supt† <T Γt† (δ) · E[ H0 − HT ] √

                     R(T ) = O                                     · T
                                              1−γ
                                                          γL · E[H0 − HT ]

                                      γδL
                                   +        ·T +ϵ·T +                        .                    (E.14)
                                     1−γ                       (1 − γ)
                                                              P∞         t
Since the reward function is bounded in [0, 1], we take L =      t=0 γ       = 1/(1 − γ) and obtain
                                         √
                γ · supt† <T Γt† (δ) · E[ H0 − HT ] √                          γ · E[H0 − HT ]

                                                           γδ
R(T ) = O                                          · T+          · T + ϵ · T +                   .
                               1−γ                      (1 − γ)2                   (1 − γ)2

Thus, we prove Theorem 4.4.


A PPENDIX F          L INEAR S PECIAL C ASE
We specialize Algorithm 3 to a linear setting and characterize the Bayesian regret. In particular,
we define a Bayesian variant of linear kernel MDPs [71, 70, 10, 81]. Here, Es′ ∼Pθ (· | s,a) V (s′ ) is
linear in a feature ψV (s, a) ∈ Rd for an arbitrary parameter θ ∈ Rd , while the prior and posterior
distributions of the data-generating parameter θ⋆ ∈ Rd are Gaussian. Specifically, ψV (s, a) maps
the value function V and the state-action pair (s, a) to a d-dimensional vector. Recall that ρ is the
initial distribution of states, t is the step index, and T is the total number of steps. Also, pt is the
posterior distribution at the t-th step.


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition F.1 (Bayesian Linear Kernel MDP [19, 71, 70, 10, 81]). A Bayesian linear kernel MDP
M satisfies


                                 V (st+1 ) | st , at ∼ N (ψV (st , at )⊤ θ, 1)


for all t ≥ 0, (st , at ) ∈ S × A, st+1 ∼ Pθ (· | st , at ), θ ∈ Rd , as well as all value function V . Here,
ψV (s, a) maps V and (s, a) to a d-dimensional vector, which satisfies ∥ψV (s, a)∥2 ≤ R for all
(s, a) ∈ S × A and all V . Also, M also satisfies |Es0 ∼ρ V (s0 )| ≤ R for all V . Here, R is a positive
constant that is independent of t and T . The prior distribution of the data-generating parameter
θ⋆ ∈ Rd is N (0, λId ), where λ is a positive constant. Here, ψV is known and θ⋆ is unknown.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the reward function is deterministic and known.


Let (K − 1) be the total number of switches until t reaches (T − 1). Let tK = T . At the (T − 1)-th
step, Algorithm 3 samples θT −1 from ptK−1 and executes aT −1 = πT −1 (sT −1 ) , where we have
πT −1 = PLϵ (θT −1 ). Upon receiving rT −1 and sT from the external environment, Algorithm 3
                                     T −1
updates DT = {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}t=0  and terminates. For notational simplicity, we define Vt =
  πk
Vθk for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 and obtain the closed form of pt as follows,

                                           θ | Dt ∼ N (θbt ; Σ−1
                                                              t ),


where

                          t−1
                          X                                      t−1
                                                             −1  X
              θbt = λId +     ψVi (si , ai )ψVi (si , ai )⊤          ψVi (si , ai )Vi (si+1 )          (F.1)
                              i=0                                    i=0


and

                                             t−1
                                                                              ⊤
                                             X
                               Σt = λId +          ψVi (si , ai ) ψVi (si , ai ) .                     (F.2)
                                             i=0


Hence, the posterior entropy is

                      Ht = H(pt ) = 1/2 · log(det(Σt )) + d/2 · (1 + log(2π)).                         (F.3)

We specialize the switching condition in Algorithm 3 as follows,

                          1/2 · log(det(Σtk )) − 1/2 · log(det(Σt )) > log 2,

which is equivalent to det(Σtk ) > 4 · det(Σt ). This switching condition is also similarly adopted in
work for RL [81, 1]. As a result, we have

                                         det(Σtk ) ≤ 4 · det(Σt )                                      (F.4)

for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 and k < K.
To apply Theorem 4.4, we characterize the information gain H0 − HT throughout the T steps and
the information ratio Γt† (δ), which is defined in Definition 4.3.


                                                      32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Information Gain. By the definition of Σt in (F.2), we have log det(Σ0 ) = d · log λ and

                                            T
                                            X −1
               log det(ΣT ) = log det λId +      ψVt (st , at )ψV⊤t (st , at )
                                                  t=0
                                                             T −1
                                                             X
                              ≤ d · log 1/d · tr λId +              ψVt (st , at )ψV⊤t (st , at )
                                                             t=0
                                                         T −1
                                                         X
                              = d · log 1/d · λd +              ∥ψVt (st , at )∥22
                                                         t=0
                              ≤ d · log(λ + T R2 /d)                                                  (F.5)

almost surely. Here, the first inequality uses the relationship between the trace and the determinant
of a square matrix, the second equality uses tr(a⊤ b) = tr(ba⊤ ) for two arbitrary vectors a and b,
and the last inequality uses the fact that ∥ψV (s, a)∥2 is upper bounded by R for all (s, a) ∈ S × A
and V . Hence, we have

                              H0 − HT = O d · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ))

                                                                                                      (F.6)

almost surely. By (E.11) in the proof of Theorem 4.4, we obtain

                                K − 1 = O d · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ))

                                                                                                      (F.7)

almost surely.
Information Ratio. The following proposition characterizes the information ratio Γt† (δ), which is
defined in Definition 4.3.

Proposition F.2. The information ratio Γt† (δ) satisfies supt† <T Γt† (δ) = O(d · log(dT /δ)).

Proof of Proposition F.2. For any t† and t ≥ t† , Ht† − Ht ≤ log 2 implies


                        (1/2) · log det (Σt† ) − (1/2) · log det (Σt ) ≤ log 2,


which uses (F.3). Hence, we have


                                       det (Σt† ) ≤ 4 · det (Σt ).                                    (F.8)


By Definition F.1, we have


                 ((Pθ⋆ − Pθt† )Vt )(st , at ) = (θ⋆ − θt† )⊤ ψVt (st , at )
                                              ≤ ∥θ⋆ − θt† ∥Σt† · ∥ψVt (st , at )∥Σ−1
                                                                                           t†

                                                         ⋆
                                              ≤ 4 · ∥θ − θt† ∥Σt† · ∥ψVt (st , at )∥Σ−1 ,             (F.9)
                                                                                                t


where the first inequality invokes the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the second inequality is de-
rived from Lemma 12 in [2] and (F.8). Since θt† and θ⋆ share the posterior distribution N (θbt† , Σ−1
                                                                                                   † ) t
given Dt† , we know that ∥θ − θbt† ∥2Σ † follows Xd2 , where θ ∈ {θ⋆ , θt† } and Xd2 is the chi-square
                                       t


                                                    33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distribution with d degrees of freedom. By the tail behavior of the chi-square distribution [20], we
have


                               P ∥θ⋆ − θbt† ∥2Σ † > 2d · log(2d/δ) ≤ δ/2

                                                                                                       (F.10)
                                                   t


and


                               P ∥θt† − θbt† ∥2Σ † > 2d · log(2d/δ) ≤ δ/2

                                                                                                       (F.11)
                                                   t


for a sufficiently large d and a sufficiently small δ. Hence, it holds with probability at least 1 − δ that

                          √        q                                              √
       ∥θ⋆ − θt† ∥Σt† ≤

                              2·       ∥θt† − θbt† ∥2Σ † + ∥θ⋆ − θbt† ∥2Σ † = O       d · log(d/δ) ,   (F.12)
                                                       t               t


which uses the triangle inequality for ∥ · ∥Σt† and the inequality (a + b)2 ≤ 2 · (a2 + b2 ) for all
a, b ≥ 0. Recall that the information gain is defined as


                                         I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) = Ht − Ht+1 .


By (F.3), we have


                  I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) = 1/2 · log det(Σt+1 )/det(Σt )
                                       = 1/2 · log(1 + ψVt (st , at )⊤ Σ−1
                                                                        t ψVt (st , at ))

                                       ≥ log(1 + d)/(2d) · ψVt (st , at )⊤ Σ−1
                                                                            t ψVt (st , at )

                                       = log(1 + d)/(2d) · ∥ψVt (st , at )∥2Σ−1 ,                      (F.13)
                                                                              t


where the second equality uses the matrix determinant lemma and the first inequality uses the fact
that log(1 + x)/x is an increasing function for x ≥ 0 and


                    0 ≤ ψVt (st , at )⊤ Σ−1
                                         t ψVt (st , at )
                                                                       −1
                      ≤ ψVt (st , at )⊤ ψVt (st , at )ψVt (st , at )⊤     ψVt (st , at )
                                                                                         −1
                      = tr ψVt (st , at )ψVt (st , at ) ψVt (st , at )ψVt (st , at )⊤
                                                       ⊤


                      = d.                                                                             (F.14)


Here, the first inequality uses the nonnegativity of a quadratic form, the first equality uses tr(a⊤ b) =
tr(ba⊤ ) for two arbitrary vectors a and b, and the second inequality uses (F.2). We obtain

                                              √   p                              p
  4 · ∥θ⋆ − θt† ∥Σt† · ∥ψVt (st , at )∥Σ−1 ≤ 4 2d/ log(1 + d) · ∥θ⋆ − θt† ∥Σt† · I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt )
                                        t
                                              p                           p
                                           ≤ 4 2(d + 1) · ∥θ⋆ − θt† ∥Σt† · I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt )
                                               p                       p
                                           = O d(d + 1) · log(d/δ) · I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt )        (F.15)


                                                           34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all t < T such that Ht† − Ht ≤ log 2. Here, the first inequality uses (F.13), the second inequality
uses log(1 + x) ≥ x/(1 + x) for all x ≥ 0, and the first equality uses (F.12). Setting δ ′ = δ/T and
applying the union bound over 0 ≤ t < T , we obtain

                                                           p
                               sup Γt† (δ ′ ) = O           d(d + 1) · log(dT /δ ′ )

                               t† <T

                                                   = O d · log(dT /δ ′ )



with probability at least 1 − δ ′ for a sufficiently large enough d and a sufficiently small δ ′ . Thus, we
prove Proposition F.2.

Bayesian Regret. Proposition F.2 enables us to specialize Theorem 4.4 in Bayesian linear kernel
MDPs when any value function is upper bounded by L [40, 45, 47, 36]. To remove the boundedness
assumption, we present a refined analysis based on the proof of Theorem 4.4, which characterizes
term (A) in Lemma E.1 through a conditional expectation. Recall that Bayesian linear kernel MDPs
are defined in Definition F.1.

Proposition F.3. For Bayesian linear kernel MDPs, the Bayesian regret of Algorithm 3 satisfies

                    γd3/2 · log(T R2 /(dλ)) √   γλ1/2 d3/2 R
      R(T ) = O                            · T+              · log(T R2 /(dλ)) + ϵ · T .            (F.16)
                             1−γ                  1−γ

                               √
Proposition F.3 establishes the √T regret of Algorithm 3 for an appropriate choice of the planning
suboptimality ϵ, e.g., ϵ = O(1/ T ). Here, the first term on the right-hand side of (F.16) is the
leading term.

F.1     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION F.3

Proof of Proposition F.3. Following the proof of Theorem 4.4, it suffices to bound


                             1−γ   hK−1
                                    X          X−1 k
                                            htk+1                  k
                                                                         ii
                                 ·E     Eπk       Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
                              γ               t=t
                                             k=0                k



on the left-hand side of (E.6) in Lemma E.1. In particular, Lemma E.1 gives


       1−γ   hK−1
              X          X−1 k
                      htk+1                  k
                                                    ii
           ·E     Eπk       Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st )
        γ               t=t
                   k=0              k

            hK−1
             X          X−1
                     htk+1          k                       k
                                                                        ii
          =E     Eπk       (Bθk Vθπk )(st , at ) − (Bθ⋆ Vθπk )(st , at )
                k=0          t=tk
            |                                      {z                               }
                                        term (A): information gain
                  hK−1
                   X      h    k               k               k             k       ii
                       Eπk Vθπk (stk+1 ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk+1 ) − Vθπk (stk ) − Vθπ⋆ (stk ) ,

                +E                                                                                  (F.17)
                       k=0
                   |                                             {z                         }
                                                    term (B): value inconsistency


where Eπk is taken with respect to the state-action sequence following st+1 ∼ Pθ⋆ (· | st , at ) and
at = π k (st ) for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 , while E is taken with respect to the prior distribution p0 of θ⋆ ,


                                                              35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the posterior distribution ptk of θk , and the iterative update of π k . Here, π k is determined by θk and
                                                      k −1
ptk is conditioned on Dtk = {(st , at , st+1 , rt )}tt=0   , which is generated by θ⋆ and Algorithm 3.
                                                                      k
Analysis of Term (A). Recall that we define Vt = Vθπk for all tk ≤ t < tk+1 and k < K. We have

               hK−1
                X          X−1
                        htk+1                             ii
   term (A) = E     Eπk        ψVt (st , at )⊤ (θk − θ⋆ )
                    k=0               t=tk
                  hK−1  X−1
                   X htk+1                                              ii
                                       E ψVt (st , at )⊤ (θk − θ⋆ ) Fk

               =E
                    k=0        t=tk
                  hK−1 tk+1 −1
                    X X                                            1/2     k                                1/2 i
                                       E ∥ψVt (st , at )∥2Σ−1 Fk      · E ∥θ − θ⋆ ∥2Σt

               ≤E                                                                                    Fk
                                                           tk                                    k
                    k=0       t=tk
                   hK−1 X−1
                    X tk+1                              1/2     k                                                1/2 i
               ≤4·E         E ∥ψVt (st , at )∥2Σ−1 Fk      · E ∥θ − θ⋆ ∥2Σt                               Fk             ,
                                                                 t                                   k
                         k=0     t=tk

                                                                                                                      (F.18)

where the first equality uses Definition F.1 and the second equality uses the tower property of the
conditional expectation. Note that Fk is defined in (E.2) and the reward function is deterministic
and known in Definition F.1. Also, the first inequality invokes the Holder’s inequality and the sec-
ond inequality uses Lemma 12 in [2] and (F.4). Since θk and θ⋆ share the posterior distribution
N (θbt , Σ−1 ) given Dt , we have that ∥θ − θbt ∥2 follows X 2 . Here, θ ∈ {θ⋆ , θk } and X 2 is the
     k    tk              k                            k   Σtk              d                                     d
chi-square distribution with d degrees of freedom, whose expectation is d. Hence, we have


   E ∥θk − θ⋆ ∥2Σt       Fk ≤ 2 · E ∥θk − θbtk ∥2Σt             Fk + 2 · E ∥θ⋆ − θbtk ∥2Σt

                                                                                                 Fk = 2d,             (F.19)
                     k                                     k                                 k


where the first inequality uses the triangle inequality for ∥ · ∥Σtk and (a + b)2 ≤ 2(a2 + b2 ) for all
a, b ≥ 0. Plugging (F.19) into (F.18), we obtain

                            √      hK−1 X−1
                                    X tk+1                              1/2 i
                term (A) ≤ 4 2d · E         E ∥ψVt (st , at )∥2Σ−1 Fk
                                                                                 t
                                              k=0   t=tk

                                 p            hK−1 X−1
                                               X tk+1                          1/2 i
                              ≤ 8 (d + 1)d · E         E I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) Fk
                                                     k=0       t=tk
                                                     −1
                                                  h TX
                                 p          √                                   1/2 i
                              ≤ 8 (d + 1)d · T · E      E I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) Fk
                                                                t=0
                                                   −1
                                 p          √   hTX                          i 1/2
                              ≤ 8 (d + 1)d · T · E    E I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) Fk
                                                                t=0
                                 p          √ q
                              = 8 (d + 1)d · T · E H0 − HT ,                                                          (F.20)


where the second inequality follows the same arguments in (F.13) and (F.15), the second last in-
equality invokes the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Also, the last inequality uses the concavity of the
square-root function, while the last equality uses I(θ; ξt+1 | Dt ) = Ht − Ht+1 and the tower prop-


                                                           36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


erty of the conditional expectation. Recall that H0 − HT = O(d · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ))) almost surely
in (F.6). We have

                                                                              √
                              term (A) = O d3/2 · log(T R2 /(dλ)) ·            T .                  (F.21)


Analysis of Term (B). By Definition F.1, we have

            hK−1
             X      h                                                            ⊤ ii
term (B) = E     Eπk ψV πk (stk+1 −1 , atk+1 −1 ) − ψV πk (stk+1 −1 , atk+1 −1 ) θ⋆
                                θk                                θ⋆
                k=0
                 hK−1
                  X      h                                                    ⊤ ii    0               0
                      Eπk ψV πk (stk −1 , atk −1 ) − ψV πk (stk −1 , atk −1 ) θ⋆ + E Vθπ⋆ (s0 ) − Vθπ0 (s0 )

               −E
                                      θk                          θ⋆
                       k=1
            hK−1
             X      h                                                                       ii
          ≤E     Eπk ψV πk (stk+1 −1 , atk+1 −1 ) − ψV πk (stk+1 −1 , atk+1 −1 ) 2 · ∥θ⋆ ∥2
                                 θk                               θ⋆
                k=0
                 hK−1
                  X      h                                                              ii
               +E     Eπk ψV πk (stk −1 , atk −1 ) − ψV πk (stk −1 , atk −1 ) 2 · ∥θ⋆ ∥2 + 2R
                                      θ⋆                          θk
                       k=1

          ≤ 4R · E K · ∥θ⋆ ∥2 + 2R,

                                                                                                    (F.22)


where the first equality uses stk ∼ Pθ⋆ (· | stk −1 , atk −1 ), atk −1 = π k (stk −1 ), and


                        Estk ∼Pθ⋆ (· | stk −1 ,atk −1 ) V (stk ) = ψV (stk −1 , atk −1 )⊤ θ⋆


for all 0 < k < K and V . In (F.22), the first inequality invokes the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
and |Es0 ∼ρ V (s0 )| ≤ R for all V , while the last inequality uses the triangle inequality for ∥ · ∥2 and
∥ψV (s, a)∥2 ≤ R for all (s, a) ∈ S × A and V . By (F.7), we have


         4R · E K · ∥θ⋆ ∥2 + 2R = O R · 1 + d log 2 · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ)) · E ∥θ⋆ ∥2


                                = O λ1/2 d1/2 R · 1 + d · log 2 · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ)) ,


where the last equality uses the fact that the prior distribution is N (0, λId ) and E[∥θ⋆ ∥2 ] ≤
p              √
  E[∥θ⋆ ∥22 ] ≤ λd. Here, ∥θ⋆ ∥22 /λ follows the chi-square distribution with d degrees of freedom,
whose expectation is d. For a sufficiently large d, we have


                  term (B) = O λ1/2 d1/2 R · 1 + d · log 2 · log(1 + T R2 /(dλ))


                           = O λ1/2 d3/2 R · log(T R2 /(dλ)) .

                                                                                                    (F.23)


Combining Lemma E.1, (F.21), and (F.23), we obtain

 hK−1
  X          X−1 k
          htk+1                  k
                                       ii     γd3/2 · log(T R2 /(dλ)) √   γλ1/2 d3/2 R
E     Eπk       Vθπk (st ) − Vθπ⋆ (st ) = O                          · T+              · log(T R2 /(dλ)) .
            t=t
                                                       1−γ                  1−γ
   k=0             k


                                                        37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Definition 4.2 and a similar argument of (E.1) in the proof of Theorem 4.4, we obtain

                                       γd3/2 · log(T R2 /(dλ)) √   γλ1/2 d3/2 R
                         R(T ) = O                            · T+              · log(T R2 /(dλ)) + ϵ · T .
                                                1−γ                  1−γ

Thus, we prove Proposition F.3.


A PPENDIX G                           M ORE E XPERIMENTS
In what follows, we provide the detailed setups and additional results of our experiments.

G.1                      G AME OF 24
Task Setup. Game of 24 [73] is a mathematical puzzle where the player uses basic arithmetic
operations (i.e., addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) with four given numbers to get 24.
Figure 10 gives an illustrative example for Game of 24.



                             [Illustrative example for Game of 24]
                                    • Numbers: [2, 5, 8, 11]
                                    • Arithmetic Operations: [+, −, ×, /, (, )]
                                    • Solution:
                                                                 (11 − 5) × 8/4 = 24


Figure 10: An illustrative example of the Game of 24. The player uses combinations of basic
arithmetic operations with four given numbers to get 24.


                                     Game of 24, gpt-4                                                                               Game of 24, gpt-3.5-turbo
                   100                                                                                        50
                                                                                                                       RAFA(b = 1)
                                                                                                                       RAFA(b = 2)
                                                                                                                       Reflexion
                    80                                                                                        40       ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
                                                                                           Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                       ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
Success Rate (%)


                                                              RAFA(b = 1)                                              ToT(b = 1, 10 trials)
                    60                                        RAFA(b = 2)                                     30       ToT(b = 2, 10 trials)
                                                              Reflexion
                                                              ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
                                                              ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
                    40                                        ToT(b = 1, 10 trials)                           20
                                                              ToT(b = 2, 10 trials)


                    20                                                                                        10


                     0   3      6      9       12        15             18                                     0   3             6             9       12   15   18
                                           Step                                                                                                    Step

Figure 11: Sample efficiency on Game of 24. RAFA agent achieves strong performance due to an
orchestration of reasoning and acting. The success rate at a given step is the number of tasks that is
solved within the given step.


                                                                                      38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Game of 24, gpt-4                                                                             Game of 24, gpt-3.5-turbo
                    100                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                  RAFA(b = 1)
                                                                                                                  RAFA(b = 2)
                                                                                                                  Reflexion
 Success Rate (%)    80                                                                                    40     ToT(b = 1, 8.6M tokens)


                                                                                        Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                                  ToT(b = 2, 17.8M tokens)


                     60                                                                                    30


                     40                                                                                    20
                                                      RAFA(b = 1)
                                                      RAFA(b = 2)
                     20                               Reflexion                                            10
                                                      ToT(b = 1, 7.4M tokens)
                                                      ToT(b = 2, 11.6M tokens)
                     0
                    0.0M   0.8M    1.6M      2.4M         3.2M              4.0M                            0
                                                                                                           0.0M       4.0M              8.0M     12.0M   16.0M   20.0M
                                       Tokens                                                                                               Tokens


Figure 12: Token efficiency on Game of 24. RAFA is superior in terms of token complexity. Methods
that lack planning like Reflexion has a low token demand, however it is not enough to compen-
sate for the drop in performance. Methods that lacks in-context learning like ToT would generate
unnecessary repeated trials due to lack of reflection and improvement, which makes the method to-
ken inefficient.


To evaluate the performance of RAFA in a more profound way, we also consider token complexity
for evaluation as shown in Figure 12. This rules out the possibility that some methods can get better
performance via just using more queries. We compare the token efficiency of our method on the
Game of 24 with various baseline methods and the results and RAFA is superior in terms of token
complexity. Methods that lack planning like Reflexion has a low token demand, however it is
not enough to compensate for the drop in performance. Methods that lacks in-context learning like
ToT would generate unnecessary repeated trials due to lack of reflection and improvement, which
makes the method token inefficient.
Following Yao et al. [73], we use the same subset indexed 901-1,000 from a total of 1,362 tasks
collected from 4nums.com. The index is arranged from easy to hard by human solving time so the
subset is relatively challenging. The agent receives a reward of 1 if the proposed formula is correct
and the proposed formula is accepted and concatenated into the state; if the final result is exactly
24, the agent receives a reward of 10, and the episode terminates. Otherwise, the agent receives
a reward of 0, and the proposed formula is not accepted. We limit the maximum trials for each
task to 20 to avoid meaningless retries. The task is successful if the agent receives a return larger
than 10 1 (i.e., find a valid solution within 20 steps). We report the final success rate and sample
efficiency for each method on the subset of 100 tasks. Notably, a task is considered successful if
the RAFA agent returns one and only one correct formula, which is more strictly evaluated than
Tree of Thoughts (ToT, Yao et al. [73]): we allow open-loop agents like ToT to retry 20 times and
consider them successful if they generate a valid solution in any of the 20 trials. For CoT [67] and
Reflexion [53] agents, we allow them to reflect on the environment’s feedback but require them
to generate a plan immediately without sophisticated reasoning. only require any one of the best k
formulas to be correct for success. Thus, our result is not directly comparable to theirs.
RAFA Setup. In the Game of 24, the RAFA agent uses ToT as the planner, regenerates a plan when
the agent receives a zero reward and continues acting according to the previous plan when the agent
receives a positive reward. We set the base ToT planner with beam search width b = 1, 2 and use
both gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 to test the RAFA’s boost-up over LLM agents with different
reasoning abilities. We set the temperature t = 0.2 by default to favor rigorous reasoning and
t = 0.7 for majority voting.
Reduced Hallucination Through Interaction. A comprehensive review of various method pro-
posals revealed significant hallucination, especially with gpt-3.5-turbo. A common halluci-
nation is that the agent believes she can reuse the same number (e.g. using the number 2 twice as
    1
      For gpt-3.5-turbo, we report the success rate when the agent receives a return no less than 3 (i.e.,
find all sub-steps to get 24 but not necessarily generate a whole correct formula). This is because ToT with
gpt-3.5-turbo is known to suffer from correctly get a whole formula due to limited reasoning ability and
non-perfect prompts. See https://github.com/princeton-nlp/tree-of-thought-llm/issues/24 for more details.


                                                                                   39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


illustrated in Figure 2). RAFA efficiently mitigates such hallucination by actively interacting with
the environment, displaying exceptional hallucination resistance and improved performance.
Enhanced Efficiency Through Planning. Evidenced in Figure 3, the RAFA agent substantially
surpasses the Reflexion baseline, reflecting heightened efficiency and minimized regret by negat-
ing careless trials. For example, without carefully planning, agent may give negative answers,
e.g,“Impossible to obtain 24 with the given numbers, or unchecked answers, e.g.,“Answer: 6 * 9
/ (3 - 2) = 24”. This reduction of careless trails is especially achieved when a strong backbone LLMs
(e.g., gpt-4) is used, even with a basic planning method, such as BFS with B = 1.
Ablation Study. The RAFA agent’s performance is dissected by individually examining its com-
ponents: (1) Planning modules or model/elite LLM, (2) Reflection modules or critic LLM, and (3)
Different LLMs. Results, displayed in Table 1 and Figure 3, affirm the substantial contribution of
each segment to the aggregate performance. Compared to absent or rudimentary zero-shot planning,
a basic planner markedly enhances overall performance. However, augmenting planner strength
only offers marginal performance enhancements. Both critic LLM and robust LLM usage emerge
as pivotal for optimal performance.

G.2     ALFW ORLD

   Goal: heat an egg and
                             Reasoning                      You see a fork 1      Go to      You see a
    put it on dining table                 Go to
                                         cabinet 1            and a cup 1.       drawer 1    cd 1.
You see a
cabinet 1, a
countertop 1, a              Elite LLM
                                           Go to    Model LLM You see a bread                 Egg 1 is  Critic LLM
diningtable 1,                           countertop           1 and an egg 1.   Take egg 1
                                                                                             picked up.
and a drawer 1.                              1
    Acting
                                                             You see a cd 1     Take cup 1
      Go to                                Go to                                              Cup 1 is
                                                              and a cup 1.         from
      countertop 1                        drawer 1                                           picked up.
                                                                                 drawer 1
          Env
             ...



                        Figure 13: An illustration of RAFA in the ALFWorld environment.

Task Setup. The action space of ALFWorld consists of high-level actions such as “heat a potato
with a microwave”, which is executed in the underlying embodied simulator through low-level action
primitives. The egocentric visual observations of the simulator are translated into natural language
before being provided to the agent. The state is the history of the observations. If a task goal can be
precisely achieved by the agent, it will be counted as a success.
RAFA Setup. In the ALFWorld environment, the RAFA planner is instantiated as Breadth First
Search (BFS). Specifically, B and U are both set to 2, and we use gpt-3 (text-davinci-003)
for the Critic, Model, and Elite modules. Besides, since it is challenging to prompt the LLM
with the stored full trajectories in the memory buffer due to the token limit, we make the following
modifications: the Model LLM instance uses only the partial trajectory executed so far in the current
episode, and the Elite LLM instance uses the same partial executed trajectory with additional
model-generated state-action pairs during the planning subroutine. When switching is triggered
after 20 failed timesteps (i.e., an episode), a summary from the failure trajectory is generated by
gpt-4 and added to the Critic prompt.
Reduced Hallucination Through Interaction. The baselines are more likely to hallucinate when
the target object is not found after exploring many locations. On the other hand, the critic LLM
used in RAFA is able to probe the hallucination by generating the summary “In this environment,
my critic assigned a 1/3 value after taking a knife. However, the task is to take and cool a tomato.”
and avoid it in the next episode. Therefore, RAFA is more sample-efficient due to an orchestration
of reasoning and acting and the ability to mitigate hallucination through interaction.
Ablation Study. To better understand the role that the planning subroutine plays in the RAFA al-
gorithm, we conduct ablation studies on the search depth U and search breadth B. The results
are shown in Figure 14 and 15, respectively. We observe that when setting the search depth to
B = U = 2, the success rate is higher than when setting the search depth to U = 1 or setting the
search breadth B = 1, especially at the initial episode. This indicates that the reasoning ability of


                                                                    40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RAFA is enhanced through the planning subroutine. Besides, the algorithm is also more sample-
efficient when setting B = U = 2, indicating a better capacity for learning and planning through
interaction and reasoning.

                     100                     ALFWorld                                    100                 ALFWorld

                         90                                                                  90
      Success Rate (%)


                                                                          Success Rate (%)
                         80                                                                  80
                         70                                                                  70
                         60                             RAFA, B=2, U=2                       60                         RAFA, B=2, U=2
                                                        RAFA, B=2, U=1                                                  RAFA, B=1, U=2
                         50 0      2          4      6          8                            50 0        2    4      6          8
                                             Episode                                                         Episode
            Figure 14: Ablation on the search depth                            Figure 15: Ablation on the search breadth
            U in the ALFWorld environment.                                     B in the ALFWorld environment.


G.3             B LOCKS W ORLD
Task Setup. The reported success rates are averaged in tasks that require different minimum steps.
Specifically, the evaluation is conducted in 57 4-step tasks and 114 6-step tasks. We set the state
as the current arrangement of the blocks and the actions contain Stack, Unstack, Put, and Pickup,
coupled with a block being operated.


                                        Reasoning   Unstack purple
Goal: blue block on top                                                                             s1
                                                    block from red
 of the orange block                                    block


                                                    Unstack yellow
                                       Elite LLM                         Model LLM                                Critic LLM
                                                    block from blue
                                                         block
    Acting
   Unstack yellow
   block from blue                                       Pick up the
        block                                           orange block
                         Env
                           ...


                                 Figure 16: Illustration of RAFA in the BlocksWorld environment.


RAFA Setup. The search space is up to 54 for a 4-step task and is up to 56 for a 6-step
task. For 4-step tasks, RAFA can achieve over 50% success rate within 8 learning steps
with Vicuna-13B(v1.3) and achieve over 80% success rate within 8 learning steps with
Vicuna-33B(v1.3). For 6-step tasks, RAFA can achieve over 40% success rate within 20 learn-
ing steps with Vicuna-13B(v1.3) and achieve over 50% success rate within 20 learning steps
with Vicuna-33B(v1.3). Empirical results show that Vicuna could produce wrong state tran-
sition in the planning phase. RAFA can mitigate hallucination with feedback from failure trajectories
and active exploration. One can draw such a conclusion by comparing RAFA with RAP as RAP does
not receive feedback from the real environment.

G.4             T IC -TAC -T OE
Task Setup. Tic-Tac-Toe [7] is a competitive game in which two players take turns to mark a three-
by-three grid with X or O, and a player succeeds when their marks occupy a diagonal, horizontal, or
vertical line.


                                                                         41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Reasoning                    O | O | 3               O | O | 3
                                               -----------             -----------
                                                4 | X | X               X | X | X               Fail
                                               -----------             -----------
                                                7 | 8 | 9               7 | 8 | 9

    O | 2 | 3                        Dynamic O | 2 | 3 Opponent O | 2 | 3
   ----------- Elite LLM            Model LLM ----------- Model LLM ----------- Critic LLM       Not
    4 | X | X                                  O | X | X             O | X | X                  done
   -----------                                -----------           -----------
    7 | 8 | 9                                  7 | 8 | 9             X | 8 | 9
 Acting
                                                O | 2 | 3               O | 2 | 3
                                               -----------             -----------
                                                4 | X | X               X | X | X               Fail
     Env                                       -----------             -----------
Opponent action                                 O | 8 | 9               O | 8 | 9
          ...


Figure 17: Illustration of RAFA (playing O) in the Tic-Tac-Toe game. States are represented by
a numbered 3 × 3 grid and actions are represented by a number between 1-9. The opponent is
considered part of the environment.

We adopt the convention that X plays first. As illustrated below in Figure ??, we use a numbered
3 × 3 grid to represent a state and a number between 1 and 9 to represent an action, which also
illustrates the transition and reward function. Although Tic-Tac-Toe is a solved game with a forced
draw assuming the best play from both players, it remains a challenge for LLMs to accomplish this
task even when prompted to play only the optimal moves. We collected the battle outcomes between
different LLM models in Table 5, where we notice that gpt-4 performs worse when playing as “O”.
Thus, in our experiments, we let RAFA play as “O” and let baseline LLM models play as “X”.

                                                              O
                  X wins : Tie : O wins
                                                gpt-3.5               gpt-4
                           gpt-3.5          55% : 35% : 10%       90% : 0% : 10%
                  X
                            gpt-4           65% : 15% : 20%       90% : 0% : 10%

Table 5: Probability of “X wins,” “Tie,” and “O wins” in Tic-Tac-Toe. The results are obtained by
averaging over 20 simulated games.

RAFA Setup. For implementation, we set B = 3 and adopt MCTS to evaluate the proposed actions.
We set U = 4 which is the maximum game depth. We set a prediction-based switching condition
triggered when the prediction does not agree with the observation. Specifically, policy switches
when one of the following events occurs:
       • The RAFA agent takes an action and predicts the next state, which is different from the
         observed next state.
       • Before the opponent takes an action, the RAFA agent tries to predict such an action, which
         is different from the actual action that the opponent takes.
       • After the opponent takes an action, RAFA agent predicts the next state, which is different
         from the observed next state.
       • The RAFA agent predicts the current game status (X wins, O wins, Tie, Not finished), which
         is different from the environment’s feedback.
Besides, we use the ground truth of those predictions to update the agent’s belief of the world, which
also implicitly affects the agent’s policy.
We define a discrete reward function with r = −1, 0, 1 corresponding to lose, tie, and win. The
agent only gets rewards when the current episode is completed. We define the score of an agent as
its expected reward which can be approximated by simulation. The empirical results are shown in


                                                 42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


figure 18. We conduct experiments using both gpt-4 as the backend. The score of RAFA (B = 4)
increases as it interacts more with the environment. By analyzing the generated trajectories, we also
notice that although RAFA agent is not perfect, it exploits the weakness of the baseline model well,
which is why it almost never loses after 7 episodes.


                                       Tic-Tac-Toe (Player O), gpt-4
                             0.9
                                     RAFA(B = 3)
                             0.6     RAFA(B = 4)
                             0.3
                    Score



                             0.0

                            −0.3

                            −0.6

                            −0.9 0     2         4             6      8      10
                                                     Episode

Figure 18: Score curves in the Tic-Tac-Toe game. We use gpt-4 as backend. Results are averaged
across 10 simulations and smoothed with a window size of 5.



A PPENDIX H         P ROMPTS
In this section, we give details of the prompts used for each task.

H.1   G AME OF 24
Critic LLM. For the LLM instance of the Critic, we prompt it with the current action (formula)
with reward and feedback from the environment. The critic is required to determine whether each
formula is valid or not and give a ”sure” or ”impossible” label for the formula. We use critic prompts
to generate reflection for formula proposal and evaluation, respectively.

                              Critic prompt (for formula proposal)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24. Now we
 consider the following puzzle: {input}.
 Here is an attempt answer:
 {answer}
 And we have the following feedback:
 {feedback}
 Now using the above feedback, give 'sure' or 'impossible' labels for
 each formula with left numbers from each step. Give 'sure' if the
 formula is correct and can lead to 24 and give 'impossible' if the
 formula is incorrect or illegal. First repeat the formula with left
 numbers from each step above and then give the label, with the
 following form: {{formula}} (left: {{left numbers}}): {{label}}.


                                                  43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Critic prompt (for formula evaluation)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24. Now we
 consider the following puzzle: {input}.
 Here is an attempt answer:
 {answer}
 And we have the following feedback:
 {feedback}
 Now using the above feedback, give 'sure' or 'impossible' labels for
 left numbers from each step. Give 'sure' if the formula is correct and
 left numbers can lead to 24 and give 'impossible' if the formula is
 incorrect or illegal. First repeat the left numbers from each step
 above and then give the label, with the following form: {{left
 numbers}}: {{label}}.

Elite LLM. We adopt the same prompts used in Tree-of-Thoughts [73] to propose and evaluate for-
mulas, except that we concatenate the reflections from each step to avoid making repeated mistakes.
                         Elite prompt (for formula proposal)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24.
 Evaluate if given numbers can reach 24 and choose labels from 'sure',
 'likely' and 'impossible'.
 What you have learned about the puzzle are summarized below.
 {reflections}
 Now use numbers and basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to generate
 possible next steps. Make sure use steps that is sure to leads to 24
 and avoid steps that are impossible to generate 24. Note that it is
 possible that we are considering intermediate steps so the numbers of
 the input may be less than 4.
 Example:
 Input: 2 8 8 14
 Possible next steps:
 2 + 8 = 10 (left: 8 10 14)
 8 / 2 = 4 (left: 4 8 14)
 14 + 2 = 16 (left: 8 8 16)
 2 * 8 = 16 (left: 8 14 16)
 8 - 2 = 6 (left: 6 8 14)
 14 - 8 = 6 (left: 2 6 8)
 14 /    2 = 7 (left: 7 8 8)
 14 - 2 = 12 (left: 8 8 12)
 Example:
 Input: 2 5 8
 5 - 2 = 3 (left: 3 8)
 5 * 2 = 10 (left: 10 8)


                                                44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 8 / 2 = 4 (left: 4 5)
 Now try with the following input:
 Input: {input}
 Possible next steps:
  {input}


                       Elite prompt (for formula evaluation)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24.
 Evaluate if given numbers can reach 24 and choose labels from 'sure',
 'likely' and 'impossible'.
 What you have learned about the puzzle are summarized below.
 {reflections}
 If the given numbers are already in the feedback above, just give the
 answer. Otherwise enumerate possible steps and try to give an
 approximate answer. Give the final answer in a separated line.
  {input}


                Elite prompt (for last step formula evaluation)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24.
 Evaluate if given numbers can reach 24 and choose labels from 'sure',
 'likely' and 'impossible'.
 What you have learned about the puzzle are summarized below.
 {reflections}
 Use numbers and basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to obtain 24.
 Given an input and an answer, give a judgement (sure/impossible) if
 the answer is correct, i.e., it uses each input exactly once and no
 other numbers, and reach 24.
 Input: 4 4 6 8
 Answer: (4 + 8) * (6 - 4) = 24
 Judge:
 sure
 Input: 2 9 10 12
 Answer: 2 * 12 * (10 - 9) = 24
 Judge:
 sure
 Input: 4 9 10 13
 Answer: (13 - 9) * (10 - 4) = 24
 Judge:
 sure
 Input: 4 4 6 8
 Answer: (4 + 8) * (6 - 4) + 1 = 25
 Judge:


                                             45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 impossible
 Input: 2 9 10 12
 Answer: 2 * (12 - 10) = 24
 Judge:
 impossible
 Input: 4 9 10 13
 Answer: (13 - 4) * (10 - 9) = 24
 Judge:
 impossible
 Input: {input}
 Answer: {answer}
 Judge:

For Chain-of-Thought baselines, we adopt the same methodology, and keep the original prompts
except for adding reflections as below.
                  Elite prompt (for chain-of-thought proposals)
 Now we would like to play a game of 24. That is, given 4 numbers, try
 to use them with arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24.
 Evaluate if given numbers can reach 24 and choose labels from 'sure',
 'likely' and 'impossible'.
 What you have learned about the puzzle are summarized below.
 {reflections}
 Now just remember the tips from before (if any) and focus on the new
 task. Use numbers and basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to obtain
 24. Each step, you are only allowed to choose two of the remaining
 numbers to obtain a new number.
 Input: 4 4 6 8
 Steps:
 4 + 8 = 12 (left: 4 6 12)
 6 - 4 = 2 (left: 2 12)
 2 * 12 = 24 (left: 24)
 Answer: (6 - 4) * (4 + 8) = 24
 Input: 2 9 10 12
 Steps:
 12 * 2 = 24 (left: 9 10 24)
 10 - 9 = 1 (left: 1 24)
 24 * 1 = 24 (left: 24)
 Answer: (12 * 2) * (10 - 9) = 24
 Input: 4 9 10 13
 Steps:
 13 - 10 = 3 (left: 3 4 9)
 9 - 3 = 6 (left: 4 6)
 4 * 6 = 24 (left: 24)
 Answer: 4 * (9 - (13 - 10)) = 24


                                             46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Input: 1 4 8 8
 Steps:
 8 / 4 = 2 (left: 1 2 8)
 1 + 2 = 3 (left: 3 8)
 3 * 8 = 24 (left: 24)
 Answer: (1 + 8 / 4) * 8 = 24
 Input: 5 5 5 9
 Steps:
 5 + 5 = 10 (left: 5 9 10)
 10 + 5 = 15 (left: 9 15)
 15 + 9 = 24 (left: 24)
 Answer: ((5 + 5) + 5) + 9 = 24
 Input: {input}



H.2   ALFW ORLD
Critic LLM. For the LLM instance of the Critic, we prompt it with successful examples for
each of the six task types to generate the value within each episode. Specifically, the critic LLM first
determines if the value of the current state changes. If it changes, the critic LLM then generates the
scalar value with the corresponding reason. We provide the following two examples in the put and
cool tasks, respectively.

                  Critic prompt (for value generation), "put" task
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a countertop 1, a
 garbagecan 1, a handtowelholder 2, a handtowelholder 1, a sinkbasin 2,
 a sinkbasin 1, a toilet 1, a toiletpaperhanger 1, and a towelholder
 1.Your task is to: put some spraybottle on toilet.
 > critic: My task requires two sub-goals in order: take a spraybottle
 and put the spraybottle on the toilet. My current state satisfies zero
 of the two sub-goals. The value is 0/2=0.
 > OK.
 On the cabinet 1, you see a cloth 1, a soapbar 1, a soapbottle 1.
 > OK.
 The cabinet 2 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the cabinet 2. The cabinet 2 is open. In it, you see a candle
 1, and a spraybottle 2.
 > OK.
 You pick up the spraybottle 2 from the cabinet 2.
 > critic: Now I take a spraybottle. My current state satisfies the
 first of the two sub-goals: take a spraybottle. The value is 1/2=0.5.
 > OK.
 On the toilet 1, you see a soapbottle 2.
 > OK.


                                                  47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You put the spraybottle 2 in/on the toilet 1.
 > critic: Now I put the spraybottle on the toilet. My current state
 satisfies all the two sub-goals. The value is 2/2=1.


                Critic prompt (for value generation), "cool" task
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 16, a cabinet 15, a cabinet 14, a cabinet 13, a cabinet 12, a
 cabinet 11, a cabinet 10, a cabinet 9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a
 cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a
 cabinet 1, a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
 diningtable 1, a drawer 5, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a
 drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a safe 1, a
 sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a
 stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1.
 Your task is to: cool some pan and put it in stoveburner.
 > critic: My task requires three sub-goals in order: take a pan, cool
 the pan with fridge, and put the pan in the stoveburner. My current
 state satisfies zero of the three sub-goals. The value is 0/3=0.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 1, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 2, you see a pot 1.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 3, you see a pan 1.
 > OK.
 You pick up the pan 1 from the stoveburner 3.
 > critic: Now I take a pan. My current state satisfies the first of
 the three sub-goals: take a pan. The value is 1/3=0.333.
 > OK.
 The fridge 1 is closed.
 > OK.
 You cool the pan 1 using the fridge 1.
 > critic: Now I cool the pan. My current state satisfies the first two
 of the three sub-goals: take a pan and cool the pan with fridge. The
 value is 2/3=0.667.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 1, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 You put the pan 1 in/on the stoveburner 1.
 > critic: Now I put the pan in the stoveburner. My current state
 satisfies all the three sub-goals. The value is 3/3=1.


In addition to the prompt for value generation within each episode, we also prompt the Critic
LLM to generate summary feedback according to the past failure trajectory. We use the same prompt


                                               48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all six task types. Specifically, it contains the full failure trajectory (observation only), as well as
the failure feedback at the end of each trajectory.
                         Critic prompt (for feedback generation)
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a
 cabinet 1, a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 3, a countertop 2, a
 countertop 1, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a
 garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a shelf 3, a shelf 2, a shelf 1, a
 sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a
 stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1.
 Your task is to: put a clean plate in countertop.
 > critic: My task requires three sub-goals in order: take a plate,
 clean the plate with sinkbasin, and put the plate on the countertop.
 My current state satisfies zero of the three sub-goals. The value is
 0/3=0.
 > OK.
 The drawer 1 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the drawer 1. The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a
 creditcard 2, a knife 1, and a spatula 2.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 2, you see a pan 1.
 > OK.
 You pick up the pan 1 from the stoveburner 2.
 > critic: Now I take a pan. My current state satisfies the first of
 the three sub-goals: take a plate. The value is 1/3=0.167.
 > OK.
 On the sinkbasin 1, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 You put the pan 1 in/on the sinkbasin 1.
 > OK.
 The microwave 1 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the microwave 1. The microwave 1 is open. In it, you see a
 potato 1.
 > OK.
 On the garbagecan 1, you see a soapbottle 2.
 > OK.
 The microwave 1 is open. In it, you see a potato 1.
 > OK.
 On the coffeemachine 1, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 2, you see a bread 1, a cellphone 2, a cellphone 1,
 a papertowelroll 1, a plate 2, and a soapbottle 1.


                                                    49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 > OK.
 The drawer 2 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the drawer 2. The drawer 2 is open. In it, you see a spatula
 1.
 > OK.
 On the sinkbasin 1, you see a pan 1.
 > OK.
 On the cabinet 3, you see a cup 1.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 1, you see a apple 2, a dishsponge 2, a potato 3,
 and a potato 2.
 STATUS: FAIL
 Failure feedback: In this environment, my critic assigned a 1/3 value
 after taking a pan. However, the task is to take and clean a plate. I
 noticed that the plate was found on countertop 2. In the next trial, I
 will go to countertop 2 to take the plate, then go to a sinkbasin to
 clean the plate.


 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 20, a cabinet 19, a cabinet 18, a cabinet 17, a cabinet 16, a
 cabinet 15, a cabinet 14, a cabinet 13, a cabinet 12, a cabinet 11, a
 cabinet 10, a cabinet 9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a cabinet 6, a
 cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a
 coffeemachine 1, a countertop 3, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
 drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a
 microwave 1, a shelf 3, a shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a
 stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a stoveburner 1, and
 a toaster 1.
 Your task is to: put two saltshaker in drawer.
 > critic: My task requires four sub-goals in order: take the first
 saltshaker, put the first saltshaker in the drawer, take the second
 saltshaker, and put the second saltshaker in the drawer. My current
 state satisfies zero of the four sub-goals. The value is 0/4=0.
 > OK.
 On the coffeemachine 1, you see a cup 1, a fork 4, and a potato 2.
 > OK.
 On the toaster 1, you see a pan 1 and a knife 1.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 3, you see a bowl 2, a houseplant 1, a knife 2, a
 peppershaker 1, a saltshaker 4, a soapbottle 1, a spatula 2, and a
 tomato 3.
 > OK.



                                             50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You pick up the saltshaker 4 from the countertop 3.
 > critic: Now I take the first saltshaker. My current state satisfies
 the first of the four sub-goals: take the first saltshaker. The value
 is 1/4=0.25.
 > OK.
 The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 You put the saltshaker 4 in/on the drawer 1.
 > critic: Now I put the first creditcard in the dresser. My current
 state satisfies the first two of the four sub-goals: take the first
 saltshaker and put the first saltshaker in the drawer. The value is
 2/4=0.5.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 1, you see a bread 1.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 2, you see a potato 1, a pot 2, and a knife 3.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 3, you see a fork 1, a fork 2, and a cup 2.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 4, you see a peppershaker 1 and a pan 2.
 > OK.
 You pick up the peppershaker 1 from the stoveburner 4.
 > critic: Now I take the second saltshaker. My current state satisfies
 the first three of the four sub-goals: take the first saltshaker, put
 the first saltshaker in the drawer, and take the second saltshaker.
 The value is 3/4=0.75.
 > OK.
 The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a saltshaker 4.
 > OK.
 You put the peppershaker 1 in/on the drawer 1.
 > critic: Now I put the second creditcard in the dresser. My current
 state satisfies all the four sub-goals. The value is 4/4=1.
 STATUS: FAIL
 Failure feedback: In this environment, my critic assigned a 1/4 value
 after taking a saltshaker and a 3/4 value after taking a peppershaker.
 However, the task is to put two saltshaker in the drawer. I noticed
 that one saltshaker was put on the countertop 3. I didn't find the
 second saltshaker in this trial. In the next trial, I will first go to
 countertop 3 to take the first saltshaker and then explore other
 locations to find a second saltshaker, including drawer 2-3, shelf
 1-3, and cabinet 1-20.


                                             51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a
 coffeemachine 1, a countertop 3, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
 drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a
 microwave 1, a shelf 3, a shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a
 stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a stoveburner 1, and
 a toaster 1.
 Your task is to: put a cool tomato in microwave.
 > critic: My task requires three sub-goals in order: take a tomato,
 cool the tomato with fridge, and put the tomato in the microwave. My
 current state satisfies zero of the three sub-goals. The value is
 0/3=0.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 1, you see a mug 1, and a saltshaker 1.
 > OK.
 On the sinkbasin 1, you see a fork 1, a glassbottle 2, a spatula 1,
 and a spoon 3.
 > OK.
 You pick up the fork 1 from the sinkbasin 1.
 > critic: Now I take a fork. My current state satisfies the first of
 the six sub-goals: take a fork. The value is 1/3=0.333.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 2, you see a butterknife 2, a butterknife 1, a
 cellphone 1, a glassbottle 1, a knife 1, a lettuce 3, a peppershaker
 1, a statue 2, a statue 1, and a vase 1.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 3, you see a bread 1, a butterknife 3, a creditcard
 2, a houseplant 1, a knife 3, a knife 2, a mug 2, a peppershaker 2,
 and a spatula 2.
 > OK.
 On the stoveburner 4, you see a pan 1.
 > OK.
 The drawer 3 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the drawer 3. The drawer 3 is open. In it, you see a
 saltshaker 3.
 > OK.
 The fridge 1 is closed.
 > OK.
 On the countertop 3, you see a bread 1, a butterknife 3, a creditcard
 2, a houseplant 1, a knife 3, a knife 2, a mug 2, a peppershaker 2,
 and a spatula 2.
 > OK.



                                             52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 On the cabinet 1, you see a dishsponge 1.
 > OK.
 The cabinet 2 is closed.
 > OK.
 You open the cabinet 2. The cabinet 2 is open. In it, you see nothing.
 > OK.
 On the cabinet 3, you see a cd 1 and a plate 4.
 STATUS: FAIL
 Failure feedback: In this environment, my critic assigned a 1/3 value
 after taking a fork. However, the task is to take and cool a tomato. I
 didn't find the tomato in this trial. In the next trial, I will
 explore other locations to find a tomato, including cabinet 4, cabinet
 5, coffeemachine 1, microwave 1, shelf 1-3, stoveburner 1-4 and
 toaster 1, etc.


Model LLM and Elite LLM. We use the same prompt for both the Model LLM and the Elite
LLM. Specifically, we simply prompt these two instances with the successful past trajectories (ob-
servations and actions) for each task type and expect the Model LLM and Elite LLM to generate
the possible next observation and the potential actions, respectively. Below, we provide two prompt
examples in the put and cool tasks, respectively.


                           Model & Elite prompt, "put" task
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a countertop 1, a
 garbagecan 1, a handtowelholder 2, a handtowelholder 1, a sinkbasin 2,
 a sinkbasin 1, a toilet 1, a toiletpaperhanger 1, and a towelholder 1.
 Your task is to: put some spraybottle on toilet.
 > go to cabinet 1
 On the cabinet 1, you see a cloth 1, a soapbar 1, a soapbottle 1.
 > go to cabinet 2
 The cabinet 2 is closed.
 > open cabinet 2
 You open the cabinet 2. The cabinet 2 is open. In it, you see a candle
 1, and a spraybottle 2.
 > take spraybottle 2 from cabinet 2
 You pick up the spraybottle 2 from the cabinet 2.
 > go to toilet 1
 On the toilet 1, you see a soapbottle 2.
 > put spraybottle 2 in/on toilet 1
 You put the spraybottle 2 in/on the toilet 1.


                                                53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Model & Elite prompt, "cool" task
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
 cabinet 16, a cabinet 15, a cabinet 14, a cabinet 13, a cabinet 12, a
 cabinet 11, a cabinet 10, a cabinet 9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a
 cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a
 cabinet 1, a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
 diningtable 1, a drawer 5, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a
 drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a safe 1, a
 sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a
 stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1.
 Your task is to: cool some pan and put it in stoveburner.
 > go to stoveburner 1
 On the stoveburner 1, you see nothing.
 > go to stoveburner 2
 On the stoveburner 2, you see a pot 1.
 > go to stoveburner 3
 On the stoveburner 3, you see a pan 1.
 > take pan 1 from stoveburner 3
 You pick up the pan 1 from the stoveburner 3.
 > go to fridge 1
 The fridge 1 is closed.
 > cool pan 1 with fridge 1
 You cool the pan 1 using the fridge 1.
 > go to stoveburner 1
 On the stoveburner 1, you see nothing.
 > put pan 1 in/on stoveburner 1
 You put the pan 1 in/on the stoveburner 1.


H.3   B LOCKSWORLD
Critic LLM. We evaluate RAFA and RAP with the reward scheme proposed by [23]. We prompt
the language model with the previous state-action trajectory and calculate the log probabilities of
taking each feasible action. Given the action taken in the current state, the Model LLM predicts
the next state and we calculate the percentage of subgoals completed in the next state. We adopt the
prompt examples from [23] to ensure the fairness in comparison.
          Critic prompt example (for log probability), "step-4" task
 I am playing with a set of blocks where I need to arrange the blocks
 into stacks. Here are the actions I can do


 Pick up a block
 Unstack a block from on top of another block
 Put down a block
 Stack a block on top of another block


 I have the following restrictions on my actions:


                                                54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 I can only pick up or unstack one block at a time.
 I can only pick up or unstack a block if my hand is empty.
 I can only pick up a block if the block is on the table and the block
 is clear. A block is clear if the block has no other blocks on top of
 it and if the block is not picked up.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking was really on top of the other block.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking is clear.
 Once I pick up or unstack a block, I am holding the block.
 I can only put down a block that I am holding.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if I am holding the
 block being stacked.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if the block onto
 which I am stacking the block is clear.
 Once I put down or stack a block, my hand becomes empty.


 [STATEMENT]
 As initial conditions I have that, the red block is clear, the yellow
 block is clear, the hand is empty, the red block is on top of the blue
 block, the yellow block is on top of the orange block, the blue block
 is on the table and the orange block is on the table.
 My goal is to have that the orange block is on top of the red block.


 My plan is as follows:


 [PLAN]
 unstack the yellow block from on top of the orange block
 put down the yellow block
 pick up the orange block
 stack the orange block on top of the red block
 [PLAN END]


 [STATEMENT]
 As initial conditions I have that, the orange block is clear, the
 yellow block is clear, the hand is empty, the blue block is on top of
 the red block, the orange block is on top of the blue block, the red
 block is on the table and the yellow block is on the table.
 My goal is to have that the blue block is on top of the red block and
 the yellow block is on top of the orange block.


 My plan is as follows:


                                             55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [PLAN]
 pick up the yellow block
 stack the yellow block on top of the orange block
 [PLAN END]


 [STATEMENT]
 As initial conditions I have that, the red block is clear, the blue
 block is clear, the orange block is clear, the hand is empty, the blue
 block is on top of the yellow block, the red block is on the table,
 the orange block is on the table and the yellow block is on the table.
 My goal is to have that the blue block is on top of the orange block
 and the yellow block is on top of the red block.


 My plan is as follows:


 [PLAN]
 unstack the blue block from on top of the yellow block
 stack the blue block on top of the orange block
 pick up the yellow block
 stack the yellow block on top of the red block
 [PLAN END]


 [STATEMENT]
 As initial conditions I have that, the red block is clear, the blue
 block is clear, the yellow block is clear, the hand is empty, the
 yellow block is on top of the orange block, the red block is on the
 table, the blue block is on the table and the orange block is on the
 table.
 My goal is to have that the orange block is on top of the blue block
 and the yellow block is on top of the red block.


 My plan is as follows:


 [PLAN]
 unstack the yellow block from on top of the orange block
 stack the yellow block on top of the red block
 pick up the orange block
 stack the orange block on top of the blue block
 [PLAN END]


Model LLM. we prompt the Model LLM with few-shot examples and the current state and action.
The Model LLM generates the predicted next state description. We adopt the prompt examples
from [23] to ensure the fairness in comparison.


                                             56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Model prompt template, "Pick up" action
 I am playing with a set of blocks where I need to arrange the blocks
 into stacks. Here are the actions I can do


 Pick up a block
 Unstack a block from on top of another block
 Put down a block
 Stack a block on top of another block


 I have the following restrictions on my actions:
 I can only pick up or unstack one block at a time.
 I can only pick up or unstack a block if my hand is empty.
 I can only pick up a block if the block is on the table and the block
 is clear. A block is clear if the block has no other blocks on top of
 it and if the block is not picked up.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking was really on top of the other block.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking is clear. Once I pick up or unstack a block, I am
 holding the block.
 I can only put down a block that I am holding.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if I am holding the
 block being stacked.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if the block onto
 which I am stacking the block is clear. Once I put down or stack a
 block, my hand becomes empty.


 After being given an initial state and an action, give the new state
 after performing the action.


 [SCENARIO 1]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the white block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the brown block is clear, the hand is empty, the white block is
 on top of the purple block, the purple block is on the table, the cyan
 block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Pick up the brown block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was empty and is now holding the brown block, the
 brown block was on the table and is now in the hand, and the brown
 block is no longer clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the white block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the brown block is in the hand, the hand is holding the brown
 block, the white block is on top of the purple block, the purple block
 is on the table and the cyan block is on the table.



                                             57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [SCENARIO 2]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the purple block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the white block is clear, the hand is empty, the white block is
 on top of the brown block, the purple block is on the table, the cyan
 block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Pick up the cyan block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was empty and is now holding the cyan block, the
 cyan block was on the table and is now in the hand, and the cyan block
 is no longer clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the cyan block is in the hand, the white block
 is clear, the purple block is clear, the hand is holding the cyan
 block, the white block is on top of the brown block, the purple block
 is on the table and the brown block is on the table.


                     Model prompt template, "Unstack" action
 I am playing with a set of blocks where I need to arrange the blocks
 into stacks. Here are the actions I can do


 Pick up a block
 Unstack a block from on top of another block
 Put down a block
 Stack a block on top of another block


 I have the following restrictions on my actions:
 I can only pick up or unstack one block at a time.
 I can only pick up or unstack a block if my hand is empty.
 I can only pick up a block if the block is on the table and the block
 is clear. A block is clear if the block has no other blocks on top of
 it and if the block is not picked up.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking was really on top of the other block.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking is clear. Once I pick up or unstack a block, I am
 holding the block.
 I can only put down a block that I am holding.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if I am holding the
 block being stacked.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if the block onto
 which I am stacking the block is clear. Once I put down or stack a
 block, my hand becomes empty.



                                             58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 After being given an initial state and an action, give the new state
 after performing the action.


 [SCENARIO 1]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the white block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the brown block is clear, the hand is empty, the white block is
 on top of the purple block, the purple block is on the table, the cyan
 block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Unstack the white block from on top of the purple block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was empty and is now holding the white block, the
 white block was on top of the purple block and is now in the hand, the
 white block is no longer clear, and the purple block is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the purple block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the brown block is clear, the hand is holding the white block,
 the white block is in the hand, the purple block is on the table, the
 cyan block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.


 [SCENARIO 2]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the purple block is clear, the cyan block is
 clear, the white block is clear, the hand is empty, the cyan block is
 on top of the brown block, the purple block is on the table, the white
 block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Unstack the cyan block from on top of the brown block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was empty and is now holding the cyan block, the
 cyan block was on top of the brown block and is now in the hand, the
 cyan block is no longer clear, and the brown block is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the purple block is clear, the brown block is
 clear, the cyan block is in the hand, the white block is clear, the
 hand is holding the cyan block, the purple block is on the table, the
 white block is on the table and the brown block is on the table.



                     Model prompt template, "Put down" action
 I am playing with a set of blocks where I need to arrange the blocks
 into stacks. Here are the actions I can do


 Pick up a block
 Unstack a block from on top of another block
 Put down a block
 Stack a block on top of another block


 I have the following restrictions on my actions:
 I can only pick up or unstack one block at a time.
 I can only pick up or unstack a block if my hand is empty.


                                             59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 I can only pick up a block if the block is on the table and the block
 is clear. A block is clear if the block has no other blocks on top of
 it and if the block is not picked up.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking was really on top of the other block.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking is clear. Once I pick up or unstack a block, I am
 holding the block.
 I can only put down a block that I am holding.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if I am holding the
 block being stacked.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if the block onto
 which I am stacking the block is clear. Once I put down or stack a
 block, my hand becomes empty.


 After being given an initial state and an action, give the new state
 after performing the action.


 [SCENARIO 1]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the white block is clear, the purple block is
 clear, the cyan block is in the hand, the brown block is clear, the
 hand is holding the cyan block, the white block is on the table, the
 purple block is on the table, and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Put down the cyan block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was holding the cyan block and is now empty, the
 cyan block was in the hand and is now on the table, and the cyan block
 is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the cyan block is clear, the purple block is
 clear, the white block is clear, the brown block is clear, the hand is
 empty, the white block is on the table, the purple block is on the
 table, the cyan block is on the table, and the brown block is on the
 table.


 [SCENARIO 2]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the purple block is clear, the black block is
 in the hand, the white block is clear, the hand is holding the black
 block, the white block is on top of the brown block, the purple block
 is on the table, and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Put down the black block.


                                             60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [CHANGE] The hand was holding the black block and is now empty, the
 black block was in the hand and is now on the table, and the black
 block is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the black block is clear, the purple block is
 clear, the white block is clear, the hand is empty, the white block is
 on top of the brown block, the purple block is on the table, the brown
 block is on the table, and the black block is on the table.



                       Model prompt template, "Stack" action
 I am playing with a set of blocks where I need to arrange the blocks
 into stacks. Here are the actions I can do


 Pick up a block
 Unstack a block from on top of another block
 Put down a block
 Stack a block on top of another block


 I have the following restrictions on my actions:
 I can only pick up or unstack one block at a time.
 I can only pick up or unstack a block if my hand is empty.
 I can only pick up a block if the block is on the table and the block
 is clear. A block is clear if the block has no other blocks on top of
 it and if the block is not picked up.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking was really on top of the other block.
 I can only unstack a block from on top of another block if the block I
 am unstacking is clear. Once I pick up or unstack a block, I am
 holding the block.
 I can only put down a block that I am holding.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if I am holding the
 block being stacked.
 I can only stack a block on top of another block if the block onto
 which I am stacking the block is clear. Once I put down or stack a
 block, my hand becomes empty.


 After being given an initial state and an action, give the new state
 after performing the action.


 [SCENARIO 1]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the white block is clear, the purple block is
 clear, the cyan block is in the hand, the brown block is clear, the
 hand is holding the cyan block, the white block is on the table, the
 purple block is on the table, and the brown block is on the table.


                                             61
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [ACTION] Stack the cyan block on top of the brown block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was holding the cyan block and is now empty, the
 cyan block was in the hand and is now on top of the brown block, the
 brown block is no longer clear, and the cyan block is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the cyan block is clear, the purple block is
 clear, the white block is clear, the hand is empty, the cyan block is
 on top of the brown block, the brown block is on the table, the purple
 block is on the table, and the white block is on the table.


 [SCENARIO 2]
 [STATE 0] I have that, the purple block is clear, the black block is
 in the hand, the white block is clear, the hand is holding the black
 block, the white block is on top of the brown block, the purple block
 is on the table, and the brown block is on the table.
 [ACTION] Stack the black block on top of the purple block.
 [CHANGE] The hand was holding the black block and is now empty, the
 black block was in the hand and is now on top of the purple block, the
 purple block is no longer clear, and the black block is now clear.
 [STATE 1] I have that, the black block is clear, the white block is
 clear, the hand is empty, the black block is on top of the purple
 block, the white block is on top of the brown block, the brown block
 is on the table, and the purple block is on the table.


H.4   T IC -TAC -T OE
Elite LLM
                          Elite prompt, propose n actions
 In the game of Tic-Tac-Toe, two players, "X" and "O," alternate
 placing their symbols on a 3x3 grid. The objective is to be the first
 to get three of their symbols in a row, either horizontally,
 vertically, or diagonally. We use numbers to indicate empty positions,
 and then replace them with "X" or "O" as moves are made. For example,
 an empty board is denoted by


 1 | 2 | 3
 ---------
 4 | 5 | 6
 ---------
 7 | 8 | 9


 Your task is to identify the optimal position for the next move based
 on the current board state. Assume that it's your turn and you're
 playing as "{role}". Please make sure the optimal position is EMPTY.
 For example, in the following Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


                                             62
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1 | 2 | 3
 ---------
 4 | X | 6
 ---------
 7 | 8 | 9


 Position 5 is occupied by "X". Thus, position 5 is not an optimal
 position. Provide only the optimal position in the first line. In the
 second line, give a brief explanation for this choice.


 Current Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 {state}


 Role: {role}


 Optimal Position:


Model LLM
                          Model prompt, predict next state
 Predict the Next State of the Tic-Tac-Toe Board


 In a game of Tic-Tac-Toe, two players, "X" and "O," take turns to
 place their symbols on a 3x3 grid. Your task is to predict what the
 board will look like after a specified move has been made.


 Examples
 {examples}
 Now, Predict the Next State of the Following Tic-Tac-Toe Board:
 Initial Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 {state}


 Move: Player puts "{role}" in position {action}.


 Updated Board:


                     Model prompt, predict opponent’s action
 In Tic-Tac-Toe, each player takes turns placing their respective
 symbols ("X" or "O") on a 3x3 board. Your task is to predict where the
 opponent will place their symbol based on their past moves and the
 current board state.



                                             63
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Example
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 O | X | O
 ---------
 X | O | X
 ---------
 7 | 8 | X


 Opponent's Move: "O" in position 7
 {examples}
 Here's how the Tic-Tac-Toe board currently looks:
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 {state}


 Given the history and current board state, where do you think the
 opponent will place their "{role}" next? Please make sure the output
 is an empty position without "X" or "O".


 Opponent's Move: "{role}" in position



Critic LLM
                           Critic prompt, evaluate winner
 Determine the Winner in a Tic-Tac-Toe Game


 In Tic-Tac-Toe, two players, "X" and "O" take turns to place their
 respective symbols on a 3x3 board. The first player to get three of
 their symbols in a row, either horizontally, vertically, or
 diagonally, wins the game. Your task is to evaluate the board state
 and determine if there is a winner.


 Examples


 Example
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 O | X | O
 ---------
 X | X | X
 ---------
 O | O | X



                                             64
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Question: Is there a winner?


 Answer: Let's think step by step.


 First row: O X O, no winner
 Second row: X X X, X wins


 Therefore, "X" wins


 Example
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 X | 2 | O
 ---------
 4 | O | X
 ---------
 O | X | 9


 Question: Is there a winner?


 Answer: Let's think step by step.


 First row: X 2 O, no winner
 Second row: 4 O X, no winner
 Third row: O X 9, no winner
 First column: X 4 O, no winner
 Second column: 2 O X, no winner
 Thrid column: O X 9, no winner
 Main diagonal: X O 9, no winner
 Anti-diagonal: O O O, O wins


 Therefore, "O" wins.
 {examples}
 Now, for the Current Tic-Tac-Toe Board:
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 {state}


 Question: Is there a winner?


 Answer: Let's think step by step.


                                             65
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Critic prompt, evaluate tie (when there is no winner)
 In the game of Tic-Tac-Toe, two players alternate turns to fill a 3x3
 grid with their respective symbols: "X" and "O". A board is considered
 "completely filled" when all nine cells of the grid contain either an
 'X' or an 'O', with no empty spaces or other characters.


 Examples:
 {examples}
 Now for the Current Tic-Tac-Toe Board:
 Tic-Tac-Toe Board:


 {state}


 Is the board completely filled?


 Answer:


                                             66
