Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERPRETING CLIP’ S I MAGE R EPRESENTATION VIA
T EXT-BASED D ECOMPOSITION
 Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt
 UC Berkeley
 {yossi gandelsman,aaefros,jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu

                                              A BSTRACT
            We investigate the CLIP image encoder by analyzing how individual model com-
            ponents affect the final representation. We decompose the image representation as
            a sum across individual image patches, model layers, and attention heads, and use
            CLIP’s text representation to interpret the summands. Interpreting the attention
            heads, we characterize each head’s role by automatically finding text represen-
            tations that span its output space, which reveals property-specific roles for many
            heads (e.g. location or shape). Next, interpreting the image patches, we uncover
            an emergent spatial localization within CLIP. Finally, we use this understanding to
            remove spurious features from CLIP and to create a strong zero-shot image seg-
            menter. Our results indicate that a scalable understanding of transformer models
            is attainable and can be used to repair and improve models.1

1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, Radford et al. (2021) introduced CLIP, a class of neural networks that produce image
representations from natural language supervision. As language is more expressive than previously
used supervision signals (e.g. object categories) and CLIP is trained on a lot more data, its rep-
resentations have proved useful on downstream tasks including classification (Zhou et al., 2022),
segmentation (Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022), and generation (Rombach et al., 2022). However, we have
a limited understanding of what information is actually encoded in these representations.
To better understand CLIP, we design methods to study its internal structure, focusing on CLIP-
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Our methods leverage several aspects of CLIP-ViT’s architecture:
First, the architecture uses residual connections, so the output is a sum of individual layer outputs.
Moreover, it uses attention, so the output is also a sum across individual locations in the image.
Finally, the representation lives in a joint vision-language space, so we can label its directions with
text. We use these properties to decompose the representation into text-explainable directions that
are attributed to specific attention heads and image locations.
As a preliminary step, we use the residual structure to investigate which layers have a significant
direct effect on the output. We find that ablating all layers but the last 4 attention layers has only
a small effect on CLIP’s zero-shot classification accuracy (Section 3). We conclude that the CLIP
image representation is primarily constructed by these late attention layers.
We next investigate the late attention layers in detail, leveraging the language space to uncover
interpretable structure. We propose an algorithm, T EXT S PAN, that finds a basis for each attention
head where each basis vector is labeled by a text description. The resulting bases reveal specialized
roles for each head: for example, one head’s top 3 basis directions are A semicircular arch, A
isosceles triangle and oval, suggesting that it specializes in shapes (Figure 1(a)).
We present two applications of these identified head roles. First, we can reduce spurious correlations
by removing heads associated with the spurious cue; we apply this on the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa
et al., 2019) to improve worst-group accuracy from 48% to 73%. Second, the representations of
heads with a property-specific role can be used to retrieve images according to that property; we use
it to perform retrieval based on discovered senses of similarity, such as color, location, and texture.
We next exploit the spatial structure provided by attention layers. Each attention head’s output is a
weighted sum across image locations, allowing us to decompose the output across these locations.
    1
        Project page and code: https://yossigandelsman.github.io/clip_decomposition/


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                CLIP-ViT                                               (b)       Image Tokens Decomposition


                    Tokens


                                                                                   n
                                                                                io
                                                                        se e
                                                                                                       “A photo               “A photo


                                                                             at
                                                                      re ag
                                                            P


                                                                          nt
                                                                    ep Im
                                                           proj.                                       of a                   of a
                                                          layer                                        pyramid”               camel”


                                                                   R
    Input Image              Layers x Heads

    (a)           Attention Heads Decomposition                                        (c)            Joint Decomposition
Layer 23, Head 10            Layer 22, Head 1          Layer 22, Head 10                     Layer 22, Head 1      Layer 22, Head 10
(a “number” head)            (a “shape” head)          (a “color” head)
                                                                                                                              “Image
1.Image with six subjects    1.A semicircular arch     1.Image with a yellow color                     “An
                                                                                                                              with an
2.Image with a four people   2.An isosceles triangle   2.Image with a orange color                     isosceles
3.An image of the number 3   3.An oval                 3.Image with cold green tones                                          orange
                                                                                                       triangle”
...                          ...                       ...                                                                    color”

Figure 1: CLIP-ViT image representation decomposition. By decomposing CLIP’s image rep-
resentation as a sum across individual image patches, model layers, and attention heads, we can
(a) characterize each head’s role by automatically finding text-interpretable directions that span its
output space, (b) highlight the image regions that contribute to the similarity score between image
and text, and (c) present what regions contribute towards a found text direction at a specific head.


We use this to visualize how much each location writes along a given text direction (Figure 1(b)).
This yields a zero-shot image segmenter that outperforms existing CLIP-based zero-shot methods.
Finally, we consider the spatial structure jointly with the text basis obtained from T EXT S PAN. For
each direction in the basis, the spatial decomposition highlights which image regions affect that basis
direction. We visualize this in Figure 1(c), and find that it validates our text labels: for instance, the
regions with triangles are the primary contributors to a direction that is labeled as isosceles triangle.
In summary, we interpret CLIP’s image representation by decomposing it into text-interpretable el-
ements that are attributed to individual attention heads and image locations. We discover property-
specific heads and emergent localization, and use our discoveries to reduce spurious cues and im-
prove zero-shot segmentation, showing that understanding can improve downstream performance.

2         R ELATED W ORK
Vision model explainability. A widely used class of explainability methods produces heatmaps to
highlight parts in the input image that are most significant to the model output (Selvaraju et al., 2017;
Sundararajan et al., 2017; Binder et al., 2016; Voita et al., 2019; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Chefer et al.,
2021). While these heatmaps are useful for explaining the relevance of specific image regions to the
output, they do not show how attributes that lack spatial localization (e.g. object size or shape) affect
the output. To address this, a few methods interpret models by finding counterfactual edits using
generative models (Goetschalckx et al., 2019; Lang et al., 2021; Aberman et al., 2021). All these
methods aim to explain the output of the model without interpreting its intermediate computation.
Intermediate representations interpretability. An alternate way to explain vision models is to
study their inner workings. One approach is to invert intermediate features into the input image space
(Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2015; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2014; Goh et al., 2021). Another approach is to
interpret individual neurons (Bau et al., 2020; 2019; Dravid et al., 2023) and connections between
neurons (Olah et al., 2020). These approaches interpret models by relying only on visual outputs.
Few methods use text to interpret intermediate representations in vision models. Hernandez et al.
(2022) provide text descriptions for image regions in which a neuron is active. Yuksekgonul et al.
(2023) project model features into a bank of text-based concepts. More closely to us, a few methods
analyze CLIP’s intermediate representations via text—Goh et al. (2021) find multimodal neurons in
CLIP that respond to different renditions of the same subject in images. Materzynska et al. (2022)
study entanglement in CLIP between images of words and natural images. We differ from these
works by using CLIP’s intrinsic language-image space and by exploiting decompositions in CLIP’s
architecture for interpreting intermediate representations.
Contrastive vision-language models. Contrastive vision-and-language models like CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) showed promising zero-shot transfer capabilities for down-
stream tasks, including OCR, geo-localization and classification (Wortsman, 2023). Moreover, CLIP


                                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


representations are used for segmentation (Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022), querying 3D scenes (Kerr
et al., 2023), and text-based image generation (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022). We aim
to interpret what information is encoded in these representations.

3     D ECOMPOSING CLIP I MAGE R EPRESENTATION INTO L AYERS

We start by presenting the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) and describe how the image represen-
tation of CLIP-ViT is computed. We show that this representation can be decomposed into direct
contributions of individual layers of the image encoder ViT architecture. Through this decomposi-
tion, we find that the last few attention layers have most of the direct effects on this representation.

3.1   CLIP-V I T P RELIMINARIES

Contrastive pre-training. CLIP is trained to produce visual representations from images I coupled
with text descriptions t. It uses two encoders—a transformer-based text encoder Mtext and an image
encoder Mimage . Both Mtext and Mimage map to a shared vision-and-language latent space, allowing
us to measure similarity between images and text via cosine similarity:
                    sim(I, t) = ⟨Mimage (I), Mtext (t)⟩/(||Mimage (I)||2 ||Mtext (t)||2 )                 (1)
Given a batch of images and corresponding text descriptions {(Ii , ti )}i∈{1,...,k} , CLIP is trained to
maximize the similarity of the image representation Mimage (Ii ) to its corresponding text representa-
tion Mtext (ti ), while minimizing sim(Ii , tj ) for every i ̸= j in the batch.
Zero-shot classification. CLIP can be used for zero-shot image classification. To classify an image
given a fixed set of classes, each name of a class (e.g. “Chihuahua”) is mapped to a fixed template
(e.g. “An image of a {class}”) and encoded by the CLIP text encoder. The prediction for a given
image is the class whose text description has the highest similarity to the image representation.
CLIP image representation. Several architectures have been proposed for computing CLIP’s im-
age representation. We focus on the variant that incorporates ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) as a
backbone. Here a vision transformer (ViT) is applied to the input image I ∈ RH×W ×3 to obtain
a d-dimensional representation ViT(I). The CLIP image representation Mimage (I) is a linear pro-
jection of this output to a d′ -dimensional representation in the joint vision-and-language space2 .
                                                    ′
Formally, denoting the projection matrix by P ∈ Rd ×d :
                                          Mimage (I) = P ViT(I)                                           (2)
Both the parameters of the ViT and the projection matrix P are learned during training.
ViT architecture. ViT is a residual network built from L layers, each of which contains a multi-head
self-attention (MSA) followed by an MLP block. The input I is first split into N non-overlapping
image patches. The patches are projected linearly into N d-dimensional vectors, and positional
embeddings are added to them to create the image tokens {zi0 }i∈{1,...,N } . An additional learned
token z00 ∈ Rd , named the class token, is also included and later used as the output token.
Formally, the matrix Z 0 ∈ Rd×(N +1) , with the tokens z00 , z10 , ..., zN 0
                                                                              as columns, constitutes the
initial state of the residual stream. It is updated for L iterations via these two residual steps:

                         Ẑ l = MSAl (Z l−1 ) + Z l−1 , Z l = MLPl (Ẑ l ) + Ẑ l .                       (3)
                                                         l                                            l
We denote the first column in the residual stream Z , corresponding to the class token, by [Z ]cls .
The output of the ViT is therefore [Z L ]cls .

3.2   D ECOMPOSITION INTO LAYERS

The residual structure of ViT allows us to express its output as a sum of the direct contributions of
individual layers of the model. Recall that the image representation Mimage (I) is a linear projection
   2
     Both here and in Eq. 3, we ignore a layer-normalization term to simplify derivations. We address layer-
normalization in detail in Section A.1.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                  80
                                                                  70
                                                                  60


                                                       Accuracy
                                                                  50
                   Base       + MLPs ablation                     40
                 accuracy                                         30         ViT-B-16
   ViT-B-16       70.22             67.04                         20         ViT-L-14
                                                                  10         ViT-H-14
   ViT-L-14       75.25             74.12                          0
   ViT-H-14       77.95             76.30                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32
                                                                            Accumulated mean-ablated layers
 Table 1: MLPs mean-ablation. We simultane-             Figure 2: MSAs accumulated mean-ablation. We
 ously replace all the direct effects of the MLPs       replace all the direct effects of the MSAs up to a given
 with their average taken across ImageNet’s valida-     layer with their average taken across the ImageNet
 tion set. This results in only a small reduction in    validation set. Only the replacement of the last few
 zero-shot classification performance.                  layers causes a large decrease in accuracy.


of the ViT output. By unrolling Eq. 3 across layers, the image representation can be written as:
                                           XL     h              i     XL    h           i
     Mimage (I) = P ViT(I) = P Z 0 cls +       P MSAl (Z l−1 )             P MLPl (Ẑ l )

                                                                     +                           (4)
                                                                                cls                         cls
                                               l=1                                      l=1
                                               |                   {z             }     |        {z          }
                                                           MSA terms                          MLP terms
Eq. 4 decomposes the image representation into direct contributions of MLPs, MSAs, and the in-
put class token, allowing us to analyze each term separately. We ignore here the indirect effects
of the output of one layer on another downstream layer. We use this decomposition (and further
decompositions) to analyze CLIP’s representations in the next sections.
Evaluating the direct contribution of layers. As a preliminary investigation, we study which of
the components in Eq. 4 significantly affect the final image representation, and find that the large
majority of the direct effects come from the late attention layers.
To study the direct effect of a component (or set of components), we use mean-ablation (Nanda
et al., 2023), which replaces the component with its mean value across a dataset of images. Specif-
ically, we measure the drop in zero-shot accuracy on a classification task before and after ablation.
Components with larger direct effects should result in larger accuracy drops.
In our experiments, we compute means for each component over the ImageNet (IN) validation set
and evaluate the drop in IN classification accuracy. We analyze the OpenCLIP ViT-H-14, L-14, and
B-16 models (Ilharco et al., 2021), which were trained on LAION-2B (Schuhmann et al., 2022).
MLPs have a negligible direct effect. Table 1 presents the results of simultaneously mean-ablating
all the MLPs. The MLPs do not have a significant direct effect on the image representation, as
ablating all of them leads to only a small drop in accuracy (1%-3%).
Only the last MSAs have a significant direct effect. We next evaluate the direct effect of different
MSA layers. To do so, we mean-ablate all MSA layers up to some layer l. Figure 2 presents the re-
sults: removing all the early MSA layers (up to the last 4) does not change the accuracy significantly.
Mean-ablating these final MSAs, on the other hand, reduces the performance drastically.
In summary, the direct effect on the output is concentrated in the last 4 MSA layers. We therefore
focus only on these layers in our subsequent analysis, ignoring the MLPs and the early MSA layers.

3.3   F INE - GRAINED DECOMPOSITION INTO HEADS AND POSITIONS

We present a more fine-grained decomposition of the MSA blocks that will be used in the next two
sections. We focus on the output at the class token, as that is the only term appearing in Eq. 4.
Following Elhage et al. (2021), we write the MSA output as a sum over H independent attention
heads and the N input tokens:
                    h               i    XH XN
                      MSAl (Z l−1 )   =         xl,h     l,h     l,h
                                                  i , xi = αi WV O zi
                                                                      l,h l−1
                                                                                              (5)
                                       cls
                                            h=1 i=0
          l,h
where WV O ∈ R     d×d
                       are transition matrices and αil,h ∈ R are the attention weights from the class
                         PN
token to the i-th token ( i=0 αil,h = 1). Therefore, the MSA output can be decomposed into direct
effects of individual heads and tokens.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      L21.H11 (“Geo-locations”)                     L23.H10 (“Counting”)           L22.H8 (“Letters”)
      Photo captured in the Arizona desert          Image with six subjects        A photo with the letter V
      Picture taken in Alberta, Canada              Image with four people         A photo with the letter F
      Photo taken in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil         An image of the number 3       A photo with the letter D
      Picture taken in Cyprus                       An image of the number 10      A photo with the letter T
      Photo taken in Seoul, South Korea             The number fifteen             A photo with the letter X
      L22.H11 (“Colors”)                            L22.H6 (“Animals”)             L22.H3 (“Objects”)
      A charcoal gray color                         Curious wildlife               An image of legs
      Sepia-toned photograph                        Majestic soaring birds         A jacket
      Minimalist white backdrop                     An image with dogs             A helmet
      High-contrast black and white                 Image with a dragonfly         A scarf
      Image with a red color                        An image with cats             A table
      L23.H12 (“Textures”)                          L22.H1 (“Shapes”)              L22.H2 (“Locations”)
      Artwork with pointillism technique            A semicircular arch            Urban park greenery
      Artwork with woven basket design              An isosceles triangle          Cozy home interior
      Artwork featuring barcode arrangement         An oval                        Urban subway station
      Image with houndstooth patterns               Rectangular object             Energetic street scene
      Image with quilted fabric patterns            A sphere                       Tranquil boating on a lake
Table 2: Top-5 text descriptions extracted per head by our algorithm. Top 5 components returned by
T EXT S PAN applied to ViT-L, for several selected heads. See Section A.5 for results on all the heads.


Plugging the MSA output definition in Eq. 5 into the MSA term in Eq. 4, we obtain:
                     L
                     X      h             i             L X
                                                        X   N
                                                          H X
                           P MSAl (Z l−1 )          =                 ci,l,h , ci,l,h = P xl,h
                                                                                           i                    (6)
                                              cls
                     l=1                                l=1 h=1 i=0

In other words, the total direct effect of all attention blocks is the result of contracting the tensor c
across all of its dimensions. By contracting along only some dimensions, we can decompose effects
in a variety of useful ways. For instance, we can contract along the spatial dimension i to get a
                                        PN
contribution for each head: cl,h
                               head =      i=0 ci,l,h . Alternatively, we can contract along layers and
                                                                 PL PH
heads to get a contribution from each image token: citoken = l=1 h=1 ci,l,h .
The quantities ci,l,h , cl,h          i                      ′
                            head and ctoken all live in the d -dimensional joint text-image representation
space, which allows us to interpret them via text. For instance, given text description t, the quantity
⟨Mtext (t), cl,h
             head ⟩ intuitively measures the similarity of that head’s output to description t.


4     D ECOMPOSITION INTO ATTENTION H EADS
Motivated by the findings in Section 3.2, we turn to understanding the late MSA layers in CLIP.
We use the decomposition into individual attention heads (Section 3.3), and present an algorithm
for labeling the latent directions of each head with text descriptions. Examples of this labeling are
depicted in Table 2 and Figure 4, with the labeling for all 64 late attention heads given in Section A.5.
Our labeling reveals that some heads exhibit specific semantic roles, e.g. “counting” or “location”, in
which many latent directions in the head track different aspects of that role. We show how to exploit
these labeled roles both for property-specific image retrieval and for reducing spurious correlations.

4.1    T EXT- INTERPRETABLE DECOMPOSITION INTO HEADS

We decompose an MSA’s output into text-related directions in the joint representation space. We rely
on two key properties: First, the output of each MSA block is a sum of contributions of individual
attention heads, as demonstrated in Section 3.3. Second, these contributions lie in the joint text-
image representation space and so can be associated with text.
Recall from Section 3.3 that the MSA terms of the image representation (Eq. 4) can be written as
a sum over heads, l,h cl,h                                           l,h
                    P
                          head . To interpret a head’s contribution chead , we will find a set of text de-
scriptions that explain most of the variation in the head’s output (the head “principal components”).
To formalize this, we take input images I1 , ..., IK with associated head outputs c1 , ..., cK (for sim-
plicity, we fix the layer l and head h and omit it from the notation). As c1 , ..., cK are vectors in the


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: T EXT S PAN
                                                                                                         ′
Input: Head (l, h) contribution cl,h   head for K images stacked as rows in a matrix C ∈ R
                                                                                           K×d
                                                                                               , a pool of M
                                                                                               ′
         text descriptions {ti }i=1 , their corresponding CLIP text representations R ∈ RM ×d (projected to
                                 M

         the head output space), and basis size m
                                                                                     ′
Output: A set of text descriptions T and projected representations C ′ ∈ RK×d
                     ′
Initialization: C ← 0K×d′ , T ← ϕ
for i in [1, ..., m] do
     D ← RC T
     j ∗ ← arg maxM    j=1 Var(D[j])
     T ← T ∪ {tj ∗ }
     for k in [1, ..., K] do
                                           ∗
          C ′ [k] ← C ′ [k] + ⟨C[k],R[j
                                ||R[j ∗ ]||2
                                             ]⟩
                                                R[j ∗ ]
                                           ∗
           C[k] ← C[k] − ⟨C[k],R[j
                          ||R[j ∗ ]||2
                                       ]⟩
                                          R[j ∗ ]
      for k in [1, ..., M ] do
                                          ∗
          R[k] ← R[k] − ⟨R[k],R[j
                               ||R[j ∗ ]||2
                                            ]⟩
                                               R[j ∗ ]


joint text-image space, each text input t defines a direction Mtext (t) in that space. Given a collection
of text directions T , let ProjT denote the projection onto the span of {Mtext (t) | t ∈ T }. We define
the variance explained by T as the variance under this projection:
                                               K                                                     K
                                          1 X                                        1 X
                   Vexplained (T ) =          ∥ ProjT (ck − cavg )∥22 , where cavg =     ck .                                  (7)
                                          K                                          K
                                               k=1                                               k=1

We aim to find a set of m descriptions T for each head that maximizes Vexplained (T ). Unlike regular
PCA, there is no closed-form solution to this optimization problem, so we take a greedy approach.
Greedy algorithm for descriptive set mining. To approximately maximize the explained variance
in Eq. 7, we start with a large pool of candidate descriptions {ti }M
                                                                    i=1 and greedily select from it to
obtain the set T .
                                                                               70
Our algorithm, T EXT S PAN, is presented in Alg. 1. It
                                           ′                                   60
starts by forming the matrix C ∈ RK×d of outputs for                           50
                                                                    Accuracy


                                                 ′
head (l, h), as well as the matrix R ∈ RM ×d of repre-                         40
sentations for the candidate descriptions, projected onto                      30
the span of C. In each round, T EXT S PAN computes the                         20                            general descriptions
                                                                               10
                                                                                                             most common words
dot product between each row of R and the head outputs                                                       random vectors
C, and finds the row with the highest variance R[j ∗ ] (the                    0
                                                                                    10   20     30           40       50       60
first “principle component”). It then projects that compo-                                Descriptions per head
nent away from all rows and repeats the process to find              Figure 3: ImageNet classification accu-
the next components. The projection step ensures that                racy for the image representation pro-
each new component adds variance that is orthogonal to               jected to T EXT S PAN bases. We evalu-
the earlier components.                                              ate our algorithm for different initial de-
T EXT S PAN requires an initial set of descriptions {ti }M           scription pools, and with different out-
                                                         i=1
that is diverse enough to capture the output space of each           put sizes.
head. We use a set of sentences that were generated
by prompting ChatGPT-3.5 to produce general image de-
scriptions. After obtaining an initial set, we manually prompt ChatGPT to generate more examples
of specific patterns we found (e.g. texts that describe more colors). This results in 3498 sentences.
In our experiments, we also consider two simpler baselines—one-word descriptions comprising the
most common words in English, and a set of random d′ -dimensional vectors that do not correspond
to text (see Section A.3 for the ChatGPT prompt and more details about the baselines).
4.2      E XPERIMENTS

We apply T EXT S PAN to find a basis of text descriptions for all heads in the last 4 MSA layers.
We first verify that this set captures most of the model’s behavior and that text descriptions track


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



     Layer 22, Head 8: “A photo with the letter V”            Layer 22, Head 2: “Urban park greenery”


     Layer 23, Head 12: “Image with polka dot patterns”       Layer 22, Head 7: “Serene winter wonderland”


Figure 4: Top-4 images for the top head description found by T EXT S PAN. We retrieve images with the
highest similarity score between cl,h
                                  head and the top text representation found by T EXT S PAN . They correspond to
the provided text descriptions. See Figure 11 in the appendix for randomly selected heads.



image properties. We then show that some heads are responsible for capturing specific image prop-
erties (see Figure 1(1)). We use this finding for two applications—reducing known spurious cues in
downstream classification and property-specific image retrieval.
Experimental setting. We apply T EXT S PAN to all the heads in the last 4 layers of CLIP ViT-L,
which are responsible for most of the direct effects on the image representation (see Section 3.2).
We consider a variety of output sizes m ∈ {10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60}.
We first verify that the resulting text representations capture the important variation in the image
representation, as measured by zero-shot accuracy on ImageNet. We simultaneously replace each
head’s direct contribution cl,h                                                                 l,h
                              head with its projection to the text representations ProjT (l,h) chead (where
T (l, h) is the obtained text set for head (l, h)). We also mean-ablate all other terms in the represen-
tation (MLPs and the rest of the MSA layers).
The results are shown in Fig. 3: 60 descriptions per head suffice to reach 72.77% accuracy (compared
to 75.25% base accuracy). Moreover, using our ChatGPT-generated descriptions as the candidate
pool yields higher zero-shot accuracy than either common words or random directions, for all the
different sizes m. In summary, we can approximate CLIP’s representation by projecting each head
output, a 768-dimensional vector, to a (head-specific) 60-dimensional text-interpretable subspace.
Some attention heads capture specific image properties. We report selected head descriptions
from T EXT S PAN (m = 60) in Table 2, with full results in Appendix A.5. For some heads, the top
descriptions center around a single image property like texture (L23H12), shape (L22H1), object
count (L23H10), and color (L22H11). This suggests that these heads capture specific image proper-
ties. We qualitatively verify that the text tracks these image properties by retrieving the images with
the largest similarity ⟨Mtext (ti ), cl,h
                                      head ⟩ for the top extracted text descriptions ti . The results in Fig. 4
and 11 show that the returned images indeed match the text.
Reducing known spurious cues. We can use our knowledge of head-specific roles to manually
remove spurious correlations. For instance, if location is being used as a spurious feature, we can
ablate heads that specialize in geolocation to hopefully reduce reliance on the incorrect feature.
We validate this idea on the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa et al., 2019), which combines waterbird
and landbird photographs from the CUB dataset Welinder et al. (2010) with image backgrounds
(water/land background) from the Places dataset (Zhou et al., 2016). Here image background is a
spurious cue, and models tend to misclassify waterbirds on land backgrounds (and vice versa).
To reduce spurious cues, we manually annotated the role of each head using the text descriptions
from T EXT S PAN, mean-ablated the direct contributions of all “geolocation” and “image-location”
heads, and then evaluated the zero-shot accuracy on Waterbirds, computing the worst accuracy
across subgroups as in Sagawa et al. (2019). As a baseline, we also ablated 10 random heads and
reported the top accuracy out of 5 trials. As shown in Table 3, the worst-group accuracy increases by
a large margin—by 25.2% for ViT-L. This exemplifies that the head roles we found with T EXT S PAN
help us to design representations with less spurious cues, without any additional training.
Property-based image retrieval. Since some heads specialize to image properties, we can use
their representations to obtain a property-specific similarity metric. To illustrate this, for a given
head (h, l), we compute the inner product ⟨cl,h         l,h    ′
                                             head (I), chead (I )⟩ between a base image I and all other


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   Layer 20, Head 4 (a “counting” head)                     Layer 21, Head 15 (a “location” head)


     Input Image                                              Input Image
                   Layer 23, Head 7 (an “object” head)                      Layer 22, Head 11 (a “color” head)


                   Layer 23, Head 8 (a “color” head)                        Layer 23, Head 12 (a “texture” head)


Figure 5: Top-4 nearest neighbors per head and image. We retrieve the most similar images to an input
image by computing the similarity of the direct contributions of individual heads. As some heads capture
specific aspects of the image (e.g. colors/objects), retrieval according to this metric results in images that are
most similar regarding these aspects. See additional results in the project page and appendix (Fig. 12).


images in the dataset, retrieving the images with the highest similarity. Figure 5 shows the resulting
nearest neighbors for heads that capture different properties. The retrieved images are different for
each head and match the head-specific properties. In the left example, if we use a head that captures
color for retrieval, the nearest neighbors are images with black-and-white objects. If we use a head
that counts objects, the nearest neighbors are images with two objects.

5    D ECOMPOSITION INTO I MAGE T OKENS
Decomposing the image representation across heads enabled us to answer what each head con-
tributes to the output representation. We can alternately decompose the representation across image
tokens to tell us which image regions contribute to the output for a given text direction Mtext (t). We
find that these regions match the image parts that t describes, thereby yielding a zero-shot semantic
image segmenter. We compare this segmenter to existing CLIP-based zero-shot methods and find
that it is state-of-the-art. Finally, we decompose each head’s direct contributions into per-head image
tokens and use this to obtain fine-grained visualizations of the information flow from input images
to output semantic representations.
Decomposing MSA outputs into image tokens. Applying the decomposition from Section 3.3, if
we group the terms ci,l,h by position i instead of head (l, h), we obtain the identity Mimage (I) =
PN i                      i
  i=0 ctoken (I), where ctoken (I) is the sum of the output at location i across all heads (l, h). We
empirically find that the contribution of the class token c0token has negligible direct effect on zero-
shot accuracy (see mean-ablation in A.2). Therefore, we focus on the N image tokens.
We use the decomposition into image tokens to generate a heatmap that measures how much the out-
put from each image position contributes to writing in a given text direction. Given a text description
t, we obtain this heatmap by computing the score ⟨citoken (I), Mtext (t)⟩ for each position i.
Quantitative segmentation results. We follow a standard protocol for evaluating heatmap-based
explainability methods (Chefer et al., 2021). We first compute image heatmaps given descriptions of
the image class (e.g. “An image of a {class}”)3 . We then binarize them (by applying a threshold) to
obtain a foreground/background segmentation. We compare the segmentation quality to zero-shot
segmentations produced by other explainability methods in the same manner.
We evaluate the methods on ImageNet-segmentation (Guillaumin et al., 2014), which contains a
subset of 4,276 images from the ImageNet validation set with annotated segmentations. Table 4 dis-
plays the results: our decomposition is more accurate than existing methods across all metrics. See
Chefer et al. (2021) for details about the compared methods and metrics, and additional qualitative
comparisons in Section A.6.
Joint decomposition into per-head image tokens. Finally, we can jointly decompose the output
of CLIP across both heads and locations. We use this decomposition to visualize what regions
affect each of the basis directions found by T EXT S PAN. Recall that ci,l,h from Eq. 6 is the direct
contribution of token i at head (h, l) to the representation. For each image token i, we take the inner
    3
      We normalize out bias terms by subtracting from the heatmap an averaged heatmap computed across all
class descriptions in ImageNet.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                            Layer 22, Head 13                     Layer 22, Head 7                      Layer 23, Head 8
       Input Image
                            A “geolocation” head                   A “season” head                       A “color” head


                       “Photo taken in   “Image captured      “Blossoming     “Serene winter      “Photograph        “Soft pastel
                        Paris, France”   in the Australian     springtime      wonderland”       with a red color       hues”
                                            bushlands”          blooms”                              palette”


                       “Image taken in    “Picture taken     “A photo taken   “Crisp autumn       “An image with     “A charcoal
                           Brazil”         in Pakistan”      in the summer”       leaves”        cold green tones”   gray color”

Figure 6: Joint decomposition examples. For each head (l, h), the left heatmap (green border) corresponds
to the description that is most similar to cl,h
                                            head among the T EXT S PAN output set. The right heatmap (red border)
corresponds to the least similar text in this set (for m = 60). See Figure 9 for more results.


products between ci,l,h and a basis direction Mtext (t) and obtain a per-head similarity heatmap. This
visualizes the flow of information from input images to the text-labeled basis directions.
In Figure 6, we compute heatmaps for the two T EXT S PAN basis elements that have the largest and
smallest (most negative) coefficients when producing each head’s output. The highlighted regions
match the text description for that basis direction—for instance, L22H13 is a geolocation head, its
highest-activating direction for the top image is “Photo taken in Paris, France”, and the image tokens
that contribute to this direction are those matching the Eiffel Tower.
                                                                                               Pixel Acc. ↑ mIoU ↑           mAP ↑
                       top
             base    random    ours              LRP (Binder et al., 2016)                        52.81      33.57           54.37
                                                 partial-LRP (Voita et al., 2019)                 61.49      40.71           72.29
    ViT-B-16 45.6      52.3    57.5
                                                 rollout (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020)                  60.63      40.64           74.47
    ViT-L-14 47.7      57.7    72.9
                                                 raw attention                                    65.67      43.83           76.05
    ViT-H-14 37.2      37.0    43.3
                                                 GradCAM Selvaraju et al. (2017)                  70.27      44.50           70.30
                                                 Chefer et al. (2021)                             69.21      47.47           78.29
Table 3: Worst-group accuracy                    Ours                                             75.21      54.50           81.61
on Waterbirds. We reduce spu-
rious cues by ablating property-             Table 4: Segmentation performance on ImageNet-segmentation.
specific heads. See Tables 11-14             The image tokens decomposition results in significantly more accurate
for fine-grained results.                    zero-shot segmentation than previous methods.

6     L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
We studied CLIP’s image representation by analyzing how individual model components affect it.
Our findings allowed us to reduce spurious cues in downstream classification and improve zero-shot
segmentation. We present two limitations of our investigation and conclude with future directions.
Indirect effects. We analyzed only the direct effects of model components on the representation.
Studying indirect effects (e.g. information flow from early layers to deeper ones) can provide addi-
tional insights into the internal structure of CLIP and unlock more downstream applications.
Not all attention heads have clear roles. The outputs of T EXT S PAN show that not every head cap-
tures a single image property (see results in Section A.5). We consider three possible explanations
for this: First, some heads may not correspond to coherent properties. Second, the initial descrip-
tions pool does not include descriptions of any image property. Third, some heads may collaborate
and have a coherent role only when their outputs are addressed together. Uncovering the roles of
more complex structures in CLIP can improve the performance of the described applications.
Future work. We believe that similar analysis for other CLIP architectures (e.g. ResNet) can
shed light on the differences between the output representations of different networks. Moreover,
our insights may help to design better CLIP image encoder architectures and feature extractors for
downstream tasks. We plan to explore these directions in future work.


                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Jean-Stanislas Denain for the insightful discussions
and comments. We thank Jixahai Feng, Fred Zhang, and Erik Jones for helpful feedback on the
manuscript. YG is supported by the Google Fellowship. AE is supported in part by DoD, including
DARPA’s MCS and ONR MURI, as well as funding from SAP. JS is supported by the NSF Awards
No. 1804794 & 2031899.

R EFERENCES
Kfir Aberman, Junfeng He, Yossi Gandelsman, Inbar Mosseri, David E. Jacobs, Kai Kohlhoff, Yael
  Pritch, and Michael Rubinstein. Deep saliency prior for reducing visual distraction. CoRR,
  abs/2109.01980, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01980.
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying attention flow in transformers. In Proceedings
  of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4190–4197,
  Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.
  385. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.385.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, William T. Freeman,
  and Antonio Torralba. Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial net-
  works. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2019.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907375117. URL https:
  //www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/08/31/1907375117.
Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech
  Samek. Layer-wise relevance propagation for neural networks with local renormalization layers.
  volume 9887 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 63–71. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
  2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44781-0 8.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 782–791, June 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox. Inverting convolutional networks with convolutional net-
  works. CoRR, abs/1506.02753, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02753.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale, 2021.
Amil Dravid, Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Assaf Shocher. Rosetta neurons: Mining
 the common units in a model zoo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1934–1943, October 2023.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Lore Goetschalckx, Alex Andonian, Aude Oliva, and Phillip Isola. Ganalyze: Toward visual defini-
  tions of cognitive image properties, 2019.
Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata †, Chelsea Voss †, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert,
  Alec Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. Distill, 2021.
  doi: 10.23915/distill.00030. https://distill.pub/2021/multimodal-neurons.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthieu Guillaumin, Daniel Küttel, and Vittorio Ferrari. Imagenet auto-annotation with segmenta-
 tion propagation. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 110(3):328–348, dec 2014. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10.
 1007/s11263-014-0713-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-014-0713-9.

Evan Hernandez, Sarah Schwettmann, David Bau, Teona Bagashvili, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob
  Andreas. Natural language descriptions of deep visual features. CoRR, abs/2201.11114, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11114.

Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773. If you use this software, please cite it as below.

Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc V. Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231879586.

Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Lan-
  guage embedded radiance fields, 2023.

Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim,
  William T. Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, and Inbar Mosseri. Explaining
  in style: Training a gan to explain a classifier in stylespace. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13369,
  2021.

Timo Lüddecke and Alexander Ecker. Image segmentation using text and image prompts. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  7086–7096, June 2022.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. CoRR,
  abs/1705.07874, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07874.

Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep image representations by inverting
  them. CoRR, abs/1412.0035, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.0035.

Joanna Materzynska, Antonio Torralba, and David Bau. Disentangling visual and written concepts
  in clip, 2022.

Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR,
  18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.
  html.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. CoRR, abs/2102.12092, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.12092.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. CoRR, abs/1911.08731, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08731.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman,
  Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick
  Schramowski, Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk,
  and Jenia Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
  models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.
Toby Segaran and Jeff Hammerbacher (eds.). Beautiful Data: The Stories Behind Elegant
  Data Solutions. O’Reilly, Beijing, 2009. ISBN 978-0-596-15711-1. URL https://www.
  safaribooksonline.com/library/view/beautiful-data/9780596801656/.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi
  Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-
  based localization. In ICCV, pp. 618–626. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. ISBN 978-
  1-5386-1032-9.     URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iccv/iccv2017.
  html#SelvarajuCDVPB17.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. CoRR,
 abs/1703.01365, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.01365.
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
  self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5797–5808, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1580. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1580.
Peter Welinder, Steve Branson, Takeshi Mita, Catherine Wah, Florian Schroff, Serge Be-
  longie, and Pietro Perona. Caltech-ucsd birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-201, Caltech,
  2010. URL /se3/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/WelinderEtal10_CUB-200.
  pdf,http://www.vision.caltech.edu/visipedia/CUB-200.html.
Mitchell Wortsman. Reaching 80% zero-shot accuracy with openclip: Vit-g/14 trained on laion-2b,
 2023. URL https://laion.ai/blog/giant-openclip/.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models, 2023.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Antonio Torralba, and Aude Oliva. Places: An image
  database for deep scene understanding, 2016.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning for
  vision-language models, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   L AYER N ORMALIZATION

We describe here the modifications that are needed to be incorporated in our method to take into
account layer-normalizations. There are two places where layer-normalizations are used - before the
projection layer (to the output of the ViT), and before each layer in the ViT (to the layer input). We
present how the individual contributions of ci,l,h , cl,h       i
                                                      head and ctoken should be changed.

Pre-projection layer normalization. As mentioned in the Section 3.1, in many implementations
of CLIP, a layer-normalization LN is applied to the output of the ViT before the projection layer.
Formally, the image representation of image I is then:
                                            Mimage (I) = P LN(ViT(I))                                      (8)

The normalization layer can be rewritten as:
                                        "        #    "           #
                            x − µl         γ            µl γ
                LN(x) = γ ∗ p 2     +β = p 2       ∗x− p 2     −β                                          (9)
                             σl + ϵ       σl + ϵ        σl + ϵ
where x ∈ Rd is the input token, µl , σl ∈ R are the mean and standard deviation, and γ, β ∈ Rd are
learned vectors. To incorporate the layer normalization in our decomposition, we compute the mean
and the standard deviation during the forward pass of the model. The multiplicative term, √ γ2 is
                                                                                                      σl +ϵ
absorbed into the projection matrix P . The contribution of √µl2γ             − β is split equally between all
                                                                      σl +ϵ
the ci,l,h terms in the Eq. 6. We apply these modifications when we decompose OpenCLIP-based
models.
MLPs and MSAs input layer normalizations. In the main paper, we do not describe the normal-
ization layers that are applied to each input of MLP and MSA in the model. More accurately, the
residual updates of the ViT are:
                                                                                l
                                                                    ˆ (Ẑ l )) + Ẑ l
                  Ẑ l = MSAl (LNl (Z l−1 )) + Z l−1 , Z l = MLPl (LN                                    (10)
           l
Where LNˆ and LNl are the layer normalizations applied to each token in the input matrix of the
MLP layers and MSA layers. This modification does not affect our corollaries about the direct
contributions of the MLP layers and MSA layers, as we only address the outputs of these layers.
The only other equation in which this modification takes place is in Eq. 5:
                  h                   i         H X
                                                X N
                      MSAl (Z l−1 )         =             xl,h  l,h  l,h l l−1
                                                           i , xi = αi LN (zi  )WVl,hO                   (11)
                                      cls
                                                h=1 i=0


A.2   M EAN -A BLATION OF THE C LASS -T OKEN ATTENDED FROM I TSELF

We show that we can ignore the direct effect of the class token in the MSAs term when we decom-
pose it into tokens (see section 5). We mean-ablate the direct contribution of the class token to the
MSAs term in Eq. 6. We simultaneously ablate both the class token and the MLPs. The ImageNet
zero-shot classification performances of the three ViT models are shown in Table 5. As shown,
the direct contributions of all the MLP layers and the direct contributions of the class token in the
decomposed MSAs term results in a negligible drop in performance for all the models.

A.3   T EXT D ESCRIPTIONS

General text descriptions. To generate the set of text descriptions that are used by our algorithm,
we prompted ChatGPT (GPT-3.5) to produce image descriptions. We used the prompt provided in
Table 6, and manually prompted the language model to generate more examples for specific patterns
we found in the initial result (e.g. more colors, more letters). This process resulted in 3498 sentences.
Most common words. For the set of most common words, we used the same number of examples,
and took the 3498 most common English words, as determined by n-gram frequency analysis of
Google’s Trillion Word Corpus (Segaran & Hammerbacher (2009)).


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Base       + class token    + MLPs
                                       accuracy       ablation       ablation
                          ViT-B-16      70.22           69.37         67.32
                          ViT-L-14      75.25           74.38         73.87
                          ViT-H-14      77.95           76.89         76.29

Table 5: Mean-ablation of the class token contribution to the MSAs term. The overall drop
in accuracy is relatively small, even when the MLPs are replaced by their mean across ImageNet
validation set.


Class-specific text descriptions. We generate additional class-specific text descriptions, by prompt-
ing ChatGPT with the prompt template provided in table 6. We queried to model for each of the
ImageNet class names. This process resulted in 28767 unique sentences.
Random vectors. As a baseline we created a random set of 3498 vectors sampled from a unit
Gaussian.

 General text descriptions initial prompt
 Imagine you are trying to explain a photograph by providing a complete set of image characteristics.
 Provide generic image characteristics. Be as general as possible and give short descriptions present-
 ing one characteristic at a time that can describe almost all the possible images of a wide range of
 categories. Try to cover as many categories as possible, and don’t repeat yourself. Here are some
 possible phrases: “An image capturing an interaction between subjects”, “Wildlife in their natural
 habitat”, “A photo with a texture of mammals”, “An image with cold green tones”, “Warm indoor
 scene”, “A photo that presents anger”. Just give the short titles, don’t explain why, and don’t com-
 bine two different concepts (with “or” or “and”). Make each item in the list short but descriptive.
 Don’t be too specific.
 Class-specific text descriptions prompt
 Provide 40 image characteristics that are true for almost all the images of {class}. Be as general as
 possible and give short descriptions presenting one characteristic at a time that can describe almost
 all the possible images of this category. Don’t mention the category name itself (which is “{class}”).
 Here are some possible phrases: “Image with texture of ...”, “Picture taken in the geographical
 location of...”, ”Photo that is taken outdoors”, “Caricature with text”, “Image with the artistic style
 of...”, “Image with one/two/three objects”, “Illustration with the color palette ...”, “Photo taken from
 above/below”, “Photograph taken during ... season”. Just give the short titles, don’t explain why,
 and don’t combine two different concepts (with “or” or “and”).

                 Table 6: ChatGPT prompts for image descriptions generation.


A.4   A DDITIONAL I NITIAL D ESCRIPTION P OOL A BLATION

We present additional ablation of the initial set of text descriptions provided to T EXT S PAN. The text
description generation processes for each of the pools are described in Section A.3.
As shown in Figure 7, using the class-specific descriptions pool that includes around ×8 more exam-
ples than the general descriptions pool, allows us to obtain higher accuracy with fewer descriptions
per head (smaller m). Nevertheless, using each of the two pools results in relatively similar accuracy
with m = 60.

A.5   T EXT S PAN OUTPUTS FOR CLIP-V I T-L

We apply T EXT S PAN to the attention heads of the last 4 layers of CLIP ViT-L. Tables 7-10 present
the first 5 descriptions per head.

A.6   Q UALITATIVE RESULTS FOR IMAGE TOKEN DECOMPOSITION

Figure 8(a) shows the similarity heatmaps for text descriptions. As presented our heatmaps high-
light the objects that are described in the text. Figure 8(b) presents the relative similarity heatmaps


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 70
                                                 60
                                                 50


                                      Accuracy
                                                 40
                                                 30
                                                                                  general descriptions
                                                 20                               most common words
                                                 10                               random vectors
                                                                                  class-specific descriptions
                                                 0
                                                      10    20          30             40        50        60
                                                               Descriptions per head

Figure 7: ImageNet classification accuracy for the image representation projected to T EXT S PAN
bases (additional results). We evaluate our algorithm for different initial description pools, and with
different output sizes.

(a)                                        (b)             “The player with                      “The grown-up      “The dog with
                                                            the white shirt”                       elephant”        the ginger fur”


                                                            “The player                           “The baby       “The dog with the
      “An image of a “An image of a ram                     with the ball”                         elephant”     black and white fur”
           tiger”    (adult male sheep)”


Figure 8: Heatmaps produced by the image token decomposition. We visualize (a) what areas
in the image directly contribute to the similarity score between the image representation and a text
representation and (b) what areas make an image representation more similar to one text represen-
tation rather than another.


given two descriptions (by subtracting between the two heatmaps). The areas in the images that
make the image representations more similar to one of the text representations rather than the other,
correspond to the areas that are mentioned by it and ignored by the other text.

A.7         M OST SIMILAR IMAGES TO T EXT S PAN RESULTS

We randomly choose 3 attention heads from the last 4 layers of CLIP ViT-L. For each head (l, h),
we retrieve the 3 images with the highest similarity score between their cl,hhead and the top 10 text
representations found by our algorithm. The retrieval is done from ImageNet validation set. The
results are presented in Figure 11. As shown, in most cases, the top text representation corresponds
to the attributes of the images.


                                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Layer 20, Head 0                             Layer 20, Head 1
       Picture taken in Hungary                     Picture taken in Seychelles
       Image taken in New England                   Picture taken in Saudi Arabia
       Futuristic technological concept             Muted urban tones
       Playful siblings                             Man-made pattern
       Picture taken in the English countryside     an image of glasgow
       Layer 20, Head 2                             Layer 20, Head 3
       Image of a police car                        Intrica wood carvingte
       Picture taken in Laos                        Image snapped in Spain
       Remote alpine chalet                         Photo taken in Bora Bora, French Polynesia
       A photograph of a small object               An image of a Preschool Teacher
       Desert sandstorm                             A breeze
       Layer 20, Head 4                             Layer 20, Head 5
       Image with a pair of subjects                an image of samoa
       Image with five subjects                     Urban nostalgia
       Image with a trio of friends                 A photo with the letter K
       A photo of an adult                          Image snapped in the Colorado Rockies
       Image with a seven people                    Serendipitous discovery
       Layer 20, Head 6                             Layer 20, Head 7
       Bustling city square                         Energetic children
       Peaceful village alleyway                    Grumpy facial expression
       ornate cathedral                             Intricate ceramic patterns
       Image taken in the Alaskan wilderness        Photo taken in Bangkok, Thailand
       Modern airport terminal                      Subdued moments
       Layer 20, Head 8                             Layer 20, Head 9
       Photo taken in Rioja, Spain                  Tranquil Asian temple
       Photo taken in Borneo                        Vibrant city nightlife
       Vibrant urban energy                         A photo with the letter R
       Picture captured in the Icelandic glaciers   intricate mosaic artwork
       serene oceanside scene                       Photo taken in the Rub’ al Khali (Empty Quarter)
       Layer 20, Head 10                            Layer 20, Head 11
       A bowl                                       Photo taken in Beijing, China
       A bottle                                     Photo with retro color filters
       Nostalgic pathways                           Image with holographic cyberpunk aesthetics
       A laptop                                     Urban street fashion
       Reflective ocean view                        Photograph with the artistic style of tilt-shift
       Layer 20, Head 12                            Layer 20, Head 13
       Photo with grainy, old film effect           Image taken from a distance
       Detailed illustration                        Photograph with the artistic style of split toning
       Serene beach sunset                          Photo taken in Beijing, China
       An image of the number 10                    A close-up shot
       An image of the number 5                     An image of a Novelist
       Layer 20, Head 14                            Layer 20, Head 15
       Quirky street performer                      Remote hilltop hut
       Antique sculptural element                   Photo taken in Barcelona, Spain
       Celebratory atmosphere                       Dynamic movement
       Overwhelmed facial expression                Caricature of an influential leader
       Serene winter wonderland                     A picture of Samoa

     Table 7: Top-5 results of T EXT S PAN. Applied to the heads at layer 20 of CLIP-ViT-L.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Layer 21, Head 0                       Layer 21, Head 1
          Timeless black and white               Picture taken in the southeastern United States
          Vintage sepia tones                    Picture taken in the Netherlands
          Image with a red color                 Image taken in Brazil
          A charcoal gray color                  Image captured in the Australian bushlands
          Soft pastel hues                       Picture taken in the English countryside
          Layer 21, Head 2                       Layer 21, Head 3
          A photo of a woman                     Precise timekeeping mechanism
          A photo of a man                       Image snapped in the Canadian lakes
          Energetic children                     An image of Andorra
          An image with dogs                     thrilling sports challenge
          A picture of a baby                    Photo taken in Namib Desert
          Layer 21, Head 4                       Layer 21, Head 5
          An image with dogs                     Inquisitive facial expression
          A picture of a bridge                  Artwork featuring typographic patterns
          A photo with the letter R              A photograph of a big object
          Dramatic skies                         Reflective landscape
          Ancient castle walls                   Burst of motion
          Layer 21, Head 6                       Layer 21, Head 7
          Photo taken in the Italian pizzerias   A pin
          thrilling motorsport race              A thimble
          Urban street fashion                   A bookmark
          An image of a Animal Trainer           Picture taken in Rwanda
          Serene countryside sunrise             A pen
          Layer 21, Head 8                       Layer 21, Head 9
          Inviting coffee shop                   Photograph with a blue color palette
          Photograph taken in a music store      Image with a purple color
          An image of a News Anchor              Image with a pink color
          Joyful family picnic scene             Image with a orange color
          cozy home library                      Timeless black and white
          Layer 21, Head 10                      Layer 21, Head 11
          Playful winking facial expression      Photo captured in the Arizona desert
          Joyful toddlers                        Picture taken in Alberta, Canada
          Close-up of a textured plastic         Photo taken in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
          An image of a Teacher                  Picture taken in Cyprus
          Image with a seven people              Photo taken in Seoul, South Korea
          Layer 21, Head 12                      Layer 21, Head 13
          Photo with grainy, old film effect     Quiet rural farmhouse
          Macro botanical photography            Lively coastal fishing port
          A laptop                               an image of liechtenstein
          Vintage nostalgia                      Image taken in the Florida Everglades
          serene mountain retreat                thrilling motorsport race
          Layer 21, Head 14                      Layer 21, Head 15
          Photo taken in Beijing, China          Submerged underwater scene
          Cheerful adolescents                   Artwork featuring overlapping scribbles
          Picture taken in Ecuador               Surrealist artwork with dreamlike elements
          Dreamy haze                            Serene winter wonderland
          Image captured in the Greek islands    Wildlife in their natural habitat

     Table 8: Top-5 results of T EXT S PAN. Applied to the heads at layer 21 of CLIP-ViT-L.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Layer 22, Head 0                          Layer 22, Head 1
       Artwork with pointillism technique        A semicircular arch
       Artwork with woven basket design          An isosceles triangle
       Artwork featuring barcode arrangement     An oval
       Image with houndstooth patterns           Rectangular object
       Image with quilted fabric patterns        A sphere
       Layer 22, Head 2                          Layer 22, Head 3
       Urban park greenery                       An image of legs
       cozy home interior                        A jacket
       Urban subway station                      A helmet
       Energetic street scene                    A scarf
       Tranquil boating on a lake                A table
       Layer 22, Head 4                          Layer 22, Head 5
       An image with dogs                        Harmonious color scheme
       Joyful toddlers                           An image of cheeks
       Serene waterfront scene                   Vibrant vitality
       thrilling sports action                   Captivating scenes
       A picture of a baby                       Dramatic chiaroscuro photography
       Layer 22, Head 6                          Layer 22, Head 7
       Curious wildlife                          Serene winter wonderland
       Majestic soaring birds                    Blossoming springtime blooms
       An image with dogs                        Crisp autumn leaves
       Image with a dragonfly                    A photo taken in the summer
       An image with cats                        Posed shot
       Layer 22, Head 8                          Layer 22, Head 9
       A photo with the letter V                 A photo of food
       A photo with the letter F                 delicate soap bubble play
       A photo with the letter D                 Dynamic and high-energy music performance
       A photo with the letter T                 Hands in an embrace
       A photo with the letter X                 Futuristic technology display
       Layer 22, Head 10                         Layer 22, Head 11
       Image with a yellow color                 A charcoal gray color
       Image with a orange color                 Sepia-toned photograph
       An image with cold green tones            Minimalist white backdrop
       Image with a pink color                   High-contrast black and white
       Sepia-toned photograph                    Image with a red color
       Layer 22, Head 12                         Layer 22, Head 13
       Photo taken in Namib Desert               Image taken in Thailand
       Ocean sunset silhouette                   Picture taken in the Netherlands
       Photo taken in the Brazilian rainforest   Picture taken in the southeastern United States
       Serene countryside sunrise                Image captured in the Australian bushlands
       Bustling cityscape at night               Picture taken in the geographical location of Spain
       Layer 22, Head 14                         Layer 22, Head 15
       A silver color                            contemplative urban view
       Play of light and shadow                  Photograph revealing frustration
       Image with a white color                  Celebratory atmosphere
       A charcoal gray color                     Captivating authenticity
       Cloudy sky                                Intense athletic competition

     Table 9: Top-5 results of T EXT S PAN. Applied to the heads at layer 22 of CLIP-ViT-L.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Layer 23, Head 0                                      Layer 23, Head 1
   Intrica wood carvingte                                Photograph taken in a retro diner
   Nighttime illumination                                Intense athlete
   Image with woven fabric design                        Detailed illustration of a futuristic bioreactor
   Image with shattered glass reflections                Image with holographic retro gaming aesthetics
   A photo of food                                       Antique historical artifact
   Layer 23, Head 2                                      Layer 23, Head 3
   Image showing prairie grouse                          Bustling city square
   Image with a penguin                                  Serene park setting
   A magnolia                                            Warm and cozy indoor scene
   An image with dogs                                    Modern airport terminal
   An image with cats                                    Remote hilltop hut
   Layer 23, Head 4                                      Layer 23, Head 5
   Playful siblings                                      Intertwined tree branches
   A photo of a young person                             Flowing water bodies
   Image with three people                               A meadow
   A photo of a woman                                    A smoky plume
   A photo of a man                                      Blossoming springtime blooms
   Layer 23, Head 6                                      Layer 23, Head 7
   Picture taken in Sumatra                              A paddle
   Picture taken in Alberta, Canada                      A ladder
   Picture taken in the geographical location of Spain   Intriguing and enigmatic passageway
   Image taken in New England                            A bowl
   Photo captured in the Arizona desert                  A table
   Layer 23, Head 8                                      Layer 23, Head 9
   Photograph with a red color palette                   ornate cathedral
   An image with cold green tones                        detailed reptile close-up
   Timeless black and white                              Image with a seagull
   Image with a yellow color                             A clover
   Photograph with a blue color palette                  Futuristic space exploration
   Layer 23, Head 10                                     Layer 23, Head 11
   Image with six subjects                               A photo with the letter N
   Image with a four people                              A photo with the letter J
   An image of the number 3                              Serendipitous discovery
   An image of the number 10                             A fin
   The number fifteen                                    Unusual angle
   Layer 23, Head 12                                     Layer 23, Head 13
   Image with polka dot patterns                         Photo taken in a museum
   Striped design                                        Surreal digital collage
   Checkered design                                      Cinematic portrait with dramatic lighting
   Artwork with pointillism technique                    Collage of vintage magazine clippings
   Photo taken in Galápagos Islands                     Candid documentary photography
   Layer 23, Head 14                                     Layer 23, Head 15
   An image with dogs                                    Resonant harmony
   Majestic soaring birds                                Subtle nuance
   Graceful swimming fish                                An image of cheeks
   An image with bikes                                   emotional candid gaze
   Picture with boats                                    Whimsicachildren’s scenel

     Table 10: Top-5 results of T EXT S PAN. Applied to the heads at layer 23 of CLIP-ViT-L.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Layer 22, Head 3                    Layer 23, Head 12                    Layer 23, Head 4
                            A “location” head                    A “texture” head                     A “people” head


                     “Photo taken in       “Serene           “Checkered      “Artwork with       “An image of    “A photo of a
                       a museum”         countryside           design”         pointillism     friends hanging     woman”
                                           sunrise”                           technique”              out”


                     “Photo taken in      “Quaint         “Image with polka “Striped design”    “A photo of a      “Joyful
                       a museum”          villages”          dot patterns”                        woman”          toddlers”


                            Figure 9: Additional joint decomposition examples.

              Input Image      rollout       raw attention      GradCAM          partial LRP   Chefer et al.        Ours

“An image
of an
echidna”


“An image
of a tiger”



“An image
of a ram
(adult male
sheep)”


Figure 10: Comparison to other explainability methods. The highlighted regions produced by
our decomposition are more aligned with the areas of the image that are mentioned in the text.

                                                                 base     ours
                                                ViT-B-16         76.7     83.8
                                                ViT-L-14         73.1     84.2
                                                ViT-H-14         77.0     84.1

Table 11: Overall classification accuracy on Waterbirds dataset. We reduce spurious cues by
zeroing the direct effects of property-specific heads.

                                                      water background         land background
                            waterbird class              92.1 (93.1)              77.8 (66.2)
                            landbird class               72.9 (47.7)              94.9 (94.8)

Table 12: Zero-shot classification accuracy on Waterbirds dataset, per class and background
(ViT-L). The accuracy for the baseline CLIP model is in parentheses. As shown, we reduce the
spurious correlation between the background and the object class.

                                                      water background         land background
                            waterbird class              62.3 (69.8)              43.3 (37.2)
                            landbird class               87.9 (71.0)              98.0 (96.4)

Table 13: Zero-shot classification accuracy on Waterbirds dataset, per class and background
(ViT-H). The accuracy for the baseline CLIP model is in parentheses.


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             water background        land background
                          waterbird class       80.5 (86.1)             81.6 (63.5)
                          landbird class        57.5 (45.6)             94.3 (96.1)

Table 14: Zero-shot classification accuracy on Waterbirds dataset, per class and background
(ViT-B). The accuracy for the baseline CLIP model is in parentheses.


           Layer 23, Head 7                     Layer 23, Head 2                     Layer 21, Head 10
A paddle                              Image showing prairie grouse         Timeless black and white


A ladder                              Image with a penguin                 Vintage sepia tones


Intriguing and enigmatic passageway   A magnolia                           Image with a red color


A bowl                                An image with dogs                   A charcoal gray color


A table                               An image with cats                   Soft pastel hues


A shoelace                            An irregular hexagon                 Picture taken in Laos


Hands in an embrace                   A parabola                           Peaceful lakeside retreat


contemplative mountain view           Image with a zebra                   Image with traditional African motifs


A roof                                A spiky texture                      Photograph with a blue color palette


A semicircular arch                   Picture of mammels                   Picture taken in Galápagos Islands


Figure 11: Top 3 images with highest similarities to T EXT S PAN outputs. For 3 randomly se-
lected attention heads, we retrieve the images with the highest similarity score between their head
contributions cl,h
                head and the top 10 text representations found by our algorithm.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Layer 23, Head 4 (a “people” head)


Input Image   Layer 22, Head 2 (a “location” head)


              Layer 23, Head 8    (a “color” head)


              Layer 22, Head 6 (an “animal” head)


Input Image   Layer 22, Head 3 (an “object” head)


              Layer 23, Head 12 (a “texture” head)


              Layer 22, Head 7   (a “season” head)


Input Image   Layer 23, Head 4   (a “people” head)


              Layer 23, Head 6    (a “geo-location” head)


              Layer 22, Head 1 (a “shape” head)


Input Image   Layer 22, Head 8 (a “letter” head)


              Layer 23, Head 8 (a “color” head)


      Figure 12: Additional results for image retrieval based on head-specific similarity.



                                                            22
