Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPOSING THE S ILENT H IDDEN I MPACT OF C ERTIFIED
T RAINING IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deep reinforcement learning research has enabled reaching significant performance
         levels for sequential decision making in MDPs with highly complex observations
         and state dynamics with the aid of deep neural networks. However, this aid
         came with a cost that is inherent to deep neural networks which have increased
         volatilities towards indistinguishable peculiarly crafted non-robust directions. To
         alleviate these volatilities several studies suggested techniques to cope with this
         problem via explicitly regulating the temporal difference loss for the worst-case
         sensitivity. In our study, we show that these certified training techniques come
         with a cost that intriguingly causes inconsistencies and overestimations in the value
         functions. Furthermore, our results essentially demonstrate that vanilla trained
         deep reinforcement learning policies have more accurate and consistent estimates
         for the state-action values. We believe our results reveal foundational intrinsic
         properties of the certified Lipschitz training techniques and demonstrate the need
         to rethink the approach to resilience in deep reinforcement learning.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Advancements in deep neural networks have recently proliferated leading to expansion in the domains
where deep neural networks are utilized including image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
natural language processing (Sutskever et al., 2014), speech recognition (Hannun et al., 2014) and self
learning systems via exploration. In particular, deep reinforcement learning has become an emerging
field with the introduction of deep neural networks as function approximators (Mnih et al., 2015).
Hence, deep neural policies have been deployed in many different domains from pharmaceuticals to
self driving cars (Daochang & Jiang, 2018; Huan-Hsin et al., 2017; Noonan, 2017).
As the advancements in deep neural networks continued a line of research focused on their vulnerabil-
ities towards a certain type of specifically crafted perturbations computed via the cost function used
to train the neural network (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2016; Dong
et al., 2018). While some research focused on producing optimal `p -norm bounded perturbations to
cause the most possible damage to the deep neural network models, an extensive amount of work
focused on making the networks robust to such perturbations (Madry et al., 2018; Carmon et al.,
2019; Raghunathan et al., 2020).
The vulnerability to such particularly optimized adversarial directions was inherited by deep neural
policies as well (Huang et al., 2017; Kos & Song, 2017; Korkmaz, 2022). Thus, robustness to such
perturbations in deep reinforcement learning became a concern for the machine learning community,
and several studies proposed various methods to increase robustness (Pinto et al., 2017; Gleave et al.,
2020). Thus, in this paper we focus on adversarially trained deep neural policies and the state-action
value function learned by these training methods in the presence of an adversary. In more detail, in
this paper we aim to seek answers for the following questions: (i) How accurate is the state-action
value function on estimating the values for state-action pairs in MDPs with high dimensional state
representations?, (ii) Does adversarial training affect the estimates of the state-action value function?,
(iii) What are the effects of training with worst-case distributional shift on the state-action value
function representation for the optimal actions? and (iv) Are there any fundamental trade-offs
intrinsic to explicit worst-case regularization in deep neural policy training? To be able to answer
these questions we focus on adversarial training and robustness in deep neural policies and make the
following contributions:


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We conduct an investigation on the state-action values learnt by the state-of-the-art adversar-
         ially trained deep neural policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies.
       • We provide a theoretically well-founded analysis for the hidden and silent impact of the
         state-of-the-art certified adversarial training on the state-action value function.
       • We perform several experiments in Atari games with large state spaces from the Arcade
         Learning Environment (ALE). With our systematic analysis we show that vanilla trained
         deep neural policies have a more accurate representation of the sub-optimal actions compared
         to the state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies.
       • Furthermore, we show the inconsistencies in the action ranking in the state-of-the-art
         adversarially trained deep neural policies. Thus, these results demonstrate the loss of
         information in state-action value function as a novel fundamental trade-off intrinsic to
         adversarial training.
       • More importantly, we demonstrate that state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural
         policies learn overestimated state-action value functions.
       • Finally, we explain how our results call into question the hypothesis initially proposed by
         Bellemare et al. (2016) relating the action gap and overestimation.

2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
2.1   P RELIMINARIES

In deep reinforcement learning the goal is to learn a policy for taking actions in a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) that maximize discounted expected cumulative reward. An MDP is represented by
a tuple M = (S, A, P, r, ρ0 , γ) where S is a set of continuous states, A is a discrete set of actions,
P is a transition probability distribution on S × A × S, r : S × A → R is a reward function,
ρ0 is the initial state distribution, and γ is the discount factor. The objective in reinforcement
learning is to learn a policy π : S → P(A) which maps states to probability distributions on
                                                                              PT −1
actions in order to maximize the expected cumulative reward R = E t=0 γ t r(st , at ) where
at ∼ π(st ). In Q-learning
                        P Watkins (1989) the goal is to learn the optimal state-action value function
Q∗ (s, a) = R(s, a) + s0 ∈S P (s0 |s, a) maxa0 ∈A Q∗ (s0 , a0 ). Thus, the optimal policy is determined
by choosing the action a∗ (s) = arg maxa Q(s, a) in state s.

2.2   A DVERSARIAL C RAFTING AND T RAINING

Szegedy et al. (2014) observed that imperceptible perturbations could change the decision of a deep
neural network and proposed a box constrained optimization method to produce such perturbations.
Goodfellow et al. (2015) suggested a faster method to produce such perturbations based on the
linearization of the cost function used in training the network. Kurakin et al. (2016) proposed the
iterative version of the fast gradient sign method proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2015) inside an
 -ball.
                             xN  +1          N                   N
                               adv = clip  (xadv + αsign(∇x J(xadv , y)))                       (1)
in which J(x, y) represents the cost function used to train the deep neural network, x represents
the input, and y represents the output labels. While several other methods have been proposed (e.g.
Korkmaz (2020)) using a momentum-based extension of the iterative fast gradient sign method,
                              ∇sadv J(stadv + µ · vt , a)                         vt+1
           vt+1 = µ · vt +             t                   and st+1    t
                                                                adv = sadv + α ·                    (2)
                             k∇sadv J(sadv + µ · vt , a)k1                       kvt+1 k2
adversarial training has mostly been conducted with perturbations computed by projected gradient
descent (PGD) proposed by Madry et al. (2018) (i.e. Equation 1).

2.3   A DVERSARIES AND T RAINING IN D EEP N EURAL P OLICIES

The initial investigation on resilience of deep neural policies was conducted by Kos & Song (2017)
and Huang et al. (2017) concurrently based on the utilization of the fast gradient sign method proposed
by Goodfellow et al. (2015). Korkmaz (2022) showed that deep reinforcement learning policies learn


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


shared adversarial features across MDPs. While several studies focused on improving optimization
techniques to compute optimal perturbations, a line of research focused on making deep neural
policies resilient to these perturbations. Pinto et al. (2017) proposed to model the dynamics between
the adversary and the deep neural policy as a zero-sum game where the goal of the adversary is to
minimize expected cumulative rewards of the deep neural policy. Gleave et al. (2020) approached
this problem with an adversary model which is restricted to take natural actions in the MDP instead
of modifying the observations with `p -norm bounded perturbations. The authors model this dynamic
as a zero-sum Markov game and solve it via self play. Recently, Huan et al. (2020) proposed to model
this interaction between the adversary and the deep neural policy as a state-adversarial MDP, and
claimed that their proposed algorithm State Adversarial Double Deep Q-Network (SA-DDQN) learns
theoretically certified robust policies against natural noise and perturbations. While some empirical
concerns have been raised on the robustness of theoretically certified adversarially trained deep neural
policies Ezgi (2021), more recently Korkmaz (2023) demonstrated that adversarial training causes
generalization problems in deep reinforcement learning. In our work, we systematically investigate
and theoretically motivate the problems caused by adversarial training on the state-action value
function learned by deep neural policies.


3    C ERTIFIED A DVERSARIAL T RAINING AND THE D EEP N EURAL P OLICY
     L ANDSCAPE

In this paper we aim to answer the following questions:

       • How does training with explicit worst-case regularization affect the estimates of the optimal
         state-action values in MDPs with high dimensional state representations?
       • Does state-of-the-art adversarial training affect the state-action value estimates?
       • Are there any intrinsic trade-offs tied to adversarial deep neural policy training?

While the goal in Q-learning is to learn the state-action value function Q(s, a) that maximizes
expected discounted cumulative rewards, in deep Q-learning an additional concern arises from
susceptibility towards adversarial perturbations due to the nonlinear function approximator used
in learning the Q-function. Ideally, it is expected that the certified adversarial training would
reduce the vulnerability of the Q-function to adversarial perturbations while preserving the Q-
values of the non-perturbed states as much as possible. The theoretically motivated adversarial
training techniques achieve certified defense against adversarial perturbations inside the  -ball
D  (s) = {s̄ : ks − s̄k∞ ≤  }. However, we demonstrate that this approach induces significant
changes in the Q-function so that the Q-function loses its accuracy for the non-perturbed states. In
particular, adversarial training causes deep neural policies to learn overestimated state-action values,
and the Q-values for non-optimal actions are reduced in accuracy to the point where their relative
ranking changes. In the remainder of this section we give theoretical motivation for these empirical
results. In particular we demonstrate that in the setting of linear function approximation, adversarial
training can potentially lead to overestimation for the Q-values of the optimal actions, and reordering
of the ranking of non-optimal actions. The basic approach of adversarial training techniques is based
on adding a regularizer to the standard Q-learning update. The regularizer is designed to penalize
Q-functions for which a perturbed state s̄ ∈ D  (s) can change the identity of the highest Q-value
action. For the baseline adversarial training technique Huan et al. (2020) we will theoretically analyze
the effects of this regularizer.
Definition 3.1. For a state s let a∗ (s) = arg maxa Q(s, a). The regularizer is given by
                               X
                                                                         ∗
                     R(θ) =            max max  ∗
                                                   Qθ (s̄, a) − Qθ (s̄, a (s)) .
                                     s̄∈D  (s) a6=a (s)
                                s


The adversarial training algorithm proceeds by adding R(θ) to the standard temporal difference loss
used in DQN
                    L(θ) = LH r + γ max
                                     0
                                        Qtarget (s0 , a0 ) − Qθ (s, a) + R(θ)
                                           a

and minimizing via stochastic gradient descent.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We now describe the construction of an MDP M with linear function approximation where the
use of the regularizer causes overestimation and reordering of suboptimal actions. There are two
states parametrized by feature vectors s1 , s2 ∈ Rn , and there are three possible actions {ai }3i=1
in each state. Taking any of the three actions in state s1 leads to a transition to state s2 and vice
versa. Let 1 > γ > 0 be the discount factor, and let δ > η > 0 be small constants with γ > δ. The
rewards for each action are as follows: r(s1 , a1 ) = 1 − γ, r(s1 , a2 ) = η − γ, r(s1 , a3 ) = δ − γ,
r(s2 , a1 ) = η − γ, r(s2 , a2 ) = 1 − γ, and r(s2 , a3 ) = δ − γ. Clearly, the optimal policy is to always
take action a1 in state s1 , and action a2 in state s2 as these are the only actions giving P∞ positive reward.
                                                            ∗                ∗                           t
Thus the optimal state-action values are given   P∞  by: Q    (s1 ,  a1 ) = Q  (s2 , a2 ) =  t=0 (1 − γ)γ = 1,
  ∗                ∗                                                t                ∗              ∗
Q (s1 , a2 )P= Q (s2 , a1 ) = η − γ + γ t=0 (1 − γ)γ = η , and Q (s1 , a3 ) = Q (s2 , a3 ) =
               ∞
δ − γ + γ t=0 (1 − γ)γ t = δ. Let the Q-function be linearly parametrized by θ = (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 ) so
that Qθ (s, ai ) = hθi , si. Finally, let zi for i ∈ {1, 2, 3} be three orthonormal vectors, and let the state
feature vectors satisfy:
                         1. s1 = z1 + δz3 + ηz2 and 2. s2 = z2 + δz3 + ηz1
Then it follows that the optimal Q-function is parametrized by θ∗ = (θ1∗ , θ2∗ , θ3∗ ) where θi∗ = zi
i.e. Qθ∗ (s, a) = Q∗ (s, a) for all s and a. Thus, according to the function Qθ∗ (s, a), for s1 the best
action is a1 , for s2 the best action is a2 , and in all states the second-best action is a3 . Next we identify
the optimal perturbations used in the computation of the regularizer R(θ∗ ) for this setting.
Proposition 3.2. In the MDP M suppose that   < δ−η
                                                2 .


      1. For s = s1 : s + √ (θ3∗ − θ1∗ ) = arg max max         Qθ∗ (s̄, a) − Qθ∗ (s̄, a∗ (s))
                            2                             ∗
                                            s̄∈D  (s) a6=a (s)


      2. For s = s2 : s + √ (θ3∗ − θ2∗ ) = arg max max         Qθ∗ (s̄, a) − Qθ∗ (s̄, a∗ (s))
                            2                             ∗
                                            s̄∈D  (s) a6=a (s)


Proof. We will prove item 1, and item 2 will follow from an identical argument with roles of θ1∗ and
θ2∗ swapped. Let s = s1 . Any s̄ ∈ D  (s) can be written as s +  v where v is a unit vector. Thus,
hθ3∗ , s̄i = hθ3∗ , si +  hθ3∗ , vi > hθ3∗ , si −   = δ −  . Similarly we have hθ2∗ , s̄i < hθ2∗ , si +   = η +  .
Since   < δ−η                                ∗         ∗
               2 , we conclude that hθ3 , s̄i > hθ2 , s̄i for all s̄ ∈ D  (s). Therefore, in state s the action
maximizing maxa6=a∗ (s) Qθ∗ (s̄, a) − Qθ∗ (s̄, a∗ (s)) will always be a3 . This implies that
               arg max max
                        ∗
                           Qθ∗ (s̄, a) − Qθ∗ (s̄, a∗ (s)) = arg maxhθ3∗ , s̄i − hθ1∗ , s̄i.
                s̄∈D  (s) a6=a (s)                                   s̄∈D  (s)

This is the maximum in a ball of radius   around s of the linear function hθ3∗ − θ1∗ , s̄i. Therefore the
maximum is achieved by s̄ = s + √ 2 (θ3∗ − θ1∗ ) as desired.

In words, the optimal direction to perturb the state s1 in order to have a∗ (s) 6= a∗ (s̄) is toward
θ3∗ − θ1∗ . Similarly for the state s2 , the optimal perturbation is toward θ3∗ − θ2∗ . Next we use this fact
to show that in order to decrease the regularizer it is sufficient to simply increase the magnitude of θ1
and θ2 , and decrease the magnitude of θ3 .
Proposition 3.3. In the MDP M let λ > 0 and suppose that   < (1−λ)δ−(1+λ)η
                                                                       2      . Let θ = (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 )
be given by θ1 = (1 + λ)θ1∗ , θ2 = (1 + λ)θ2∗ and θ3 = (1 − λ)θ3∗ . Then R(θ) < R(θ∗ ) − λ.

Proof. By an identical argument to that in Proposition 3.2 we have that a3 is always the action
maximizing maxa6=a∗ (s) Qθ (s̄, a) − Qθ (s̄, a∗ (s)) whenever   < (1−λ)δ−(1+λ)η
                                                                           2        . This condition is
satisfied by assumption. Therefore, we conclude that for s = s1 , the optimal s̄ ∈ D  (s) for the scaled
parameters θ is given by s̄ = s + √   2 (θ3 − θ1 ). Therefore, the contribution to the sum defining
                                        2(1+λ )
R(θ) from state s1 is given by
                                           p                                    p
     h(θ3 − θ1 ), s̄i = h(θ3 − θ1 ), si +   2(1 + λ2 ) = −(1 + λ) + (1 − λ)δ +   2(1 + λ2 )

where the last step uses√the fact that s = θ1∗ + δθ3∗ + ηθ2∗ and that the vectors θi∗ are orthonormal.
Next using the fact that 1 + λ2 < 1 + λ for all λ > 0 we conclude
                                                      √        √                         √
         h(θ3 − θ1 ), s̄i < −(1 + λ) + (1 − λ)δ +   2 +  λ 2 < −(1 + λ) + δ +   2.                 (3)


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                              √
The final inequality follows from the fact that   < 2δ so  λ 2 − λδ < 0. Switching to type 2 actions
an identical proof (with θ1 replaced by θ2 ) yields the same value for the contribution of type 2 actions
to the sum. By Proposition 3.2, the contribution of each type of state to the sum defining R(θ∗ ) is
                                                                           √
                          h(θ3∗ − θ1∗ ), s + √ (θ3∗ − θ1∗ )i = −1 + δ +   2.                          (4)
                                               2
Clearly the contribution of each state in 3 is strictly less than that in 4 by λ. Therefore R(θ) <
R(θ∗ ) − λ.

Combining Proposition 3.3 and Proposition 3.2 we can prove the main result of this section on the
effects of worst-case regularization on the state-action value function.
Theorem 3.4. There is an MDP with linearly parameterized state-action values, optimal state-action
value parameters θ∗ , and a parameter vector θ such that: L(θ) < L(θ∗ ), and the parameter vector θ
overestimates the optimal state-action value and re-orders the sub-optimal ones.

Proof. See supplementary material.

While we showed how this can potentially happen for a simple example with linear function ap-
proximation, we will see that this is a general phenomenon which occurs with neural-network
approximation of the Q-function in adversarially trained agents. Note that the state-of-the-art certified
adversarial training techniques are utilizing methods directly inherited from the adversarial training
techniques proposed to robustify classification tasks. It is important to note that one of the roots of
the issues identified in our paper is caused by the intrinsic differences between deep reinforcement
learning and classification tasks where adversarial training has previously been applied. In particular,
the fact that the state-action value function Q(s, a) carries significant information intrinsic to rein-
forcement learning, i.e. expected cumulative rewards obtained given a state-action pair, corresponding
to the MDP beyond simply labelling the optimal action correctly is the root cause of the effects that
are observed in Section 6.2 and Section 6.3. In other words, simply penalizing the state-action value
function for assigning the wrong “label” to an adversarial state can have unintended, potentially
detrimental consequences for learning an accurate state-action value function.

4    A NALYZING T HE ACCURACY OF S TATE -ACTION VALUES
In this section we provide a methodology to measure the accuracy of the state-action value function
in representing values for the non-optimal actions. At a high-level, our approach is based on action
modification and the relative performance drop P as defined below:
Definition 4.1. The performance drop of an agent when modifying the agent’s actions is given by
                                           Scorebase − Scoreactmod
                                     P=                            .                                   (5)
                                            Scorebase − Scoremin
where Scorebase represent the baseline run of the game with no action modification, Scoremin represents
the minimum score available for a given game, and Scoreactmod represents the run of the game where
the actions of the agent are modified for a fraction of the state observations.

To measure the “accuracy” for non-optimal actions formally, let ai be the ith best action decided by
the deep neural policy in a given state s (i.e. Q(s, a) is sorted in decreasing order, and ai is the action
corresponding to ith largest Q-value). For a trained agent, the value of Q(s, ai ) should represent
the expected cumulative rewards obtained by taking action ai in state s, and then taking the highest
Q-value action (i.e. a1 ) in every subsequent state. Thus, a natural test to perform would be: pick
a random state s, make the agent choose action ai in state s, and in all other states have the agent
choose the highest Q-value action. By comparing the relative performance drop P in this test to a
clean run where the agent always takes the highest Q-value action, one can measure the decline in
rewards caused by taking action ai . Further, we can provide a measure of accuracy for the state-action
value function by comparing the results of the test for each i ∈ {1, 2 . . . |A|}, and checking that
the relative performance drops Pi are in the correct order i.e. 0 = P1 ≤ P2 · · · ≤ P|A| . One issue
with the above proposal is that it is often the case that there are many states s in which the action
taken has very little impact on the final rewards. Instead, there are a relatively smaller number of


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Performance drop P2 (p) with respect to action modification a2 for the state-of-the-art
adversarially trained deep neural policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies. Left: BankHeist.
Center: RoadRunner. Right: Freeway.
critical states in which the action taken has a large impact. Thus, picking a single random state s in
which to take action ai will have a statistically insignificant impact on the final rewards in the game.
Therefore we modify the test described above by instead sampling a p-fraction of the states in the
episode uniformly at random, and making the agent take action ai in each of the sampled states. We
then record the relative performance drop as a function of p, yielding a reward curve Pi (p). More
formally, we define
Definition 4.2. Let M be an MDP and Q(s, a) be a state-action value function for M. In each state
label the actions a1 , . . . a|A| in order so that Q(s, a1 ) ≥ Q(s, a2 ) · · · ≥ Q(s, a|A| ). We define the
performance curve Pi (p) to be the expected performance drop of an agent in M which takes action
ai in a randomly sampled p-fraction of states, and takes action a1 in all other states.

Using these reward curves one can check whether Pi (p) lies above Pj (p) whenever i > j. Of course
one curve may not always lie strictly above or below another, so we introduce the following definition
to quantitatively capture the relative ordering of performance drop curves.
Definition 4.3. Let F : [0, 1] → [0, 1] and G : [0, 1] → [0, 1]. For any τ > 0, we say that the F
                   R1
τ -dominates G if 0 (F (p) − G(p)) dp > τ .

To compare the accuracy of state-action values for vanilla versus adversarially trained agents, we can
thus perform the above test, and check the relative ordering of the curves Pi (p) using Definition 4.3
for each agent type. In addition, we can also directly compare for each i the curve Piadv (p) for the
adversarially trained agent with the curve Pivanilla (p) for the vanilla trained agent. This is possible
because Pi (p) measures the performance drop of the agent relative to a clean run, and so always takes
values on a normalized scale from 0 to 1. Thus, if we observe for example that P2adv (p) τ -dominates
P2vanilla (p) for some τ > 0, we can conclude that the state-action value function of the vanilla trained
agent more accurately represents the second-best action than that of the adversarially trained agent.

5    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
The experiments are conducted in high dimensional state representation MDPs. In particular, our
experiments are conducted in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013)
in the OpenAI (Brockman et al., 2016) baseline version. The vanilla trained deep neural policy
is trained via Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) (Wang et al., 2016) initially proposed by Hasselt
et al. (2016) with prioritized experience replay proposed by (Schaul et al., 2016), and the state-
of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policy is trained via State-Adversarial Double Deep
Q-Network (SA-DDQN) (Section 2) with prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al., 2016). The
results are averaged over 10 episodes. We explain in detail all the necessary hyperparameters for
the implementation in the supplementary material. The standard error of the mean is included for
all of the figures and tables. Note that in the main body of the paper we focus on the baseline
adversarial training. In the supplementary material we also provide analysis on the follow-up more
recent studies in adversarial training techniques. The results reported for all of the adversarial training
techniques remains the same: that the adversarially trained policies learn inaccurate, inconsistent and
overestimated state-action values.

6    A NALYZING THE S TATE -ACTION VALUE F UNCTION R EPRESENTATION
In this section we demonstrate that the state-action value function of adversarially trained deep
neural policies provides inaccurate estimates for the non-optimal actions, and learns overestimated


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Performance drop Pw (p) with respect to action modification aw for the state-of-the-art
adversarially trained deep neural policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies.
Table 1: Area under the curve of performance drop under action modification (AM) a2 and aw for
the state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies.
  Environments                 BankHeist                      RoadRunner                        Freeway
  Training Method     Adversarial        Vanilla      Adversarial        Vanilla      Adversarial         Vanilla
  AM a2              0.449±0.007       0.191±0.04     0.414±0.015     0.247±0.009     0.351±0.009    0.302±0.007
  AM aw              0.311± 0.011     0.398±0.011     0.345±0.011     0.393±0.009     0.241±0.007    0.311±0.010



state-action values. This confirms that the theoretically-motivated problems discussed in Section
3 do indeed occur in practice for deep neural policies. In particular, to evaluate the accuracy on
non-optimal actions we use the methodology discussed in Section 4 of measuring the performance
drop Pi (p) that occurs when causing the deep neural policy to take the i-th best action in a p fraction
of states. Our aim is to provide an analysis on how accurate the state-action value function is in
representing values for both optimal and non-optimal actions for vanilla trained deep neural policies
and state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies.

6.1    I NCONSONANCE IN A DVERSARIALLY T RAINED D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
       P OLICIES

In this subsection we demonstrate the inconsistencies in the action
ranking in adversarially trained policies. In particular, in Figure 3 in
BankHeist choosing the worst action leads to a smaller performance
drop than choosing the second best action i.e. Pw (p) < P2 (p) for
all p. Thus, this demonstrates that the state-action value function
is not ranking the sub-optimal actions accurately. While learning
an accurate representation of the state-action values is important
for obtaining a policy that aims to maximize expected cumulative
rewards, learning the correct order of the actions can also solve this Figure 3: P2 and Pw for ad-
problem.1 While the inconsistency in action ranking for adversarially versarially trained deep neural
trained deep neural policies can be seen as a vulnerability problem policies.
from a security point of view, most intriguingly these results demonstrate the loss of information in
state-action value function as a novel fundamental trade-off intrinsic to adversarial training.

6.2   I NACCURACY OF A DVERSARIALLY T RAINED S TATE -ACTION VALUES FOR N ON - OPTIMAL
      ACTIONS

In Figure 1 we show the performance drop P2 (p) as a function of the fraction of states p in which
the action modification is applied for state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies and
vanilla trained deep neural policies. In particular, the action modification is set for the second best
action a2 decided by the state-action value function Q(s, a). As we increase the fraction of states in
which the action modification set to a2 is applied, we observe a performance drop for both of the deep
neural policies. However, we observe that the vanilla trained deep neural policies experience a lower
   1
     Furthermore, note that in several cases the deep neural policy must know the correct order of the actions
due to the presence of an obstruction that blocks the optimal action either due to the existence of other agents or
environmental effects Gleave et al. (2020). In particular, a line of algorithms have been proposed to learn the
ranking of the actions so that the agent can choose the next-best ranked action in safety-critical situations. Some
work has also pointed out that in some cases learning the relative rank of the actions (Lin & Zhou, 2020) can be
more sample efficient than learning correct estimates of the state-action values.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 4: Q-value of a∗ over the states for adversarially and vanilla trained deep neural policies.
Table 2: Average Q-values of the optimal action in state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural
policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies.
 Environments                BankHeist                        RoadRunner                        Freeway
 Training Method      Adversarial    Vanilla            Adversarial   Vanilla          Adversarial      Vanilla
 Q(s, a∗ )           5.903±2.052        0.300±0.434    8.806±3.216     0.602±0.781    1.667± 0.406    1.185±0.348


performance drop with this modification. Especially in BankHeist we observe that the performance
drop does not exceed 0.55 even when the action modification is applied for a large fraction of the
visited states for the vanilla trained deep neural policies. This gap in the performance drop between
the adversarially trained and vanilla trained deep neural policies indicates that the state-action value
function learnt by vanilla trained deep neural policies has a better estimate for the non-optimal
actions. As we measured the impact of a2 modification on the policy performance, we further test
aw = arg mina Q(s, a) (i.e. worst possible action in a given state) modification on the deep neural
policy. Figure 2 shows that the performance drop Pw (p) is higher in the vanilla trained deep neural
policies compared to adversarially trained deep neural policies when the action modification is set to
aw . This again further demonstrates that the state-action value function learnt by the vanilla trained
deep neural policy has a more accurate representation over the non-optimal actions. We hypothesize
that adversarial training places higher emphasis on ensuring that the highest ranked action (i.e. the
action that maximizes the state-action value function in a given state) does not change under small
`p -norm bounded perturbations, rather than accurately computing the state-action value function as
discussed in Section 3. A method which places higher emphasis on the highest ranked action risks
converging to a state-action value function with overestimated Q-values. We further demonstrate this
in Section 6.3.


6.3    OVERESTIMATION OF Q- VALUES IN A DVERSARIALLY T RAINED D EEP N EURAL P OLICIES

Overestimation of Q-values was initially discussed by Thrun & Schwartz (1993) as a byproduct of
the use of function approximators, and was subsequently explained as being caused by the use of the
max operator in Q-learning (van Hasselt, 2010). Furthermore, Hasselt et al. (2016) demonstrate that
the overestimation bias results in learning sub-optimal policies, and thus proposes deep double-Q
learning that alleviates the overestimation problem initially observed in DQN Mnih et al. (2016).
In this subsection we empirically demonstrate that state-of-the-art adversarial training indeed leads
to overestimation in Q-values, as hypothesized in Section 3. In particular, Figure 4 and Table 2
show the overestimation bias on the state-action values learned by the state-of-the-art adversarially
trained deep neural policies. Note that the fact that adversarially trained deep reinforcement learning
policies assign higher state-action values than the vanilla trained deep reinforcement learning policies
while performing similarly (i.e. obtaining similar expected cumulative rewards without modification)
clearly demonstrates that the adversarial training techniques, on top of the inconsonance and the
inaccuracy issues, learn explicitly biased state-action values.
Table 3: Normalized state-action value estimates2 and state-action value estimate shift for the second
best action in state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies.
 Q(s, a)                    Q(s, a∗ )                          Q(s, a2 )                       Q(s, aw )
 ALE               Adversarial          Vanilla       Adversarial          Vanilla    Adversarial          Vanilla
 BankHeist     0.1894±0.002       0.170±0.003     0.130±0.0006       0.169±0.002     0.127±0.0010    0.161±0.004
 RoadRunner    0.1696±0.008       0.236±0.094     0.132±0.0026       0.159±0.079     0.126±0.0049    -0.265±0.071
 Freeway       0.1894±0.002       0.341±0.008     0.130±0.0006       0.333±0.002     0.127±0.0010    0.325±0.009



                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that these state-of-the-art adversarial training algorithms are published in NeurIPS 2020 as
Spotlight Presentation and NeurIPS 2021. Thus, the uncovered issues with this line of algorithms
carry significant importance due to the fact that these studies influence future research directions
while significantly pivoting research focus. Furthermore, without the knowledge of the actual costs
and drawbacks of these algorithms a significant level of research efforts might be misdirected. While
the results reported in Figure 3, Section 6.2, and Section 6.3 reveal concrete problems of the state-of-
the-art adversarial training techniques particularly regarding the inconsonance and overestimation
issues, from the security perspective these results call for an urgent reconsideration and discussion
on the certified robustness algorithms and their implications. Furthermore, orthogonally from the
alignment perspective these results demonstrate that adversarially training causes policies to be
misaligned with human decision making processes.

6.4   ACTION G AP P HENOMENON

The action gap is defined as the difference
κ(Q, s) = max
           0
              Q(s, a0 )−maxa∈arg
                            /    maxa0 ∈A Q(s,a0 ) Q(s, a).
            a ∈A

Initially, Farahmand (2011) describes the existence of a large
action gap as a desirable property of an MDP, which makes
learning an optimal policy easier. Subsequently, Bellemare
et al. (2016) proposed a connection between the action gap
and the overestimation of Q-values, and in particular hypoth-
esized that increasing the action gap of the learned value
function causes a decrease in overestimation of Q-values.
Following this study, several papers built on the hypothe-
sis that increasing the action gap causes reduction in bias Figure 5: Normalized state-action val-
(Smirnova & Dohmatob, 2020; Fox et al., 2016; Jain et al., ues for the best action a∗ , second best
2020; Lu et al., 2019). In Figure 5 we show that adversarial action a and worst action a over
                                                                            2                     w
training increases the action gap. Thus, the fact that adver- states. Left: Vanilla trained. Right:
sarially trained deep neural policies overestimate the optimal State-of-the-art adversarially trained.
state-action values (see Section 6.3) refutes the hypothesis
that increasing the action gap is the sole cause of a decrease in overestimation bias of state-action
values. We hypothesize that the consistent Bellman operator (Bellemare et al., 2016) may cause
a decrease in overestimation for a different reason. In particular, the consistent Bellman operator
corresponds to a special case of a certain reparameterization of Kullback-Leibler regularization for
value iteration (Vieillard et al., 2020). Thus, it may be the case that the decrease in overestimation of
Q-values and improvement in performance is due to a type of implicit regularization rather than to an
increase of the action gap. Hence, our results show that increasing the action gap alone may coincide
with an increase in overestimation of Q-values.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this paper we focus on the state-action value function learnt via the state-of-the-art adversarially
trained deep neural policies and vanilla trained deep neural policies. We provide theoretical analysis on
the fundamental effects caused by adversarial training on the state-action value function. Furthermore,
we conduct manifold experiments in the Arcade Learning Environment and with our systematic
analysis we demonstrate that vanilla trained deep neural policies have more accurate and consistent
estimates for the state-action values than the state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies.
More intriguingly, we show that adversarially trained deep neural policies in certain MDPs completely
lose all the information in the state-action value function that contains the relative ranking of the
actions. More importantly, we show that state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep neural policies
learn overestimated state-action values. We believe our investigation lays out intrinsic properties
of adversarial training while systematically revealing the underlying vulnerabilities, and can be
conducive to building robust and optimal deep neural policies.
    2
      Note that due to the fact that the adversarially trained deep neural policy overestimates Q-values, we
introduce a normalization in order to compare the action gaps of adversarially and vanilla trained
                                                                                             P     policies. In
particular, in Figure 5 we report normalized Q-values in each state s by dividing Q(s, a) by a |Q(s, a)|.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael. Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research., pp.
 253–279, 2013.

Marc G. Bellemare, Georg Ostrovski, Arthur Guez, Philip S. Thomas, and Rémi Munos. Increasing
 the action gap: New operators for reinforcement learning. In Dale Schuurmans and Michael P.
 Wellman (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February
 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, pp. 1476–1483. AAAI Press, 2016.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

Yair Carmon, Aditi Raghunathan, Ludwig Schmidt, John C. Duchi, and Percy Liang. Unlabeled
  data improves adversarial robustness. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer,
  Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
  NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 11190–11201, 2019.

Liu Daochang and Tingting. Jiang. Deep reinforcement learning for surgical gesture segmentation
  and classification. In International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted
  intervention., pp. 247–255.Springer, Cham, 2018.

Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boosting
  adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 9185–9193, 2018.

Korkmaz Ezgi. Investigating vulnerabilities of deep neural policies. Conference on Uncertainty in
 Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2021.

Amir Massoud Farahmand. Action-gap phenomenon in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2011.

Roy Fox, Ari Pakman, and Naftali Tishby. Taming the noise in reinforcement learning via soft
  updates. Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2016.

Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Cody Wild, Kant Neel, Sergey Levine, and Stuart Russell. Adver-
  sarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning
 Representations ICLR, 2020.

Ian Goodfellow, Jonathan Shelens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaning and harnessing adversarial
  examples. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Diamos Greg, Erich Else, Ryan Prenger,
 Sanjeev Satheesh, Sengupta Shubho, Ada Coates, and Andrew Ng. Deep speech: Scaling up
 end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.

Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016.

Zhang Huan, Chen Hongge, Xiao Chaowei, Bo Li, Mingyan Boning, Duane Liu, and ChoJui Hsiesh.
  Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on state observatons. NeurIPS
  Spotlight Presentation, 2020.

Sandy Huang, Nicholas Papernot, Yan Goodfellow, Ian an Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Adversarial
  attacks on neural network policies. Workshop Track of the 5th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017.

Tseng Huan-Hsin, Sunan Cui, Yi Luo, Jen-Tzung Chien, Randall K. Ten Haken, and Issam El. Naqa.
  Deep reinforcement learning for automated radiation adaptation in lung cancer. Medical physics
  44, pp. 6690–6705, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vishal Jain, William Fedus, Hugo Larochelle, Doina Precup, and Marc G. Bellemare. Algorithmic
  improvements for deep reinforcement learning applied to interactive fiction. Association for the
  Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2020.
Ezgi Korkmaz. Nesterov momentum adversarial perturbations in the deep reinforcement learning
  domain. International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, Inductive Biases, Invariances
  and Generalization in Reinforcement Learning Workshop., 2020.
Ezgi Korkmaz. Deep reinforcement learning policies learn shared adversarial features across mdps.
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Ezgi Korkmaz. Adversarial robust deep reinforcement learning requires redefining robustness. AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Jernej Kos and Dawn Song. Delving into adversarial attacks on deep policies. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial examples in the physical world.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533, 2016.
Kaixiang Lin and Jiayu Zhou. Ranking policy gradient. In 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Yingdong Lu, Mark S. Squillante, and Chai Wah Wu. A family of robust stochastic operators for
  reinforcement learning. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
  d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019,
  December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 15626–15636, 2019.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In 6th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference
  Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, arc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles
  Beattie, Amir Sadik, Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg,
  and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518:
  529–533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Badia Puigdomenech, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray. Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.
Laura Noonan. Jpmorgan develops robot to execute trades. Financial Times, pp. 1928–1937, July
  2017.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
  ment learning. International Conference on Learning Representations ICLR, 2017.
Aditi Raghunathan, Sang Michael Xie, Fanny Yang, John C. Duchi, and Percy Liang. Understanding
  and mitigating the tradeoff between robustness and accuracy. In Proceedings of the 37th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7909–7919. PMLR, 2020.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonogloua, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay.
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
Elena Smirnova and Elvis Dohmatob. On the convergence of smooth regularized approximate value
  iteration schemes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual,
  2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. . Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 2014.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dimutru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Sebastian Thrun and Anton Schwartz. Issues in using function approximation for reinforcement
  learning. In Fourth Connectionist Models Summer School, 1993.
Hado van Hasselt. Double q-learning. In John D. Lafferty, Christopher K. I. Williams, John Shawe-
  Taylor, Richard S. Zemel, and Aron Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 23: 24th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2010. Proceedings
  of a meeting held 6-9 December 2010, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, pp. 2613–2621.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2010.
Nino Vieillard, Tadashi Kozuno, Bruno Scherrer, Olivier Pietquin, Rémi Munos, and Matthieu
  Geist. Leverage the average: an analysis of KL regularization in reinforcement learning. In Hugo
  Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando. De Freitas.
  Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. Internation Conference on Machine
  Learning ICML., pp. 1995–2003, 2016.
Chris Watkins. Learning from delayed rewards. In PhD thesis, Cambridge. King’s College, 1989.


                                                12
