Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE C ERTIFICATION PARADOX :
C ERTIFICATIONS A DMIT B ETTER E VASION ATTACKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         In guaranteeing the absence of adversarial examples in bounded spaces, certification
         mechanisms play an important role in demonstrating neural network robustness.
         Within this work we ask if certifications themselves can potentially compromise
         the very models they help to protect? By demonstrating a new attack surface that
         exploits certified guarantees to construct norm minimising evasion attacks, we
         demonstrate the heretofore unexplored risks inherent in releasing certifications.
         Our new Certification Aware Attack produces smaller, more difficult to detect
         adversarial examples more than 74% of the time than comparable attacks, while
         reducing the median perturbation norm by more than 10%. That this is achievable
         in significantly less computational time highlights an apparent paradox—that
         releasing certifications can reduce security.


1    I NTRODUCTION

A well known property of learned models is that semantically indistinguishable samples can yield
different model outputs (Biggio et al., 2013). When such samples are constructed deliberately these
samples are known as adversarial examples, and they pose a significant risk to deployed models.
This is especially true when the distance between clean and adversarial examples is minimised, as
they can be incredibly difficult to detect. While adversarial defences have been proposed as a best
response countermeasure to the adversarial attacks that generate these examples, the security they
provide is often illusory, as motivated attackers can typically exploit-or-evade them.
In response to this dynamic, recent research effort has focused upon certified guarantees of adversarial
robustness, which ensure that no adversarial examples exist within a calculable, bounded region
(Weng et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2019b). While it is well-
known that certified guarantees still admit practical attacks outside the region of certification, Table 1
demonstrates that only several works have considered how adversarial attacks may be applied to
certified models, with the majority of these focusing upon how manipulations of the training corpus
can be used to improve certifications at test time—a process that does not require reliable, hard to
detect norm-minimising attacks. Cohen et al. (2019) stands alone as the are the only work to consider
the risk of test-time attack against certified models, however they explicitly note that their tested
attack does not align with the concept of attacking a certified model, and present no quantitative
measures of performance. This paucity of test-time attacks, and the broad lack of consideration of
what is required to attack a certified model leaves the security community without an understanding
of how tight the guarantees provided by certification mechanisms are in practice, relative to the size
of realisable adversarial attacks.
To delve into these risks, this defines how adversarial attacks can be applied to certified models, in
a manner which allows extant attacks to be deployed against a range of certification mechanisms.
Based upon this framework, we debut a novel attack surface that certifications themselves can be
exploited to construct smaller adversarial perturbations. This attack, which we will henceforth refer
to as a Certification Aware Attack exploits the very nature of certifications to help to rapidly identify
adversarial examples. As Figure 1 demonstrates, the certifications at identified adversarial examples
can then be exploited to guide the attack to new, norm-minimising adversarial perturbations. Thus
the impact of our new attack framework is to (i) speed up the initial stages of the search with larger
and more informative jumps, and (ii) to reduce the total adversarial perturbation, which ensures that
these adversarial examples have a higher chance of avoiding detection (Gilmer et al., 2018).


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: An illustrative evasion attack for a binary classifier, where knowledge of the certifications
(circles) allows an iterative attack to better optimise their attack .

Table 1: Extant attacks, distinguished by if their goal is to change the label of samples or to just
improve robust accuracy; if they were deployed at train- or test-time; if they have direct applicability
to certifications (where half-circles denote attempting to improve certified robustness); and if they
exploit the certifications themselves.

                                                                  Applicability
                                                                                  Certi-    Exploits
    Algorithms                                   Goal     Train        Test
                                                                                   fied      Certs.
    PGD (Madry et al., 2018)                    Label                              #           #
    Carlini & Wagner (2017)                     Label                              #           #
    AutoAttack (Croce & Hein, 2020)             Label                              #           #
    DeepFool Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2016)     Label        #                     #           #
    Training w/ Noise (Bishop, 1995)            Acc.                    #          #
                                                                                   G           #
    Salman et al. (2019a)                       Acc.                    #          #
                                                                                   G           #
    MACER (Zhai et al., 2020)                   Acc.                    #          #
                                                                                   G           #
    Cohen et al. (2019)                         Label        #                                 #
    Ours                                        Label        #
                                                             G


2     BACKGROUND : C ERTIFICATION M ECHANISMS
Certification mechanisms eschew the responsive view of adversarial defences in favour of attempting
to provide bounds upon the space in which adversarial examples x′ can exist—typically a x-centred
p-norm ball of radius r defined as Bp (x, r), where r is strictly less than

         ⋆               ′     ′                   ′
        r = inf {∥x − x ∥p : x ∈ S, F (x) ̸= F (x ), } where F (·) = 1 arg max fi (·) .         (1)
                                                                                i∈K

where 1 is a one-hot encoding of the predicted class in K = {1, . . . , K}, and S is the permissible
input space, which is typically [0, 1]d within a computer-vision context. The size of Bp (x, r) can be
considered a reliable proxy for both the detectability of adversarial examples (Gilmer et al., 2018)
and the cost to the attacker (Huang et al., 2011).
The construction of these bounds can be considered through either exact or high-probability methods.
Exact methods typically construct their bounds by way of either Interval Bound Propagation (IBP),
which propagates interval bounds through the model; or Convex Relaxation, which utilises linear
relaxation to construct bounding output polytopes over input bounded perturbations Salman et al.
(2019b); Mirman et al. (2018); Weng et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2018); Singh et al. (2019); Mohapatra
et al. (2020), in a manner that generally provides tighter bounds than IBP Lyu et al. (2021). However,
these techniques exhibit a time and memory complexity that makes them infeasible for complex
model architectures or high-dimensional data Wang et al. (2021); Chiang et al. (2020); Levine & Feizi
(2022). While Lipschitz certified mechanisms Tsuzuku et al. (2018); Leino et al. (2021) have recently
been proposed as a less computationally intensive alternative than bound propagation mechanisms,
they still exhibit scalability issues for larger and more semantically complex models.
An alternate approach is the high-probability certifications of techniques employing randomised
smoothing (Lecuyer et al., 2019), in which the Monte Carlo estimator of the expectation under


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


repeatedly perturbed sampling
                                  N
                             1 X
                                   F (Xj )        ≈           EX [F (X)]          ∀i ∈ K               (2)
                             N j=1
                                                 i.i.d.
                           X1 , . . . , XN , X    ∼           x + N (0, σ 2 ) ,
can be exploited to provide guarantees of invariance under additive perturbations. In forming this
aggregated classification, the model is re-construed as a smoothed classifier, which in turn is certified.
Mechanisms for constructing such certifications include differential privacy (Lecuyer et al., 2019;
Dwork et al., 2006), Rényi divergence (Li et al., 2019), and parameterising worst-case behaviours
(Cohen et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2019a; Cullen et al., 2022). The latter of these approaches has
proved the most performant, and yields certifications of the form
                                  σ   −1   q
                              r=      Φ      E0 [x] − Φ−1 E   p1 [x]     ,                            (3)
                                  2
where Φ−1 is the inverse normal CDF, (E0 , E1 ) = topk ({EX [F (X)]} , 2) , and (E      q0 , E
                                                                                             p1 ) are the
lower and upper confidence bounds of these quantities to some confidence level α (Goodman, 1965).

3    ATTACKING C ERTIFIED D EFENCES
While certified mechanisms provide guarantees of adversarial resistance, it is important to remember
that these guarantees only exist to finite radii, and do not obviate the existence of all possible
adversarial examples. This nuance may explain why there has not been any consideration in the
literature of how certified models perform under attack.
When it comes to attacking certified models, one may intuitively think of simply identifying a sample
x′ such that ∥x′ − x∥> r⋆ . However, in practice certification mechanisms are not able to construct
tight bounds on r⋆ , and even if they were, the search space for identifying x′ would still be significant.
Moreover, any such point would have an associated certified radii of 0, which would likely trigger
further inspection in any operationalised certification system. As such, within this work, we introduce
the idea of a confident adversarial attack against a certification mechanism being one in which a
certification constructed at the adversarial example is non-zero. In the case of a randomised smoothing
based mechanism, such a condition is equivalent to
                           arg max EX [F (x′ )] ̸= arg max EX [F (x)] and                              (4)
                                   Eq0 [F (x′ )] > E
                                                   p1 [F (x′ )] .
That this is highly concentrated (for sufficiently high Monte Carlo sample sizes) enables any of
the reference attacks within Table 1 to be effectively employed against the class expectations,
rather than the individual draws under noise. This contrasts with approaches like Expectation Over
Transformation (Athalye et al., 2018), in which each sample under noise is attacked, in a process that
requires significant numerically inefficient repetition of the attack process.
An additional complicating factor for randomised smoothing based mechanisms is that the final layer
can be defined in terms of differentiable softmax layers, or non-differentiable arg max layers (Cullen
et al., 2024). The latter of these is a core component of popular certification mechanisms, including
that of Equation 3. It could naively be assumed that non-differentiable layers inherently defeat the
gradient based attack mechanisms. However, this cannot be assumed to provide an insurmountable
barrier to attack, with mechanisms including stochastic gradient estimation (Fu, 2006; Chen et al.,
2019), surrogate modelling, and transfer attacks all providing potential avenues for a motivated
attacker. In this work, we assume that the final arg max layer can be replaced with a Gumbel
Softmax (Jang et al., 2017)
                                      exp ((log(πi ) + gi )/τ )
                           yi = P                                  , ∀i ∈ K .                      (5)
                                     j∈K exp ((log(πi ) + gi )/τ )
Such a change has been chosen to maximise the difficulty of establishing gradients, while circum-
venting the need to assess if attack performance is a product of the chosen surrogate mechanisms
for estimating gradients or the attack itself. However we must emphasise that the aforementioned
attack definition is not reliant upon re-parameterising with the Gumbel-Softmax, and can be applied
to models with a softmax final layer, or indeed any other network architecture.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HREAT MODEL
For certified mechanisms that do not incorporate randomised smoothing—as seen in Section 5.3—our
attack framework requires white-box access to the model, in a manner that requires oracle access to
gradients, model predictions, certifications. Specific to attacks against models employing randomised
smoothing, we also assume the attacker has the ability to construct derivatives through arg max
layers, and knowledge of the level of additive noise σ. However we note that even this last assumption
is not strictly necessary, as Appendix F demonstrates that approximates values of σ still provide
enhanced certification performance.

4     C ERTIFICATION AWARE ATTACKS
While there is value in understanding the tightness of certification mechanisms by attacking them with
extant adversarial attacks, within this work we are also interested in understanding how certifications
may be exploited by a motivated attacker to minimise the size of the identified examples. Such a
concept may seem contradictory, but it is important to consider that from an attacker’s perspective a
certification can be viewed as a lower bounds on the space where attacks may exist.
In Section 4.1 we demonstrate how the existence of certifications at all points across the instance
space (Cullen et al., 2022) can be exploited to significantly reduce the search space that must be
explored to identify adversarial examples. Once an adversarial example is identified, Section 4.2 then
demonstrates how certifications associated with successful adversarial examples can be exploited to
minimise the perturbation norm of the sample, as any norm-minimising step inside the certified radii
must still remain an adversarial example!

4.1   S TEP S IZE C ONTROL

We begin our attack process by solving the surrogate problem
                        x̂ = arg min {|E0 (x̂) − E1 (x̂)| : F (x̂) = F (x)} .                         (6)
                                x̂∈S

This formalism may seem counter-intuitive, as the constraint ensures that x̂ cannot be an adversarial
example. However, consider the gradient-based solution of the previous problem

                                               ∇xi |E0 [xi ] − E1 [xi ]|
                     xi+1 = PS xi − ϵi                                        ,                  (7)
                                             ∥∇xi |E0 [xi ] − E1 [xi ]|∥
for a projection to the feasible space PS , and for which each xi has associated certifications ri . By
imposing that ϵi > ri , we ensure that the new candidate solution xi+1 must exist outside the region
of certification of the previous point, which is a necessary but not sufficient condition for identifying
an adversarial example.
One approach for ensuring that ϵi > ri would simply be to set the ϵi of Equation 7 to be
                                          ϵi = ρ(xi ) (1 + δ) ,                                       (8)
for some δ > 0, and where ρ(xi ) = ri . However, doing so fails to account for the information gained
from the certifications at all xj for j = 0, . . . , i. If we instead construct
                                                                                       
                                                         [i                            
                   ρ(xi ) = inf ρ̂ ≥ 0 : x⋆ (ρ̂) ∈     /     BP (xj , H [c0 = cj ] rj )   ,        (9)
                                                                                       
                                                         j=0

                     ⋆                         ∇xi |E0 [xi ] − E1 [xi ]|
                   x (ρ̂) = PS xi − ρ̂                                          ,
                                            ∥∇xi |E0 [xi ] − E1 [xi ]|∥
then the resultant step must remain strictly outside the certified radii region of all examples predicting
the same class as the original sample point x0 . Within this ci is the class prediction at step i of the
iterative process, and Hc0 =ci is an indicator function.
In practice taking such large steps may be disadvantageous in certain contexts, and as such in practice,
we define ϵi in terms of pre-defined lower- and upper-bounds
                                       ϵ̃i = clip (ϵi , ϵmin , ϵmax ) .                              (10)


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   R EFINING A DVERSARIAL E XAMPLES

Once we have identified an adversarial example, we switch to the second stage of our iterative process,
in which we minimise the perturbation norm of any identified examples, in order to decrease their
detectability. At this stage, the attack iterates xi now produces a class prediction of ci ̸= c0 . Thus,
any xi must also be an adversarial attack if the difference between the two points is less than or equal
to ri . Thus our iterator can be defined as

                                                                 x0 − xi
                      xi+1 = P xi − min{ρ, ϵmax }(1 − δ)
                                                                ∥x0 − xi ∥
                                                                                     
                                                      [i                             
                          ρ = sup ρ̂ ≥ 0 : x⋆ (ρ̂) ∈       BP (xj , H [c0 ̸= cj ] rj )              (11)
                                                                                     
                                                      j=0

                                               x0 − xi
                     x⋆ (r̂) = PS xi − ρ̂                     .
                                              ∥x0 − xi ∥
Similar to Section 4.1, a simpler variant of the above simply involves setting that ρ = ri , however
doing so discards the potential for prior certifications to help refine the search space. This framing
ensures that ci = cj ∀ j > i—ie. that all adversarial examples share the same class as the first
identified adversarial example. As such, it may be true that there exists some adversarial example x′′

                             ∥x′′ − x0 ∥< ∥xi − x0 ∥      ∀i∈N .
However, as we will now demonstrate, the process defined above still produces significantly smaller
adversarial examples than other techniques, when each is employed against a certified model.
Algorithms detailing the aforementioned processes can be found within Appendix B, and the code
associated with this work can be found at Anonymised Link. The details of the parameter space
employed for our attack can be found within Appendix C.

5     R ESULTS
To demonstrate the performance of our new Certification Aware Attack frame, we test our attack
relative to a range of other comparable approaches. Both our new attack and the reference attacks are
deployed against models employing certifications, rather than the associated base classifiers.
To achieve this, our experiments consider attacks against MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) (GNU v3.0
license), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) (MIT license), and the Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge variant of ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009; Russakovsky et al., 2015) (which uses a custom,
non-commercial license). In the case of models defended by randomised smoothing, each model
was trained in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) using a ResNet-18 architecture, with experiments
considering two distinct levels of smoothing noise scale σ. Additional experiments involving against
the MACER (Zhai et al., 2020) certification framework and a ResNet-110 architecture can be found
in Appendix G. The confidence intervals of expectations in all experiments was set according to
the α = 0.005 significance level. To demonstrate the generality of our identified threat model,
Section 5.3 eschews randomised smoothing to attack certifications constructed using IBP. Due to
the inherent computational cost associated with constructing solutions with IBP, our results were
limited to MNIST models solved using a sequential model of two convolutional layers followed by
two linear layers, with ReLU activation functions. All calculations were constructed using NVIDIA
A100 GPUs, with a single GPU being employed for experiments involving MNIST and CIFAR-10,
while Imagenet test and training time evaluations were constructed using two GPUs.

5.1   ATTACKING R ANDOMISED S MOOTHING

To establish the performance of our Certification Aware Attack framework against certifications
employing randomised smoothing, Figure 2 explores the trade off between an attacks success rate,
and the size of the identified adversarial examples for our approach relative to PGD and Carlini-
Wagner. As each technique may be successfully attacking a different subset of samples, the size of
the identified adversarial examples is normalised by their associated certified radii, as per Cohen et al..


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 1000


           %-C

                  200


                  100


                   50
                        40    60       80   100 40    60       80   100 40    60       80   100
                             Success Rate            Success Rate            Success Rate



Figure 2: Minimum achievable average percentage difference between the attack radii and the certified
guarantee of Cohen et al. (Equation 3) for a given success rate for our technique (Blue), PGD (Red),
and Carlini-Wagner (Green), when tested against MNIST, CIFAR-10 and Imagenet. Solid and dashed
lines represents σ = {0.5, 1.0}. Results calculated by sweeping across the parameters of Table 3.


The percentage difference between our approach and the certified radii, %-C, can then be considered
as a measure of the average difficulty of identifying an adversarial example. These trade offs were
achieved by considering performance over a broad sweep of each models respective parameter spaces,
the details of which are included within Table 3 and Appendix C.
These results demonstrate a quasi-exponential relationship between the median percentage difference
between the attack size to the location of the smallest possible potential adversarial example, which
can be seen as a proxy for the ability of adversarial examples to be detected. Moreover, our approach
consistently identifies significantly smaller adversarial examples than both PGD and Carlini-Wagner,
with a 20 percentage point difference in the distance to Cohen et al. seen for CIFAR-10 at σ = 1.0,
and an over 30 percentage point difference for MNIST. The one notable drawback of our approach is
that over the parameter space tested we were unable to reach the same maximum success rates of
PGD in the σ = 0.5 case, however we emphasise that PGD’s distance to Cohen grows exponentially
in the region where the success rate approaches 100%.
To consider a broader range of attacks, for the remainder of this work we will assume that an attacker
employing employing either our Certification Aware Attack, PGD, or Carlini-Wagner would choose
a point in parameter space that maintains a success rate above 90%, while minimising the median
percentage difference to Cohen et al.. If such a success rate cannot be reached, it is instead assumed
that the attacker chooses the point in parameter space which maximises the success rate.
To more comprehensively examine the suite of potential attack frameworks, we now expands our
suite of comparisons to also include DeepFool (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016) and AutoAttack
(Croce & Hein, 2020), which were excluded from broader parameter sweeps due to their relative
performance. While AutoAttack has the ability to specify a ℓ2 norm perturbation magnitude, the
associated computational cost makes a broader parameter space exploration infeasible. In contrast,
while DeepFool is the fastest of all tested attacks, its failure to successfully identify norm minimising
adversarial examples lead to its exclusion from a broader parameter exploration.
Across our full set of experiments, Figure 3 and Table 2 demonstrate that our new attack framework
consistently constructs smaller adversarial perturbations than any other tested technique. On a
sample-by-sample basis, in the most challenge experiment for our technique—Imagenet at σ = 1.0—
our technique produces the smallest adversarial example for 54% of the time (denoted by the Best
column), for samples able to be attacked. This result is particularly striking given the relatively
low success rate for our approach in Imagenet, relative to the other experiments, which suggests
that the range of parameter space tested over may need further modification for datasets of the size
and complexity of Imagenet. In the remainder of the tested experiments, as the success rate of our


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: MNIST (M), CIFAR-10 (C), and ImageNet (I) attack performance across σ, covering the
proportion of samples attacked (Suc.), smallest attack proportion (Best), median attack size (r50 ),
time (Time [s]), and percentage difference to the Cohen et al. (%-C)—additional details on these
metrics can be found in Appendix D. All bar the success rate are only calculated over successful
attacks. Tested attacks are Carlini-Wagner (C-W), AutoAttack (Auto) and DeepFool (DeepF). ⋆
denotes solutions selected following Appendix C, bolded values represent the best performing metric
(excluding the success rate, as it is a control parameter), and arrows denote if a metric is more
favourable with increases or decreases in the recorded value.

                                σ = 0.5                                     σ = 1.0
      Type     Suc.↑   Best ↑    r50 ↓ %-C↓      Time ↓    Suc.↑   Best ↑    r50 ↓ %-C↓      Time ↓
 M    Ours⋆     90%      73%     2.02      82      0.34     97%     97%      2.23      90     1.22
      PGD⋆      91%      19%     2.17      96      2.04     99%      3%      2.62     123     2.03
      C-W⋆      93%       7%     5.46     364      3.03     95%      0%      5.36     380     3.02
      Auto      92%       1%     5.44     393     27.32     97%      0%      5.65     386    26.50
      DeepF      9%       0%    14.43    2417      0.07     51%      0%     17.10    2143     0.07
 C    Ours⋆     91%      87%     0.83       56     0.53     96%     92%      1.26      56     0.86
      PGD⋆      92%       4%     0.92       72     2.17     99%      3%      1.46      77     2.15
      C-W⋆      98%       5%     3.13      432     3.18     99%      1%      3.65     352     3.14
      Auto      94%       3%     4.00      493    28.37     91%      2%      5.61     492    28.40
      DeepF     88%       2%     2.44      504     0.08     98%      3%      3.42     462     0.08
 I    Ours⋆     65%      74%     1.12     131      5.59     55%     54%      1.30     160     5.69
      PGD⋆      81%      19%     2.03     214     52.82     92%     39%      3.17     193    52.07
      C-W⋆      52%       4%    32.93    5967     26.85     57%      2%     33.06    4240    28.43
      DeepF     56%       3%     2.45     661      3.01     70%      5%      4.41     646     3.04


technique increases, so too does the proportion of attacked samples for which our technique produces
the smallest possible adversarial attack, demonstrating the viability of our approach as a framework
for constructing minimal norm adversarial examples.
When considering the median certified radii produced by the techniques, our approach produces a
median certification that is on average 11% smaller for MNIST, 12% for CIFAR-10, and 52% smaller
in the case of Imagenet. Given that the approaches are not necessarily certifying the same samples,
when controlling for the size of the certified radii of attacks, the %-C results are even more stark,
which when compared to the next best technique in PGD exhibit an on average 24% reduction in the
median size of identified adversarial attacks relative to their certified radii.
One feature noted within Section 4.2 was that all adversarial examples identified by our Certification
Aware Attack framework must share the same class prediction as the first identified adversarial
example. Intuitively it would appear that such a drawback would induce a disproportionate increase
in the median certified radii as the dataset complexity is increased to the 1000-class ImageNet, as
compared to MNIST or CIFAR-10. However in practice any disadvantages from this are outweighed
by our attacks increased efficiency in exploring the search space. This efficiency in exploring the
search space is evident in the computational cost of identifying attacks, with our approach requiring
significantly less computational time to identify norm minimising adversarial examples relative to all
of the other techniques, with the exclusion DeepFool. While DeepFool requires substantially less
computational time than the other tested approaches, that it’s percentage difference to Cohen et al.
is orders of magnitude larger than other approaches emphasises that adding extra iterative steps to
balance out the computational time would likely be a forlorn task.
Exemplars of some of these attacks can be seen in Appendix H.

5.2   T IGHTNESS OF C ERTIFIED G UARANTEES

Performing these comparisons is useful not only for demonstrating the relative performance of each
attack, but also for exploring the tightness of the bounds provided by the certification mechanisms.
These bounds are by their nature conservative bounds against realisable adversarial attacks, and
performing a comparison between these bounds and the actual minimal realisable adversarial attack
can be considered evidence for the utility of certifications as a whole, and as a demonstration of


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         MNIST            CIFAR-10                Imagenet
                               100


       Success Rate: σ = 0.5
                                80

                                60

                                40

                                20

                                 0
                               100
       Success Rate: σ = 1.0


                                80

                                60

                                40

                                20

                                 0
                                     0   2        4   0    2         4   0         2         4
                                             >r                >r                      >r


Figure 3: Best achieved Attack Proportion for our new Certification Aware Attack (blue), PGD (red),
DeepFool (cyan), Carlini-Wagner (green), and AutoAttack (magenta); where the rows correspond to
σ = {0.5, 1.0} and the columns correspond to MNIST, CIFAR-10 and Imagenet. The black dotted
line represents the theoretical best case performance following Equation 3.


potential avenues of future improvement for certification mechanisms. When considering these
bounds in the contexts of the tested datasets, Figure 3 suggests that MNIST—which is often perceived
as being the simplest of datasets—demonstrates a more significant delta between the certified radii
and the attack performance. This may be a consequence of the simpler semantic properties of the
dataset being more difficult to attack, relative to Cohen et al. style certifications.
The influence of σ upon certification performance is especially interesting. Due to its role as a
multiplicative constant in Equation 3, increasing σ inherently increases the size of the certifications,
an effect that is partially offset by a decrease in the observed class expectations. However, from the
perspective of an attacker increasing σ should also increase the smoothness of the gradients, which
theoretically should make the model easier to attack. In practice, Figure 3 and Table 2 demonstrate
that increasing σ leads to a small increase in the size of identified attacks, relative to certified
guarantees. While this may at first appear contradictory, it suggests that the ease in identifying
adversarial attacks for larger σ is offset by decreases in the tightness of the certified bound.

5.3   P ERFORMANCE AGAINST OTHER CERTIFICATION MECHANISMS

To demonstrate the generality of our identified threat model, Figure 4 demonstrates the relative
performance of our technique and PGD when tested for a model certified using IBP. While we have
not fully explored the parameter spaces of both attacks, nor the broader suite of attacks in the context
of this framework, these results reinforce the information advantage an attacker has when attempting
to compromise models employing randomised smoothing if they incorporate the certification into
their attack, irrespective of the certification mechanism. That this is true confirms that all certification
mechanisms should assess their risk to adversarial attack in light of our Certification Aware Attacks.

6     D ISCUSSION : B ROADER I MPACT, L IMITATIONS , AND M ITIGATIONS
While uncovering new attacks has the potential to compromise deployed systems, there is a prima facie
argument that any security provided by ignoring new attack vectors is illusory. Such a perspective
has uncovered new attack vectors including data poisoning, backdoor attacks, model stealing, and
transfer attacks, all of which can now be protected against. Our work similarly reveals the paradox of
certifications, in that the very mechanisms that we rely upon to protect models introduce new attack
surfaces, enhancing the ability for attackers to construct norm minimising attacks.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             1.0

                             0.8


              Success Rate
                             0.6

                             0.4

                             0.2

                             0.0
                                   0   2      4               6        8            10
                                                         >r

    Figure 4: Success rate for our attack (blue) and PGD (red) for an IBP certified MNIST model.


It would appear that restricting the release of the certification could nullify our attack. However, the
certifications can be trivially reconstructed from the class expectations and σ. Even if σ is estimated,
Figure 6b and Appendix F demonstrate that our attack still outperforms other frameworks. As such,
we recommend that if possible, systems should only release the class predictions of certified models,
without any associated expectations. While this would not prevent a suitably motivated attacker
developing a surrogate model, it could increase the cost and difficulty associated with a successful
attack. Exploring the effectiveness of this mitigation is left to future work.
It is important to while this work has specifically considered ℓ2 norm bounded evasion attacks against
randomised smoothing and IBP based mechanisms, it is important to note that other threat models
threat models (Liu et al., 2023), and certification frameworks exist, like Lipschitz certification Tsuzuku
et al. (2018); Leino et al. (2021). However, these approaches still involve releasing a certificate, and
this work has clearly demonstrated the existence of a novel attack vector against said releases. As
such, we believe that any future certification—for evasion, backdoor, or other attacks—must consider
the risk associated with the releasing certifications with significant care.


7    R ELATED W ORK

This work presents both a framework for attacking certifiably robust models, and a demonstration
of how such certification can be exploited to improve attack efficacy. While we formalise the
concept of attacking certifications, prior works have considered the impact of corrupting the inputs of
both undefended and certified models. One common framework involves corrupting input samples
with additive noise or adversarial examples, in order to improve robustness (Bishop, 1995; Salman
et al., 2019a; Cohen et al., 2019). Of these, Salman et al. (2019a) is closest to our work, although
their attacks only considered a small number of draws from randomised smoothing (rather than
the full expectations), and employed a softmax in place of the arg max operator. All three of
these approaches are un-targeted, un-directed, training time modifications attempting to improve
generalisation by increasing training loss. In contrast, our focus was placed upon both constructing a
definition of test time adversarial attacks against certified models, and then exploiting the nature of
certifications themselves to improve the performance of adversarial attacks against certified models.


8    C ONCLUSION

We demonstrate the paradox of robustness certification: that tools for quantifying robustness (certifi-
cations) and defending base models (smoothing) can be exploited to support attacks against models.
Through our novel Certification Aware Attack framework, we exploit this paradox to significantly
decrease the size of the identified adversarial perturbations relative to state-of-the-art test-time attacks,
leading to an up to 55% decrease in the size of adversarial perturbations relative to the next best
performing technique. Being able to reliably, repeatedly generate such norm-minimising adversarial
examples would allow an attacker to reliably influence more samples before being detected than any
other attack. These results underscore that significant consideration must be placed upon the safety
of releasing robustness certificates.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anish Athalye, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Kevin Kwok. Synthesizing Robust Adversarial
  Examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 284–293. PMLR, 2018.

Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Šrndić, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio
  Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. Evasion Attacks Against Machine Learning at Test Time. In Joint
  European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, ECMLPKDD,
  pp. 387–402. Springer, 2013.
Chris M Bishop. Training with Noise is Equivalent to Tikhonov Regularization. Neural Computation,
  7(1):108–116, 1995.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards Evaluating the Robustness of Neural Networks. In
  2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S & P), pp. 39–57. IEEE, 2017.
Beidi Chen, Yingchen Xu, and Anshumali Shrivastava. Fast and Accurate Stochastic Gradient
  Estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 12349–12359.
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Ping-yeh Chiang, Renkun Ni, Ahmed Abdelkader, Chen Zhu, Christoph Studer, and Tom Gold-
  stein. Certified Defenses for Adversarial Patches. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR, 2020.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified Adversarial Robustness via Randomized
  Smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR,
  2019.
Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Reliable Evaluation of Adversarial Robustness with an Ensemble
  of Diverse Parameter-Free Attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp.
  2206–2216. PMLR, 2020.
Andrew C. Cullen, Paul Montague, Shijie Liu, Sarah Monazam Erfani, and Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein.
  Double Bubble, Toil and Trouble: Enhancing Certified Robustness through Transitivity. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 19099–19112. NeurIPS,
  2022.
Andrew C. Cullen, Paul Montague, Shijie Liu, Sarah Monazam Erfani, and Benjamin I.P. Rubin-
  stein. It’s Simplex! Disaggregating Measures to Improve Certified Robustness. arXiv preprin
  arXiv:2309.11005, 2024.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A Large-
   scale Hierarchical Image Database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition, CVPR, pp. 248–255. IEEE, 2009.
Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. Boosting
  Adversarial Attacks with Momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pp. 9185–9193, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating Noise to Sensitivity in
  Private Data Analysis. In Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Michael C Fu. Gradient Estimation. Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science,
 13:575–616, 2006.
Justin Gilmer, Ryan P Adams, Ian Goodfellow, David Andersen, and George E Dahl. Motivating the
  Rules of the Game for Adversarial Example Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06732, 2018.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial
  Examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2015.
Leo A Goodman. On Simultaneous Confidence Intervals for Multinomial Proportions. Technometrics,
  7(2):247–254, 1965.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ling Huang, Anthony D. Joseph, Blaine Nelson, Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein, and J. D. Tygar. Ad-
  versarial machine learning. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Security and Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 43–58, 2011.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images.
  Technical report, University of Toronto, 2009.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-Based Learning Applied
  to Document Recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Mathias Lecuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. Certified
 Robustness to Adversarial Examples with Differential Privacy. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on
 Security and Privacy (S & P), pp. 656–672. IEEE, 2019.
Klas Leino, Zifan Wang, and Matt Fredrikson. Globally-Robust Nneural Networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6212–6222. PMLR, 2021.
Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi. (de)Randomized Smoothing for Certifiable Defense against
  Patch Attacks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6465–6475.
  NeurIPS, 2022.
Bai Li, Changyou Chen, Wenlin Wang, and Lawrence Carin. Certified Adversarial Robustness with
  Additive Noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 9459–9469.
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Shijie Liu, Andrew C Cullen, Paul Montague, Sarah M Erfani, and Benjamin IP Rubinstein. Enhanc-
  ing the Antidote: Improved Pointwise Certifications against Poisoning Attacks. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 8861–8869, 2023.
Zhaoyang Lyu, Minghao Guo, Tong Wu, Guodong Xu, Kehuan Zhang, and Dahua Lin. Towards
  Evaluating and Training Rerifiably Robust Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pp. 4308–4317, 2021.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2018.
Matthew Mirman, Timon Gehr, and Martin Vechev. Differentiable Abstract Interpretation for
 Provably Robust Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp.
 3578–3586. PMLR, 2018.
Jeet Mohapatra, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, and Luca Daniel. Towards Verifying
  Robustness of Neural Networks Against A Family of Semantic Perturbations. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pp. 244–252,
  2020.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. DeepFool: A Simple and
  Accurate Method to Fool Deep Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 8024–8035.
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet Large Scale Visual
  Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hadi Salman, Jerry Li, Ilya Razenshteyn, Pengchuan Zhang, Huan Zhang, Sebastien Bubeck, and
  Greg Yang. Provably Robust Deep Learning via Adversarially Trained Smoothed Classifiers.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 11292–11303. NeurIPS,
  2019a.

Hadi Salman, Greg Yang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Pengchuan Zhang. A Convex Relaxation
  Barrier to Tight Robustness Verification of Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 9835–9846. NeurIPS, 2019b.

Gagandeep Singh, Timon Gehr, Markus Püschel, and Martin Vechev. An Abstract Domain for
  Certifying Neural Networks. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 3(POPL):
 1–30, 2019.

Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2014.

Yusuke Tsuzuku, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Lipschitz-Margin Training: Scalable Certifica-
  tion of Perturbation Invariance for Deep Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 31. NeurIPS, 2018.

Shiqi Wang, Huan Zhang, Kaidi Xu, Xue Lin, Suman Jana, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and J Zico Kolter. Beta-
  CROWN: Efficient Bound Propagation with Per-Neuron Split Constraints for Neural Network
  Robustness Verification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
  29909–29921. NeurIPS, 2021.

Lily Weng, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Zhao Song, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Luca Daniel, Duane Boning,
  and Inderjit Dhillon. Towards Fast Computation of Certified Robustness for ReLU Networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 5276–5285. PMLR, 2018.

Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Di He, Huan Zhang, Boqing Gong, Pradeep Ravikumar, Cho-Jui Hsieh,
  and Liwei Wang. MACER: Attack-free and Scalable Robust Training via Maximizing Certified
  Radius. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020.

Huan Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Luca Daniel. Efficient Neural
  Network Robustness Certification with General Activation Functions. In S. Bengio, H. Wal-
  lach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 4939–4948. NeurIPS, 2018.


A    BACKGROUND : A DVERSARIAL E XAMPLES

The existence of highly confident but incorrect adversarial examples in neural networks has been
documented extensively (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). We provide an overview of
the topic in this appendix for completeness. Formally, adversarial examples are perturbations γ ∈ S
to the input x ∈ S of a learned model f (·), for which F (x + γ) ̸= F (x).
The p-norm of this perturbation can be considered a reliable proxy for both the detectability of
adversarial examples (Gilmer et al., 2018) and the cost to the attacker (Huang et al., 2011).
The process for identifying such attacks commonly involves gradient descent over the input space. A
prominent example is the Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method (Madry et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2018),
which we will henceforth refer to as PGD. This technique attempts to converge upon an adversarial
example by way of the iterative scheme

                                                      ∇x J(x, y)
                            xk+1 = PS xk − ϵ                          .                          (12)
                                                    ∥∇x J(x, y)∥2
This process exploits gradients of the loss J(x, y) relative to a target label y to form each attack
iteration, with the step size ϵ and a projection operator P ensuring that xk+1 is restricted to S.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Certification Aware Attack Algorithm.
 1: Input: data x, level of additive noise σ, samples N , iterations M , true-label i, minimum and
      maximum step size (ϵmin , ϵmax ), scaling factor δ ∈ [0, 1]
 2: x′ , x′s Successful = x, x, False
 3: for 1 to M do
 4:      y, E     p1 , r = Model(x′ ; σ, N )
             q0 , E                                                           ▷ Detailed in Algorithm 2
 5:      if arg maxi∈K y = i then                              ▷ Adversarial Example not yet identified.
 6:         if E
               q0 > E   p1 then
 7:              ϵ = Equation 8 (x′ , δ, ϵmin , ϵmax )
 8:         else
 9:              ϵ = ϵmin
10:         end if
11:         x′ = Equation 7 (x′ , ϵ)
12:     else
13:         if r = 0 then                  ▷ Attempting to improve confidence of adversarial examples
                   ′           ′          ∇x′ (E     p1 )
                                                q 0 −E
14:              x = PS x + ϵmin ∥∇ Eq −Ep ∥
                                           x′ (  0    1) 2

15:         else                          ▷ Examples are refined while staying inside the certified radii
16:              x′s , Successful = x′ , True
17:              x′ = Equation 11(x′ , δ, ϵmax )
18:         end if
19:     end if
20: end for
21: return x′s , Successful



Carlini & Wagner (2017)—henceforth known as C-W—demonstrated the construction of adversarial
perturbations by employing gradient descent to solve
                   n                                                               o
                              2
            arg min ∥x′ − x∥2 + c · max {max{fθ (x′ )j : j ̸= i} − fθ (x′ )i , −κ}   . (13)
                 x′


We note that while one-shot variants of these attacks have historically been used as a baseline for the
performance of iterative attacks to be assessed against, we believe that by their nature such attacks
always poorly represent the success-rate and attack-size trade off. Instead, we have performed our
comparisons against the certified guarantee of Cohen et al. at the sample point, which provides
an absolute lower bound on the size of possible adversarial attacks. We feel that this form of
comparison more appropriately captures how these techniques perform, rather than attempting to
compare one-shot with iterative attacks, which fundamentally incorporate different access level threat
models.


B      A LGORITHMS

Within Algorithm 1, lines 6–11 cover the processes outlined within Section 4 and 4.1, with lines
13–17 covering the materials of Section 4.2.
One important piece of detail relates to the case where E
                                                        q0 < Ep1 , which is equivalent to r = 0. Under
both of these circumstances, the model is unable to construct a confident prediction, so the algorithm
induces minimal size-steps either away from the origin—if an adversarial example has not yet been
identified—or towards the most recent point, if that point was an adversarial example.
In order to calculate the class expectations and associated certifications for a given input x′ , Algo-
rithm 2 performs the Monte-Carlo sampling and then corrects for sampling uncertainties. We note
here that for the purposes of constructing derivatives, the lower and upper-bounding processes are
treated as if they were perturbations to the expectations, and as such they are not considered as a
part of the differentiation process. While this has the potential to slightly perturb the derivatives, our
experiments have demonstrated that any δ > 0 is sufficient to more than compensate


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Class prediction and certification for the Certification Aware Attack algorithm of
Algorithm 1.
 1: Input: Perturbed data x′ , samples N , level of added noise σ
 2: y = 0
 3: for i = 1:N do
         y = y + GS fθ x′ + N (0, σ 2 )

 4:
 5: end for
           1
 6: y = N     y
    (z0 , z1 ) =
 7:              topk(y, k = 2)                         ▷ topk is used as it is differentiable, z0 > z1
 8:  Eq0 , E
           p1 = (lowerbound(y, z0 ), upperbound(y, z1 ))             ▷ Calculated via Goodman (1965)

 9: R = σ2 Φ−1 (E   q0 ) − Φ−1 (E
                                p1 )
10: return y, Eq0 , E
                    p1 , R

Table 3: Parameter space employed for our Certification Aware Attack, PGD (see Equation 12 for
details), and Carlini-Wagner (see Equation 13).

                  Ours     ϵmin × 255     =    {1, 5, 10}
                           ϵmax × 255     =    {20, 40, 100, 255}
                                    δ     =    {0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1}
                  PGD         ϵ × 255     =    {1, 4, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 200}
                  C-W               c     =    {10−5 , 10−4 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 2, 3}


C     PARAMETER S PACE
As was discussed in Section 5, understand the relative performance of techniques requires a consider-
ation of how an attacks parameter space influences its performance metrics. In aide of this, for our
three most highly performant attack frameworks, for each dataset we performed a parameter sweep
over the parameters outlined within Figure 3. From this, for each attack we selected a representative
position in parameter space that either exhibited the minimal %-C for a success rate over 90%, or,
if such a success rate was not achievable, the maximum achievable success rate. In doing so, we
attempted to construct fair comparisons that accurately reflected the performance of the techniques.
One complicating factor of such parameter sweeps is the computational cost associated with the
exploration, especially in the case for Imagenet—as can be seen in Table 2. As such while we
endeavoured to select our representative attacks based upon 500 randomly selected samples, it
was only possible to consider 50 samples for PGD and Carlini-Wagner for Imagenet due to the
computational time associated with these parameter sweeps.
To explore the influence of the step-size control parameters of Equation 10, Figure 5 considers the
influence of a range of these parameters upon key attack metrics, based upon the parameter space
explored over Appendix C. Based upon this , it is clear that the primary driver of the success-rate and
certification size trade off (as explored in Figure 2) is the parameter ϵmax , that controls the largest
possible step size that the Certification Aware Attack framework is allowed to make. Thus further
exploring the parameter space in this direction would likely be a critical factor in increasing the
success rate observed for Imagenet.

D     M ETRICS
To help explore the relative performance of the tested techniques we consider a series of metrics
which, in aggregate, reflect the overall performance of the technique. To explain these metrics in
additional detail, the Success Rate represents the proportion of correctly predicted samples for which
a technique is able to construct a successful attack, and can be calculated as
                                                   N
                                               1 X
                                     Suc.i =         (ri,j > 0) .                                  (14)
                                               N j=1


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Response of key metrics for our Certification Aware Attack to changes in ϵmin , ϵmax and δ.



                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here the subscript i denotes a particular attack drawn from the set of attacks I, and ri,j = ∥x′j − xj ∥
is the attack radii, which for notational simplicity is set to 0 in the case of a failed attack. The set of
samples (of size N ) has been filtered to ensure that each is correctly predicted by the model in the
absence of an adversarial attack.
The Best is then the proportion of samples that a particular technique produces an attack radii smaller
than any other correctly identified adversarial attack is calculable as
                                                             ∀ (i′ ̸= i) ∈ I
                                     P
                                       j=1 ri,j ≤ ri ,j
                                                     ′
                           Besti =       P                                                        (15)
                                            j=1 ri,j > 0       ∀i∈I
Increases to both of these metrics are advantageous, although as was noted in Appendix C each result
within Table 2 must be contextualised against the decision to attempt to control the success rate to
approximately 90%, if such an success rate was achievable for the technique in light of the tested
parameter space.
The measure %-C represents the median percentage difference between the attack radii and the
certified guarantee of Cohen et al., which takes the form

                                                     ri,j − C(xj )
                               %-C = medri,j >0                      .                  (16)
                                                         C(xj )
Here med(·) is the median over the set of successfully attacked samples, and C(xj ) is the certified
radii for an ℓ2 norm, as calculable by Equation 3. Beyond this, r50 is the median certified radii of the
samples able to be successfully attacked by a given technique, and Time represents the median attack
time (in seconds) across all tested samples. All three of these latter metrics demonstrate favourable
performance with decreasing values.
This broad set of metrics was deliberately chosen to reflect different aspects of performance. However,
we call particular attention to %-C, as it is a measure of the size of the adversarial examples relative
to the location of the minimal possible adversarial example—with the certification of Cohen et al.
essentially providing what is in essence characteristic scale that can be used for normalisation. We
emphasise that such a measure of relative importance is important to further illuminate performance
in light of the fact that the other metrics may not all strictly consider the same samples, as they are
often constructed over the set of samples an attack method is successfully able to manipulate.

E    S AMPLEWISE P ERFORMANCE

                                   250                                                                      1.450
                                                                                                            1.425
                                   200
                                                                                      Perturbation Radius


                                                                                                            1.400
              %-Difference to CR


                                   150                                                                      1.375
                                                                                                            1.350
                                   100
                                                                                                            1.325
                                                                                                            1.300
                                    50
                                                                                                            1.275
                                     0                                                                      1.250
                                         0.2   0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0                                      0.6   0.8   1.0   1.2   1.4
                                               Largest Class Expectation

             (a) Percentage differences relative to E0                                                       (b) Performance for estimated σ


Figure 6: (a) captures the percentage difference between constructed adversarial perturbations and
the certified radii of Equation 3 for CIFAR-10 at σ = 0.5, with Our technique in red and PGD in blue.
(b) demonstrates that the blue mean and orange median performance of our technique are consistent
even when σ = 1.0 is approximated by an estimated σ̂.

To further illuminate the nature of the performance of our attack, Figure 6a considers the sample-wise
performance of both PGD and our Certification Aware Attack. Within this data there is a clear
self-similar trend, in which the percentage difference to Equation 3 increases as the largest class


                                                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


expectation decreases. This difference could indicate the potential for improving the certification of
samples within this region. There also appears to be a correlation between the outperformance of our
approach and the semantic complexity of the prediction task, which suggests that tightening these
guarantees could be increasingly relevant for complex datasets of academic and industry interest.

F    ACCURACY OF σ
The white-box threat model assumes that the attacker has access to the full model and its parameters,
including the level of additive noise σ. However, if the attacker only had access to the model and
output class expectations, but was somehow prevented from directly accessing σ and r, it turns out
that the Certification Aware Attack can still be applied subject to a sufficiently accurate guess of σ.
As is shown by Figure 6b, even over-estimating σ by 50% can decrease the radius of the identified
adversarial perturbation under certain experimental conditions. That this is possible is a product
of the terms δ1 and δ2 in Algorithm 1, as both of these parameters set the idealised step size to try
and either change or preserve the predicted class. While this does suggest that there is potentially
additional scope for optimising δ1 and δ2 , it also demonstrates the possibility of estimating σ as part
of a surrogate model, in order to attack within a limited threat mode.

G    T RAINING WITH MACER
Recent work has considered how certifications might be improved by augmenting the training
objective to maximising the expectation gap between classes (Salman et al., 2019a). A popular
approach for this is MACER (Zhai et al., 2020), in which the training loss is augmented to incorporate
what the authors dub the ϵ-robustness loss, which reflects proportion of training samples with
robustness above a threshold level. In principle such a training-time modification can increase the
average certified radius by 10–20%, however doing so does increase the overall training cost by more
than an order of magnitude.
To test the performance of our new attack framework against models trained with MACER, Table 4
and Figure 7 recreate earlier results from within this work for CIFAR-10, subject to the same form
of parameter exploration seen within Appendix C. We note that these calculations were performed
with a ResNet-110 architecture, rather than the ResNet-18 architecture employed within the previous
sections. While the broad qualitative feature of the success rates, best proportions, and median
certifications broadly align with those seen within Table 2, we note that there is a significant
difference in the %-C scores, which are a product of the ResNet-110 architecture (when trained under
MACER) producing certifications that are an order of magnitude smaller than those observed within
the main body of this work. That the attack radii are remaining constant while the certification radii
decrease, strongly suggests that there would be significant scope for improving the performance of
these results by varying the range of the parameter space exploration. One other notable feature is
the improvement of DeepFool for MACER trained models, relative to the performance seen within
the main body of this work, which we believe is a consequence of the changes in MACER’s model
decision space influencing the ability for DeepFool to converge upon successful evasion attacks.

H    E XEMPLAR ATTACKS
The size of the associated adversarial perturbations has been established as a proxy of the risk of
an adversarial attack evading human-or-machine-scrutiny Gilmer et al. (2018). While considering
metrics of performance are a more reliable measure of this adversarial risk, for completeness in
Figure 8 we have provided visualisations of the performance of both our attack and PGD. As both
attacks share similar methodological features, the adversarial perturbations share similar semantic
features, however our attack consistently requires smaller adversarial perturbations in order to trick
the classifier—which in turn would have a higher probability of potentially evading any detection
framework.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: CIFAR-10 attack performance across σ for a ResNet-110 architecture trained with MACER.
Table features follow Table 4

                                    σ       Type              Suc.↑   Best ↑       r50 ↓   %-C↓        Time ↓
                                                      ⋆
                                    0.25    Ours              100%     76%          0.83    2308         9.66
                                            PGD⋆              100%      5%          1.03    2918        24.47
                                            C-W⋆               24%      0%          9.10   39952        24.57
                                            DeepF             100%     18%          1.32    3687         7.01
                                    0.5     Ours⋆              77%     58%          1.09    2875        12.18
                                            PGD⋆               95%     18%          1.73    2294        24.74
                                            C-W⋆               43%      1%         11.35   19073        24.83
                                            DeepF             100%     23%          2.94    4377         7.58
                                    1.0     Ours⋆              59%     43%          1.38   12654        14.06
                                            PGD⋆               98%     39%          2.86    3201        24.52
                                            C-W⋆                9%      0%          9.63   20597        24.60
                                            DeepF             100%     19%          5.29    5670         7.11


                              100



                               80
               Success Rate


                               60



                               40



                               20



                                0

                                        0    2            4       0       2          4     0       2        4
                                                 >r                           >r                       >r


Figure 7: Attack and certification performance for a ResNet-110 model for CIFAR-10, when trained
with MACER, covering our new Certification Aware Attack (blue), PGD (red), DeepFool (cyan),
Carlini-Wagner (green), and AutoAttack (magenta). Similar to Figure 3, an ideal attack will approach
the Cohen et al. (2019) radii suggested by the black dotted lines.


                                                                        18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Illustrative examples of attack performance. Each column (from left to right) represents: the
original image; the image under our attack; the adversarial perturbation associated with our attack; the
image under PGD; the adversarial perturbation associated with PGD. The adversarial perturbations
have been multiplied by 25 for visual clarity.

                                                  19
