Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J OINTLY T RAINING L ARGE AUTOREGRESSIVE M ULTI -
MODAL M ODELS

    Emanuele Aiello†,♢∗, Lili Yu♢ , Yixin Nie♢ , Armen Aghajanyan♢ , Barlas Oguz♢
 †
    Politecnico di Torino, ♢ Meta AI



                                                  A BSTRACT
              In recent years, advances in the large-scale pretraining of language and text-to-
              image models have revolutionized the field of machine learning. Yet, integrating
              these two modalities into a single, robust model capable of generating seamless
              multimodal outputs remains a significant challenge. To address this gap, we
              present the Joint Autoregressive Mixture (JAM) framework, a modular approach
              that systematically fuses existing text and image generation models. We also
              introduce a specialized, data-efficient instruction-tuning strategy, tailored for mixed-
              modal generation tasks. Our final instruct-tuned model demonstrates unparalleled
              performance in generating high-quality multimodal outputs and represents the first
              model explicitly designed for this purpose.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Autoregressive text-to-image models, as exemplified by works such as Yu et al. (2023; 2022), have
made remarkable strides in generating highly detailed images, paralleling the achievements of
Diffusion Models Nichol et al. (2022); Ramesh et al. (2022); Rombach et al. (2022). These models
bear architectural resemblance to Large Language Models (LLMs), yet their training regimen is
tailored for paired image-text data. LLMs on the other hand (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023) are limited to text-based output, thus lacking multimodal generative capabilities
despite their proficiency in textual tasks. The subfield of Multimodal Large Models has emerged
in recent years Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021); Alayrac et al. (2022); Li et al. (2022a) in the quest to
bring together the disparate strengths of vision and language models. Despite important advances
in this direction, these models still predominantly generate one modality, thereby constraining their
expressiveness. This study aspires to break this limitation by developing a multimodal model capable
of generating integrated text and image outputs.
To achieve this objective, we conduct a comprehensive empirical investigation into the fusion of two
specialized autoregressive, decoder-only, large transformer models, each designed for unique tasks
(one for text-to-image and a text only model). We introduce a set of methods under the umbrella of
the Joint Autoregressive Mixture (JAM) framework. In building this framework, we take advantage of
the inherent architectural compatibility of autoregressive text-to-image models with LLMs, allowing
us to do deep model fusion and joint training in ways which would otherwise not be possible. Our
modular and data-efficient solution allows for deep, rapid and effective integration of continually
evolving large models, using less than 1% of the original pretraining data for both parent models.
Our contributions to this study are twofold. First, we establish the feasibility of blending autoregres-
sive text-to-image models with LLMs into a unified architecture that retains the core strengths of each
while revealing new, emergent capabilities. Second, we present innovative strategies for multimodal
instruction tuning, utilizing text-based instructions and a custom-curated dataset designed explicitly
for image generation. The result is a first-of-its-kind large multimodal model which can coherently
generate long-form content with interleaved text and images.

2        M ETHODS
To tackle the challenge of creating a unified model that excels at vision-language generative tasks, we
propose to combine two autoregressive decoder-only architectures. Our primary image-text model is
     ∗
         work done as an intern in Meta AI, correspondence <emanuele.aiello@polito.it>


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                             How can I make homemade jam?


                      There are many different kinds of jam, spread, or preserves that you can make at home. Some are simple and take little time, while others are more complicated and
                      take a little longer. Most require some berries, fruits or herbs to make, but many of them also have other ingredients you may already have in your kitchen.
                      Here are some simple and easy ways to make jam, spread, or preserves:

                      Simple and easy jam

                      1. Bring a kettle of water to boil. Pour in 3 cups (710 ml) water into a kettle or pot and put it on the stove to boil. If you don't have a kettle, you can boil water in
                      a pot on the stove.


                      2. Prepare the berries. Wash the berries and then strain them to remove the seeds. You can use any kind of berries, such as raspberries, blueberries,
                      blackberries, strawberries, gooseberries, and mirabelle berries. You can also use other fruits, such as apricots, peaches, and plums.


                      3. Poke the berries through a cheesecloth. Place the berries through the cheesecloth so that the seeds get caught on the cloth.


                                                                                  https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


                      Wash and peel the apples. Cut the core out of the apple. Then cut the apple into small slices. These slices should be about half an inch thick. Peel the skins off
                      the apples. Cut the core out of the peaches. Then peel the peaches and cut them into slices. Cut the gooseberries into small pieces. This process is called
                      cutting the berries. You can also use other fruits, such as mangoes, in place of the apples and peaches.


                      4. Add all the ingredients to a saucepan. Pour in the water, sugar, lemon juice, and lemon peel. Stir the ingredients together with a spoon or rubber spatula until
                      they are well dissolved.

                      5. Bring the mixture to a boil. Place the saucepan on the stove and bring the mixture to a boil over high heat. Then reduce the heat to low and simmer the
                      ingredients, covered, for 10 minutes.


                      6. Remove the lid and stir the mixture. Remove the cover from the saucepan and use a wooden spoon to stir the mixture frequently. This will help the sugar
                      breakdown and make the jam smoother. It will also help the flavors meld together.


Figure 1: Selected sample generated by our instruction-tuned JAM-Cross model. The model can
complex mixed-modal outputs with coherent alignment between generated text and images.


CM3leon (Yu et al., 2023), trained on 2.4T image-text caption tokens. In contrast, using the same
architecture, our LLM (Molybog et al., 2023) has been trained on 1.4T text tokens. Both models have
7B parameters, we provide additional architectural details in Section 3.1. Our overall methodology
develops in two stages. In the first stage (Sect. 2.1), we first combine and align the models. In the
second stage (Sect. 2.2), we explore new directions for instruction tuning focused on interleaved
image-text generation.

2.1     C ONTINUED P RETRAINING
We combine the two pretrained models into a singular, cohesive structure in our proposed framework.
This composite model is fine-tuned using a hybrid dataset comprising both text-only and image-text
samples within our continued pretraining phase. The central motivation behind this approach is to
seamlessly merge the capabilities of two pretrained models, capitalizing on the unique strengths
of each. The training procedure is data-efficient since the original pretrained models are typically
trained on trillions of tokens. In contrast, our procedure only uses 50 billion tokens, corresponding to
1.3% of the total data used during the pretraining.

2.1.1    M ODEL M ERGING

The concept of model merging has been previously utilized to combine models that share identical
optimization trajectories (Kaddour et al., 2022), or models that are trained on identical datasets but
have independent optimizations (for instance, Matena & Raffel (2022); Wortsman et al. (2022);
Ainsworth et al. (2022)). A consistent approach across these studies is to combine models without
any training. Our approach diverges from this convention; we view the merged model as a powerful
initialization for subsequent training on mixed-modal data. The weights of the averaged model are
defined as:
                                                                                                                       1       1
                                                                        θaverage =                                       θllm + θimg                                                              (1)
                                                                                                                       2       2
Where θllm and θimg represent the weights of the LLM and the text-to-image model respectively. In
this study, we explore weights merging specifically to multimodal decoder-only large transformer
models, and notably, on an unprecedented scale, involving models trained on trillions of tokens from
diverse datasets. In the following sections, we refer to our average model as JAM-Uniform.


                                                                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Shared Embedding

                                                Linear



                 Cross Attention block                         Cross Attention block
     Nx                                                                                         Nx
                       LLM block                                         T-I block



                                           Shared Embedding


Figure 2: JAM-Cross, architecture overview. The cross-attention blocks are interleaved between the
original LLM block and the Text-Image blocks, and the output embedding between the two branches
are concatenated and then projected to the output embedding dimension.


2.1.2     W IDTH C ONCATENATION
Our second approach employs the pretrained weights to initialize a wider architecture. Our new
model has hidden dimensions djoint = 8192, which is doubled with respect to one of the two original
models dllm = dimg = 4096. We keep the same number of layers of the original architectures. The
resulting architecture has 26B parameters, initialized starting from the pretrained weights of our
backbones. The token embedding input/output projections and the learned positional embeddings of
the two initial models are concatenated on the hidden dimension. The attention weights (e.g query
projection) Wq,combined ∈ Rdjoint ×djoint are initialized as:

                                                 Wq,llm Wq,llm
                              Wq,combined =                                                     (2)
                                                 Wq,img Wq,img

Where Wq,llm , Wq,img ∈ Rdllm ×dllm represent the weights for the query projection of a generic
attention layer. All the other weights (FFNs and output projections) are initialized following the same
logic. We also experiment with slight variations of the approach:

                                                Wq,llm Wq,average
                               Wq,combined =                                                         (3)
                                                Wq,img Wq,average
Instead of copying the two models’ parameters, we use the average to initialize half of the new
parameters. We name the resulting model JAM-Width.

2.1.3     C ROSS M ODEL F USION
We propose to embed cross-attention layers between the foundational models to facilitate seamless
information interchange while preserving the original models’ knowledge. Given two decoder-only
transformers models Tllm and Timg , we introduce a bi-directional cross-attention mechanism that
enables the layers of one model to attend to the corresponding layer’s output of the other model. This
approach allows for a progressive exchange of information at different representation levels. For a
specific layer l, let the models produce sequences of hidden states Hllm,l for Tllm and Himg,l for
Timg where these hidden states are outputs from layer l. The output of the cross-attention mechanism
(Hcross,l ) from Timg → Tllm for a given layer is evaluated as:
        Qcross,l = Wq,l Hllm,l−1 ,   Kcross,l = Wk,l Himg,l−1 ,          Vcross,l = Wv,l Himg,l−1    (4)
                                                                     !
                                                            T
                                                 Qcross,l Kcross,l
                         Hcross,l = Softmax           √                  Vcross,l                    (5)
                                                         dk
Where Wq , Wk , Wv represent the query, key, and value projection weights of the newly inserted
cross-attention layers. A symmetric process is applied for the reverse direction Tllm → Timg . We
use a shared input-output projection layer, initializing the weights of the text tokens from the LLM
input embedding and the weights of the image tokens from the image-text model. We insert a new
linear projection layer that takes the concatenation of the two model’s output embeddings as input.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2 illustrates a schematic of our model configuration. We refer to the model resulting from this
approach as JAM-Cross. Additional architectural details and the underlying design choices can be
found in Sect. 3.1. The ablation study for the optimal frequency of inserting new layers is presented
in Sect. 3.3.

2.2   M ULTIMODAL C ONVERSATIONAL I NSTRUCT T UNING
Supervised fine-tuning is a fundamental tool to leverage the abilities of large pretrained models.
Recently, instruct tuning has been extended to a multimodal setting (Liu et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023);
however, all the existing approaches are focused on visual understanding abilities. In this work, we
study instruction tuning tailored to interleaved image-text generation.
We collect a small and curated mixed-modal dataset to teach our JAM model to support textual
explanations with coherent images. Since in the first stage, the model has been trained on image-text
captions and text-only data; we train on interleaved image-text data during this phase. Our approach
is inspired by the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis from LIMA (Zhou, 2023), which posits that
a model’s foundational knowledge and skills are entirely learnt during the pretraining. Instruction
tuning is then used to guide the model in selecting the appropriate subdistribution of format used when
interacting with users. Our results demonstrate that the model can quickly learn the style of images
and text from a small curated dataset, suggesting that LIMA hypotesis holds not only for learning the
text style but also for images. In our experiments, we consider two slightly different instruction tuning
settings, we introduce a small portion of the image-text Shutterstock data with retrieval augmentation
and we find this approach beneficial to preserve the generated image quality when generating with
retrieval augmentation. Sect 3 presents a comparison between these two strategies. We train using a
standard supervised procedure without leveraging any reinforcement learning or human preference
strategy. In this instruction-tuning phase, we leverage interleaved image-text data in contrast to
previous methods (Koh et al., 2023a) that rely only on image-text caption and no instruction tuning,
our experimental results confirm the benefits of training with interleaved image-text data.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Tokenizers For images, we use the VQ-VAE tokenizer from Gafni et al. (2022). The image
resolution is set to 256 × 256, 1024 tokens represent each image, and the vocabulary has a size of
8192. Our text tokenizer is the same that have been used to train the two parent models, trained over
the Zhang et al. (2022) data for text. We introduce the additional <break> token used by CM3leon to
identify a modality break.

Image-Text Autoregressive Model We adopt CM3leon as the image-text autoregressive backbone.
The model has a standard decoder-only architecture with some peculiarities: no bias terms, dropout,
and learnable parameters for layer norms. It has been trained on 2.4T image-text tokens and uses a
sequence length 4096.

LLM As an LLM backbone, we select a model with the same architecture as CM3leon, trained
in Molybog et al. (2023) this allows us to experiment with a broader range of approaches, such as
weight averaging and width concatenation. The model is trained on 1.4T text data with a 2048 context
length, and we further fine-tuned it with a 4096 context length using only 30B text tokens.

Objective In all our experiments, we employ the CM3 objective introduced in Aghajanyan et al.
(2022); this objective accepts the original sequence as input or transforms it into an infilling instance
by masking specific spans and relocating them to the end of the document. Then, the model is
optimized for minimizing the standard autoregressive loss − log p(xinput ). This objective allows for
optional bidirectionally and increases the versatility of the model that can be used for both infilling
or standard autoregressive generation. We prevent the objective from masking across the modality
<break> tokens.

Retrieval Augmentation We employ multimodal retrieval augmentation introduced in Yasunaga
et al. (2022) for our training procedure. The retrieval procedure employs a dense retriever r, a
memory bank M and a specifically selected retrieval strategy. The retriever takes an input query


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      What is the best way to start practicing yoga?                                                                           How can I plan my trip to Hawaii?


                                                                                                                           Hawaii is a stunningly beautiful state in the United States, and it's only fitting that
                                                                                                                           you want to explore all that it has to offer. The island paradise is made up of six
               Yoga is a great way to start practicing physical and mental health. There are                               different islands- Hawaii, Molokai, Lanai, Kauai, Oahu, Maui, and Hawaii Island -each
               many styles of yoga to choose from; each with its own focus, practice methods,                              with their own unique culture, traditions, and attractions. To really make the most of
               and intensity levels. That said, if you're new to yoga or if you're interested in                           your Hawaiian adventure, you'll need to do some serious planning, especially if you
               trying it out, you may want to start with a beginner's class, choose a class that                           want to see the big picture and travel to different islands.
               focuses on relaxation, or begin with a gentler practice until your body can                                 Set your travel goals
               handle more rigorous routines.
                                                                                                                           1. List your priorities. Before you start planning your trip to Hawaii, you need to
                                                                                                                           figure out what you want out of it. Are you looking for a relaxing, family-friendly
               To find a beginner's class, search for "beginner's class" or "introduction to
                                                                                                                           experience? Or are you more interested in exploring Hawaii's natural wonders, such
               yoga" in your area. You may also want to ask your doctor or a physical therapist                            as its lush vegetation and beautiful beaches? Once you know what you want, you can
               about local yoga instructors who know how to work with people who are new to                                start narrowing down your options and focusing on the activities that best fit your
               yoga. If you have a friend who already practices yoga, ask them if they can go                              goals. For example, if you want to take in some of Hawaii's most popular attractions,
               with you to your first class; they may be able to show you some of the basics.                              such as the Rainbow Falls and the Duke Kahanamoku Beach, you'll probably want to
                                                                                                                           stay on the island of Oahu,
               As you become more experienced, you may find that you want to specialize in a
               particular style of yoga or in a particular path within yoga; you may also find
               that you want to teach yoga. If you decide that you want to teach yoga, you will
               need to get certified by the Yoga Alliance or by a similar organization


                                                                                                                           then you can make sure to see the main attractions on your list, like the Pearl Harbor
                                                                                                                           and the Lone Star State Park. If you're interested in nature, you might want to
                                                                                                                           explore one of Hawaii's wilderness areas, such as the Kaumakani Recreation Area on
                                                                                                                           Hawaii Island. Another great option is the Hawaii Tropical Botanical Garden, which
                                                                                                                           features a wide array of exotic plants and flowers.

                                                                                                                           2. Research travel time and costs. Depending on where you live, you may have to fly
                                                                                                                           to Hawaii to experience all that it has to offer. If you're interested in seeing as
                                                                                                                           much of Hawaii as you can, you'll probably want to stay on the island of Oahu, which
                                                                                                                           is the biggest and busiest of the Hawaiian islands. Once you fly to Hawaii, you'll need
                                                                                                                           to figure out how much time you have and how you'd like to spend it. Also, take into
                                                                                                                           account the cost of different travel methods, such as flights, trains, buses, and
                                                                                                                           rentals. If you're planning a family trip, you may want to research attractions that
                                                                                                                           are kid-friendly.


Figure 3: Samples generated by our JAM-Cross instruct tuned model. (Left - generated without
retrieval augmentation; Right - generated with retrieval augmentation)


x and returns a relevance score r(x, m) for each candidate document m ∈ M. Each multimodal
document is split between text and images and fed to the corresponding modality-specific VIT-B-32
CLIP encoder (Radford et al., 2021). The two embeddings are then averaged to form the documents’
vector representation. We then use Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) over the memory bank to
obtain a list of candidates. When sampling retrieved documents, we prioritize the diversity of the
sampled documents by skipping candidates with a score r(x, m) ≥ 0.9. We apply query dropout to
regularize the training, dropping 20% of tokens from the input sequence x.

Training - Alignment Phase During the continued pretraining, we train for approximately 50B
multimodal tokens. Our initial learning rate is lr = 3 × 10−5 we use 500 warm-up steps. We
set our optimal batch size to 8M tokens, this hyperparameter is borrowed from the mixed-modal
scaling laws introduced in Aghajanyan et al. (2023). The total number of training steps is 5960. This
training procedure takes approximately one day on 256 80GB A100s for all models. We select the
last checkpoint for all the different JAM models, which is always the one with the lowest average
validation perplexity (PPL).

Training - Instruct Tuning Our instruct tuning training procedure is data efficient we train with
our instruction tuning mixed corpora. The initial learning rate is set to 1 × 10−5 , and we use 300
warm-up steps and a batch size of 1M. The instruction tuning procedure takes less than 2 hours
on 64 80GB A100s, we train for 15 epochs over our mixture of datasets and manually select the
best checkpoint corresponding to the 9th epoch. Following Zhou et al. (2023), we notice that the
validation PPL doesn’t correlate with the quality of the responses.

Decoding Strategies We implement a mixed-modal decoding strategy for our interleaved generation.
The model starts generating text tokens until a modality <break> token is detected, then an image is
sampled. The generation process alternating the two modalities continues iteratively until a <eos>
token is sampled. As a result our model is able to generate free-form multimodal documents. We
employ temperature sampling, a common technique used in autoregressive model (e.g Ramesh et al.
(2022)) to control the randomness of the prediction by modifying the softmax temperature τ . We
pair this technique with TopP sampling introduced in Holtzman et al. (2019) consisting of sampling
from the top-ranked tokens with a cumulative probability exceeding a predefined threshold τP . We
also employ classifier-free guidance (CFG (Gafni et al., 2022)) for sampling images. This technique
allows to condition the sampling procedure, blending the logits from an unconditional sample with
the logits from a conditional sample. The procedure is mathematically described as
                                       logitscf = logitsuncond + αc (logitscond − logitsuncond )                                                                                                                                   (6)
where logitscond = T (ty |tx ) and logitsuncond = T (ty | < mask >); T represent the transformer
model, < mask > represent the absence of the input text, tx are the conditional input tokens, ty are


                                                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the output tokens and αc is the scaling factor for CFG. Thanks to the CM3 objective, our training
procedure allows our models to sample with CFG without further fine-tuning. Inspired by Yu et al.
(2023) we complement this technique to boost the generation quality. Our samples are generated
using a temperature value τ = 1, τP is set between 0.8 and 1, and we use classifier-free guidance
with values 3.5 and 4. In contrast to other approaches, we don’t make use of the computationally
expensive clip-reranking (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022; Gafni et al., 2022) or constrastive
decoding (Li et al., 2022b; Yu et al., 2023).

3.1.1    DATASETS
Shutterstock We randomly sample a subset of 30B tokens from CM3leon (Yu et al., 2023) pretrain-
ing data. The data consists of legally acquired image-caption pairs from Shutterstock, a commercial
online platform offering images with ownership attribution and clear licensing terms.

Text corpora We use 30B text tokens sampled from a mixture of several publicly available data, and
we reuse the data used for training other common open-source LLM following the same preprocessing
of (Touvron et al., 2023). The datasets are: English CommonCrawl (Touvron et al., 2023), C4 (Raffel
et al., 2020), Wikipedia, Books3 from ThePile (Gao et al., 2020), and arXiv.

LIMA We use the 1k dataset present in Zhou et al. (2023), which features various curated prompts
and responses.

 wikiHow We collect an interleaved image-text dataset sampling 3000 articles from WikiHow, an
 online wiki publication that usually curates apposite images for each article. We sample balanced
 articles from each category to ensure diversity; moreover, we leverage the platform’s community
 ratings to filter each article’s quality, sampling only those with a score greater than 90/100. For each
 article, we use the title (e.g., ’How to make ..?’) as prompt, we modify the phrase ’This article...’ with
’The following answer..’. Furthermore, we restrict the number of images as 3 per sample, to fit our
 4096 context length.

3.2     C ONTINUED P RETRAINING R ESULTS
In the initial stage of continued pretraining, we evaluate the performance across various JAM models.
Our primary objective is to ensure minimal performance degradation post-merging, relative to the
parent models. Managing both image and text processing within a single model poses significant
challenges. This evaluation seeks to quantify the retention of original performance in our different
JAM models, benchmarked against the two parent models specialized in individual modalities.

3.2.1    T EXT M ODALITY
For the text modality, we compare the zero-shot performance on some common sense reasoning tasks:
PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), ARC-Challenge, ARC-Easy (Clark et al., 2018), StoryCloze (Mostafazadeh
et al., 2016), Winograd, and Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021). We also report some recent
influential LLM (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), and our LLM (Molybog et al., 2023)
fine-tuned with 4k context as a reference. Results are presented in Table 1. The JAM-Uniform
reaches slightly better text-only performance than JAM-Width however, it is crucial to remark that
this approach consolidates the functionalities of both parent models within a constrained 7B parameter
space. Our findings reveal that the intrinsic knowledge of the parent models can be recovered mainly
from the parameter average utilizing only a minimal portion of the original pretraining data. The
JAM-Cross model yields the best results, aligning with our primary LLM. This highlights the strength
of our bidirectional cross-attention mechanism against other baselines.

3.2.2    I MAGE -T EXT M ODALITY
To assess the performance of our different baselines over the image-text modality, we compare
them using the validation perplexity (PPL) on MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014). We believe
this metric robustly correlates with performance on subsequent tasks, such as image generation and
captioning. Furthermore, it provides a reliable reference point for comparing different autoregressive
models sharing an identical tokenizer. Results are reported in Table 2. Diverging from results


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table 1: Zero Shot Text Comparison on Common Sense Reasoning Tasks

           Model           Size PIQA ARC-C ARC-E StoryCloze Winograd Winogrande
           GPT-3          175B 81.0       51.4   68.8         -             -         70.1
           LLaMa           7B 79.8        47.6   72.8         -             -         70.1
           LLM-4k          7B 76.7        45.9   67.7        79.3          83.9       66.2
           JAM-Uniform 7B       62.4      28.5   42.6        63.5          47.8       49.7
           JAM-Width   26B      57.8      31.4   31.6        54.7          50.2       51.9
           JAM-Cross   19B      75.4      41.6   67.2        79.8          81.0       66.0

         Table 2: Image-Text Comparison
                                                     Table 4: Ablations - JAM-Cross Model
  Model              Size MS-COCO PPL
  CM3               2.7B       200.1             C-Attn Size Wikipedia PPL MS-COCO PPL
  RA-CM3            2.7B       193.1             ✗        13B       7.86             153.2
  CM3leon           760M       168.8             1        26B       7.53             152.4
  CM3leon            7B        149.0             2        19B       7.18             149.0
  JAM-Uniform 7B               177.5             4        16B       8.55             151.7
  JAM-Width   26B              159.5
  JAM-Cross   19B              147.6
                                                     Table 5: Ablations - Instruction Tuning
  Table 3: Ablations - JAM-Width Model
                                                         Shutterstock MS-COCO PPL
 Init.       Wikipedia PPL MS-COCO PPL                   ✗                   190.2
 Copy              7.34          159.5                   ✓                   164.5
 Average           9.0           175.4


on the text-only modality, the JAM-Width model exhibits enhanced performance over the JAM-
Uniform model in the image-text domain. Specifically, the JAM-Width model demonstrates superior
efficacy in retaining image-text performance relative to text-only performance. Conversely, despite a
decline in performance, the JAM-Uniform model remains a good parameters-performance trade-off.
Interestingly, our JAM-Cross model not only reaches the best PPL between the JAM strategies but
also surpasses our foundational image-text model, CM3leon. We hypothesize that such advancement
can be attributed to integrating novel textual capabilities coupled with an augmented parameter count
inherent to the combined architecture. Based on empirical evidence, the JAM-Cross emerges as the
best strategy to combine two pretrained autoregressive models.

3.2.3      I NTERLEAVED G ENERATION
Our instruct-tuned JAM-Cross model reaches a high-quality level of image-text generated output. To
demonstrate its ability to generate coherent modality interleaved responses, we show an extensive set
of generated samples in Figure 3 and Section B. The samples generated with retrieval are obtained
from the model instruct-tuned with a mixture of pretraining image-text Shutterstock data along with
our corpora of instruct-tuning datasets, while the samples generated without retrieval are obtained
from the model instruct tuned only on our instruct-tuning set. The generated samples show coherent
image and text integration, demonstrating unprecedented abilities at this novel task. Overall we find
our retrieval augmented solution to be more effective than standard image sampling, boosting image
quality. We further report several qualitative comparisons with the most relevant previous work GILL
(Koh et al., 2023a) that features mixed-modal generation. We use our retrieval-augmented JAM-Cross
model and source generations for the GILL model from the original paper. From this comparison
(Figure 4), it’s immediate to notice how our model has a better overall quality of responses. The
generated text is more complete and exhaustive, while the generated images are more relevant to
the text context. We remark that our method is the first capable of such coherent and interleaved
generation with a focus on instruction tuning and that our fine-tuning procedure is effective in


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Hi, I'm looking for ideas for a customized cake design for my daughter's birthday.                                                    I need inspiration for my bridal hairstyle in a garden wedding.


            GILL                                                                                                                           GILL
                    I'm not sure what you mean by customised.                                                                                     I love the idea of a garden wedding, but I think you should go with


                        (Retrieved)                                                                                                                  (Generated)


            JAM                                                                                                                            JAM
                    Here are some custom cake ideas for your daughter's birthday:                                                                 Here are some hairstyles you can try for a garden wedding. You can do 1 large bun, 2
                                                                                                                                                  side buns, a low side part, or part your hair in the middle and go slightly half up half
                          Pink and lavender themed cake with edible glitter.                                                                     down.
                           Multicolored frosted cake with white icing and pink and lavender decorations.
                            Baker's chest themed cake.                                                                                                 1 large bun: Put some styling mousse in your hair. Then gather your hair into a large
                             Princess themed cake.                                                                                                      ponytail at the nape of your neck. Tuck the hair at the back of your head under so
                              Panda themed cake.                                                                                                        it looks like a large braid. Then use bobby pins to hold it in place.
                               Tomato themed cake.                                                                                                      2 side buns: Part your hair down the middle from the crown of your head. Then,
                                Hawaiian themed cake.                                                                                                    use a comb to separate a half of your hair to the left and the other half to the
                                 Fluffy cake with layers.                                                                                                right. Put the half that is on the left in a small ponytail and pin it up. Repeat the
                                  3D decorated cake.                                                                                                     same thing with the other half.
                                   Colorful sprinkles or glitter.                                                                                        A low side part: Part your hair from just behind one ear to the bottom of your
                                    New Year themed cake.                                                                                                 chin. Let some of your hair fall on the sides and part the rest in the middle.
                                     Book themed cake.                                                                                                    Part your hair in the middle: Take a comb and start combing from the midsection
                                                                                                                                                            down to your feet. Part the hair in the middle so that


                         (Generated)                                                                                                                   (Generated)


                                      I want to paint a landscape with mountains and a river. Can you help me find some inspiration?                                                         What would a pizza with bacon look like?


            GILL                                                                                                                           GILL
                    I'm not sure


                        (Generated)                                                                                                                  (Generated)


            JAM                                                                                                                            JAM
                                                                                                                                                  Pizza with bacon is a savory dish that contains both savory and sweet flavors. The sweet
                   Here are some inspiration ideas for you to paint a landscape with mountains and a river.
                                                                                                                                                  flavors come from the sauce, the cheese, and the toppings, while the savory flavors
                   You can start by exploring your own hometown and look around at the scenery you are
                                                                                                                                                  come from the bacon. There are various methods of making this dish. Some people
                   familiar with. Take pictures of the mountains and the river if you can. Look at the
                                                                                                                                                  choose to make a thin crust pizza, which contains less cheese and more bacon. Others
                   pictures and try to find ways to incorporate them into your painting. You can also find
                                                                                                                                                  make a thicker crust pizza that has more cheese and less bacon.
                   inspiration by looking at paintings and drawings of mountains and rivers by other artists.
                   You might go to a museum or an art store and look at some paintings. If you can't visit a
                   museum or an art store, you can at least look online. You can also find inspiration by
                   watching movies and videos that feature beautiful landscapes with mountains and rivers.


                                                                                                                                                     (Generated)


                        (Generated)


Figure 4: Qualitative comparison with previous interleaved generation models. Compared to GILL,
our model is able to generate more complete and precise answers. Results for GILL are sourced from
Koh et al. (2023a).


efficiently learning the style of the dataset, not only for text but even for images. Our model paves the
way toward a larger adaption of mixed-modal generation in real-world use cases.
3.3   A BLATION S TUDY
We compare the two approaches for the width concatenation model: copying the original models’
weight or using the average to initialize the new parameters. Results (Table 3) show that copying the
weights is more effective than averaging them to retain the original model capabilities. The ablation
study for the Cross-attention model is presented in Table 4. We ablate the frequency of inserting
cross-attention layers and the impact of not using any cross-attention layers. These experiments are
performed training with 25B tokens, all the other parameters are the same as reported in Sect. 3.1. We
remark that this is an even shorter training setting concerning our 50B tokens total training and that
the difference in performance increases as the training progresses. We further ablate the contribution
of image-text pretraining data in the instruction tuning procedure in Table 5. The results indicate
the importance of using pretraining data mixed in the instruction tuning procedure to preserve the
MS-COCO PPL. We do not report WikiHow PPL since analyzing the models shows that it doesn’t
correlate with generation quality similarly to Zhou et al. (2023).

4     R ELATED W ORKS
Generative Text-to-Image Models The field of generative text-to-image models has recently been
dominated by diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). Recent enhancements
have used pretrained text representations (Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2022) like CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) to improve the generation quality. Concurrently to developing diffusion-based generative
models, significant steps have been made by autoregressive token models (Esser et al., 2021; Gafni
et al., 2022). These models encode images into a discrete latent space (Van Den Oord et al., 2017)


                                                                                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and can be processed as a standard sequence-to-sequence modeling task, enabling the borrowing
of techniques used from Large Language Models. A critical element that has been found beneficial
in boosting text-to-image generative models is retrieval augmentation (Chen et al., 2022; Yasunaga
et al., 2022). Yasunaga et al. (2022) propose to prefix decoder-only models, such as Aghajanyan
et al. (2022), with retrieved images during training, resulting in a huge efficiency gain for the
training procedure. Yu et al. (2023), scale this strategy to reach state-of-art performance in image
generation using 5x less training compute. In this work, we borrow their model as our text-to-image
autoregressive backbone.


Multimodal Language Models The multimodal language model field has recently seen consid-
erable development. Several prior works have focused on connecting language models to visual
encoders. (Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021; Mokady et al., 2021; Najdenkoska et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023).
These methods typically train a mapping network between a pretrained image encoder and a language
model. Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) introduces cross attention into a frozen LLM to inject
visual features and trains a large corpus of image-text pairs. In this work, we similarly use cross
attention to bridge the two models; however, our mechanism is bidirectional between the vision and
language models, while for Flamingo, the visual knowledge is injected in the language model and
not vice-versa. CM3 (Aghajanyan et al., 2022) is trained on a large corpus of structured HTML; it
introduces the Casually Masked Language Modeling objective we adopt to train our models. Koh
et al. (2023b) propose a multimodal language model capable of processing arbitrarily interleaved
image and text inputs and generating interleaved output of text and retrieved image. Subsequently,
on the same line of work, GILL Koh et al. (2023a) proposes to ground an LLM to a text-to-image
model, using a mapping network and freezing the pretrained models, introducing the possibility of
generating or retrieving images as output. Similarly to GILL, Sun et al. (2023b) propose to model
different modalities in an autoregressive way with a single model they call Emu. Differently from our
work, they employ EVA-CLIP (Sun et al., 2023a) encoder to generate visual embeddings and Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) conditioned on the generated image tokens to decode images.


Instruction Tuning Instruction tuning aims to teach language models to follow natural language
instructions. Several methods have been proposed for instruction tuning, using existing NLP datasets
converted in instruction formats Wei et al. (2021) Chung et al. (2022), or using LLMs like GPT-4 to
generate instruction data with better diversity Wang et al. (2022) Honovich et al. (2022). Recently,
LIMA Zhou et al. (2023) demonstrated that 1,000 carefully curated samples are enough to reach
competitive results compared to bigger instruction-tuning datasets. The authors hypothesize that most
of the knowledge is learned during the pretraining, and the instruction tuning teaches the style to
interact with the users. In this work, we explore using a small set of multimodal instruction tuning
data to fine-tune our model, verifying the effectiveness of a small dataset in this multimodal setting
tailored to image generation. Several vision language works adopt instruction tuning for multimodal
tasks-focused user interactions optimized for visual content understanding Liu et al. (2023) Dai et al.
(2023) Ye et al. (2023) Zhu et al. (2023). Unlike previous works, we explore instruction tuning
focused mixed-modal generation, paving the way for more significant adaptation of multimodal
models that can generate interleaved image-text output.


5    C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have presented novel methodologies for combining pretrained autoregressive models,
demonstrating the viability of synthesizing the knowledge of two distinct models into a cohesive
structure with extended capabilities. Our exploration validates that the integrated model can be adeptly
fine-tuned using our tailored instruction-tuning procedure for interleaved image-text generation. To
this end, we pioneered creating a specialized dataset centered on instruction tuning for this particular
task. Nevertheless, the proposed study is limited to 7B parameter models with the same architecture.
Future works may consider scaling the models’ size and asymmetrically applying our cross-fusion
method to bridge models of varying sizes. Increasing the context length and delving into multi-turn
conversations could further represent an interesting exploration direction. In conclusion, our study
sets the foundation for substantial advancements in the realm of multimodal autoregressive models.
The fusion of text-to-image generation with large language models paves the way for sophisticated
systems capable of interleaved image-text interactions, enriching the landscape of conversational AI.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Bernie Huang, Candace Ross, Vladimir Karpukhin, Hu Xu, Naman Goyal,
  Dmytro Okhonko, Mandar Joshi, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, et al. Cm3: A causal masked
  multimodal model of the internet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07520, 2022.

Armen Aghajanyan, Lili Yu, Alexis Conneau, Wei-Ning Hsu, Karen Hambardzumyan, Susan Zhang,
  Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Scaling laws for generative
  mixed-modal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03728, 2023.

Samuel Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models modulo
  permutation symmetries. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.

Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical
  commonsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Chitwan Saharia, and William W Cohen. Re-imagen: Retrieval-augmented
 text-to-image generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14491, 2022.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.

Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2023.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 12873–12883, 2021.

Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 89–106. Springer, 2022.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural instructions: Tuning
  language models with (almost) no human labor. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09689, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jean Kaddour, Linqing Liu, Ricardo Silva, and Matt J Kusner. Questions for flat-minima optimization
  of modern neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00661, 2, 2022.
Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images with multimodal language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17216, 2023a.
Jing Yu Koh, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. Grounding language models to images for
   multimodal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13823, 2023b.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597,
  2023.
Xiang Lisa Li, Ari Holtzman, Daniel Fried, Percy Liang, Jason Eisner, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Contrastive decoding: Open-ended text generation as optimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15097, 2022b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
  Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Michael S Matena and Colin A Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17703–17716, 2022.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Igor Molybog, Peter Albert, Moya Chen, Zachary DeVito, David Esiobu, Naman Goyal, Punit Singh
  Koura, Sharan Narang, Andrew Poulton, Ruan Silva, et al. A theory on adam instability in
  large-scale machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09871, 2023.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Van-
  derwende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. A corpus and evaluation framework for deeper
  understanding of commonsense stories. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.01696, 2016.
Ivona Najdenkoska, Xiantong Zhen, and Marcel Worring. Meta learning to bridge vision and language
  models for multimodal few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14794, 2023.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2204, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An
  adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106,
  2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Quan Sun, Yuxin Fang, Ledell Wu, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. Eva-clip: Improved training
  techniques for clip at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15389, 2023a.
Quan Sun, Qiying Yu, Yufeng Cui, Fan Zhang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yueze Wang, Hongcheng Gao,
 Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative pretraining in multimodality. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.05222, 2023b.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.
Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob L Menick, Serkan Cabi, SM Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill.
 Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language models. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:200–212, 2021.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al. Model
 soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing
 inference time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR,
 2022.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Armen Aghajanyan, Weijia Shi, Rich James, Jure Leskovec, Percy Liang, Mike
 Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. Retrieval-augmented multimodal language modeling.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12561, 2022.
Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Guohai Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Yiyang Zhou, Junyang Wang, Anwen Hu,
  Pengcheng Shi, Yaya Shi, et al. mplug-owl: Modularization empowers large language models with
  multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Lili Yu, Bernie Huang, Candace Ross, Vladimir Karpukhin, Hu Xu, Naman Goyal, Dmytro Okhonko,
  Mandar Joshi, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, et al. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models:
  Pre-training and instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07520, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11206, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


A    L IMITATIONS
The generation quality of our proposed model presents some limitations. Our JAM frameworks rely
on LLMs and text-to-image autoregressive models, inheriting their strengths and limitations, such as
the potential for hallucinations and biases in image generation. These limitations may be addressed
by improving and leveraging better autoregressive backbones.
Moreover, our instruct-tuning procedure focuses on a specific wiki-style single-turn question answer-
ing. Most of the time, the model generates a single or, at most, two images, while a longstanding goal
could be to generate entire multimodal documents with >2 images. This is partially bottlenecked
by the training data and the context length of 4k tokens; given that each image takes 1024 tokens,
generate longer outputs it’s still challenging.
Furthermore, our model is more effective in generating interleaved image text when the question
style aligns with the dataset style and when the images refer to concrete objects. While the model
usually struggles to represent more abstract concepts. We showcase some examples of this behavior
in Figure 5. When the subject of the text dialogue are more abstract concepts such as "time travel",
"music", or "research", the generated images fail to capture the textual context and enrich the model
output faithfully.

B    G ENERATED E XAMPLES
This section shows several samples generated by our instruction-tuned models using both retrieval
augmentation and standard image generation.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                               You are a scientist who just invented a Time Machine. Where do you travel first?


            I would travel back in time to when I was a teenager. There are a few people I want to meet, and I have a lot of work to do!
            First, I would travel to about the year 2000, and spend some time getting to know my family. I think it would be really cool to talk to my parents when
            they were young, and see how their lives turned out. I'd also like to meet my grandparents, and see how they changed over the course of their lives.
            I would also travel to the past to try to influence history in ways that I think would be beneficial. I would travel to historical events and try to change
            the course of history for the better, or at least record what I do and let people see what I did. I would also travel to ancient times and try to make
            discoveries that have never been made before.
            I would also go to the future to see how society has changed and what kind of changes it has undergone. I would also like to see what kind of
            technological advances people have made in the future and what kind of impact those advances have had on society.
                                                                https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


                                                                                                                                    How can I start playing guitar and become a better musician?


        There are several ways. Start with basic lessons. Many websites offer free lessons, including Google, YouTube, and Encyclopedia Britannica. Focus on learning the basics, playing
        songs, and becoming familiar with the guitar's neck and how the strings are positioned. Practice your chords and scales. When you have a basic foundation of knowledge, you can
        move on to more advanced techniques. Search for videos and lessons online. Check out popular websites such as YouTube, Vimeo, and Google Play. You can also find books at your
        local library that offer guidance.
        Create your own routine. When you first start learning how to play the guitar, you'll probably feel overwhelmed and not make any progress at all. This is normal; everyone was once a
        beginner. To help you overcome this, create a practice routine. Here are a few things to consider for your routine:

              Set aside a set time and day to practice. This will help you establish a routine and stay motivated. Since you're a beginner, start with 15-20 minutes a day and 30-60 minutes a
               few times a week. As you progress, you can increase your practice time.
               Review what you learned in your lesson and practice a few songs

                                                                        https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


             Why are you holding the guitar this way? What is the best technique you can find for this? Go slow and repeat until you get it right. Review and practice until you can do it
        without taking a break. This will help you build endurance and become a more efficient player.

              Start with the basics and work your way up. Don't try to learn too much too fast. Focus on becoming a competent player who can play a few fun songs and review the basics
               along the way. You'll progress faster if you take your time and learn each aspect properly. There are plenty of resources that outline the basics of guitar playing. You can find
               them online or at your local music store.
               Take your guitar with you. This way you can practice whenever you have free time. You'll also be able to take your practice further. For example, if you're in the middle of a
                movie, practice a few chords. If you're bored in between episodes of your favorite TV show, hit the practice pedal. Finally, if you're out on a walk or running an errand, riff
                away. Any time you have a few free moments, take out your guitar and practice a few chords. Your patience will pay off.


                                                                                                                                                 How can I write a research paper?


         A research paper is an academic essay that researches and evaluates a topic and presents the results in the form of written content. Usually, a thesis statement (the main idea of
         the paper) will guide the research paper; the thesis statement will also be supported by the research and appear at the end of the paper. There are lots of different ways to write
         a research paper; the basic structure, however, stays essentially the
         same.
         Research paper introduction

              1. Give a definition of the topic you are researching. A good research paper topic should be interesting, worthy of investigation, and have an aspect of immediacy. For example,
              you could research whether teenage         pregnancy rates have decreased over the past 15 years in your area. You might choose to research homelessness in your area, or early
         childhood education programs in your city. How does obesity in children affect           their growth and development? Do pregnant women in your area get screenings for
         gestational diabetes?

              2. Describe why your topic is important. Your topic is important because people's lives are at stake. If you are researching homelessness in your area, people are living in
         unsanitary conditions, maybe they lack access      to basic necessities like food and shelter, they may be infected with diseases


                                                                        https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


              Read about the different styles and include what styles the professional uses in their work. You might want to research how different authors in your field have written their
         introductory chapters. Some research papers       even include a chapter titled "Acknowledgments" where the author acknowledges all of the people and resources that went into
         creating the work. Remember to cite all sources you use.

               3. Provide context and weigh the severity of the issue. You want to tell your reader who or what will be affected by your topic, why that would be bad, and how your topic ties
         in to other issues and fields. How will your    research paper affect real people? If you are writing about homelessness, your research will either help homeless people get shelter
         and basic necessities or it will show that the current system of homelessness in your area is unsustainable and needs to be altered. What will the outcomes of your research be?
         If you are researching obesity in children, you might find that children are not getting enough exercise, which can lead to health problems later in life, or you might find that
         parents are not doing a good enough job at watching their children's eating habits, which may lead to lifelong health problems and/or dependence on others.


                                                       Figure 5: Generated samples - Failure Cases


                                                                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        I want to visit Yosemite National Park, can you give me some suggestions for my trip?                                                                   How can I improve my physical fitness?


       Yosemite National Park is one of the most beautiful parks in the world. There are so                          It is important to understand that fitness is not just about how much you can lift or
       many different things to do and see in the park, that it's really hard to make                                how fast you can run, there is a holistic approach to health and fitness that takes into
       suggestions. The park is huge, and travels long distances. You could visit Venice                             account your habits, stress levels and diet.To improve your physical fitness, you should
       Beach, and then drive up to Mammoth Lakes. From there, you can go back down                                   first assess your current level of fitness and identify areas where you can improve.
       through Glacier Point and Bear Yosemite to Mariposa Grove. You can explore the                                There are a number of ways to do this, such as assessing your heart rate during
       grove, then head back to Yahoo Dome. From there, you can just keep driving and                                exercise or doing a BMI test.
       drive back into Oakland. It's a long journey, and there are many areas you can
       explore.                                                                                                      After you have done an assessment, you should develop a specific plan to improve your
                                                                                                                     fitness. This should involve not only specific exercises and workouts, but also changing
       One of the best ways to explore the park is to take a shuttle bus. The park provides                          your overall lifestyle, such as by getting more active and adopting a healthier diet.
       free shuttle buses between Yosemite Village and several locations in the valley. The
       shuttles run every day, but they are not available on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
       Day, or New Year's Day. The bus system is fantastic. It's easy to use, and it allows
       you to explore different parts of the valley that you may not have otherwise visited.


                                                                                                                     Coordinating your workouts with your regular schedule. Be sure to take time for rest
                                                                                                                     and relaxation. Give yourself a few days off between workouts to prevent injury and
                                                                                                                     help your body repair and grow. Work out at a time of day when you will be energetic.
                                                                                                                     You will be able to exert yourself at your best and achieve the best results. Many
                                                                                                                     people find that morning is the best time for them, while others prefer to work out at
                                                                                                                     night. It is important to experiment with different working out schedules to see what
                                                                                                                     works best for you.]

                                                                                                                     Try new workouts and exercise techniques to keep your workout routine exciting and
       In the summer time the seasons are not as distinct as they are in other areas of                              fun. This will help you stay motivated and prevent you from getting bored with your
       California. It can be warm most of the time, and it rains fairly often. The water level                       routine. Always talk to your doctor before trying a new workout or technique,
       in the springs and lakes can vary a lot. Sometimes, it's low enough to walk across. In                        especially if you have any medical conditions. You may want to seek advice from a
       other cases, it's deep enough to swim in. The weather can change quickly in Yosemite.                         personal trainer, who can develop a specific workout program for you.
       It's important to pack clothing for all sorts of weather, and to be prepared for rainy,
       cooler weather. On the other hand, you may not get to see a lot of snow. If you want                          Be patient with yourself and your progress. Remember that it takes time to improve
       to snow bike, then you may be able to find someone to rent you equipment.                                     physical fitness, and you should be patient with yourself and avoid beating yourself up
                                                                                                                     over what you perceive are your shortcomings. Focus on the positives and use your
       Yosemite is amazing, and it will be a fantastic trip. Just remember to bring water,                           failures as learning opportunities. You may have to adapt your goals over time as you
       clothe, and sunblock                                                                                          progress.


       Figure 6: Generated samples - without retrieval (left), retrieval augmentation (right).


                                                                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                       I need to train my dog. How can I teach him how to sit and other basic instructions?


          Start with easy commands like "Sit" and "Stay". These are the first steps for someone to learn how to control their dog. They are also the first steps
          for your dog to learn how to associate his body with certain commands.
          To get your dog to sit, raise your hand in the air and make a demanding motion with your hand. Often called a "hands command", your dog will associate
          the command with your hand motion and with the positioning of your arm. Start using the word "sit" as you are making the hand motion. After a few
          attempts, your dog should understand that the command "sit" corresponds to the hand motion you are making.
          In addition to using the hand motion, be consistent with your tone of voice. Positive reinforcement will help him learn the hand motion, but your tone of
          voice will let him know whether or not he has succeeded.
          Start with a gentle voice and gradually raise your tone of voice when he follows the command. If you are happy with his performance, tell him "Good
          dog!" in a cheerful tone of voice. If he needs more work, use a firmer tone of voice and let him know that he has not succeeded yet. However, always
          stay positive.


                                                           https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


          Beginning commands with the hand motion will help you to establish the movement as the command.


                                                                                                                                      How can I improve my mathematical knowledge?


        There are several things you can do to improve your mathematical knowledge. Here are some suggestions.
        • Read books. A good way to learn mathematical concepts is to read about them. You can find books in your local library. Some popular books that might be helpful are:

             Introduction to Algebra
              Introduction to Geometry
               Mathematics: A Very Basic Guide

        • Play with numbers. You can find some math games online. Playing these games can help you practice calculations and recognize patterns. Some games you might try are:

             Arithmetic Bee
              Hyperbole and Parabola
               Pathfinder
                Solving Equations

                                                                   https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
        • Take classes. You can take classes in math at your local community college or university. Most colleges and universities offer classes in algebra, geometry, and calculus.
        You can also take classes in advanced math, such as abstract algebra, harmonic analysis, and number theory.

        •Speak with a tutor. If you are having trouble understanding a concept, you can hire a math tutor. A tutor can help you explain the material in a simpler way. You can
        find a tutor online or by asking around at


                                          Figure 7: Generated samples - retrieval augmentation


                                                                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                      How can I prepare for college admission?


                  There are a lot of things to consider when preparing for college admission. Here are a few suggestions:
                       Take college preparation classes, visit college campuses, and talk to counselors and admissions officers. Doing these things will help you
                        choose the right college and understand what you need to do to get admitted.
                        Set aside time to think about what you want to study and why. Don't settle on a major just because your parents or teachers told you to.
                        Choose a major that you're interested in and that will help you find a job that you'll like.
                        Join clubs, organizations, and sports teams. These can help you make friends, get to know other people, and have fun. They're also a good
                         way to build skills and get immediate experience that colleges will value.
                         Work hard and get good grades. A grade point average of 3.0 or better is usually needed to get into a good college. Some schools may
                          require a higher GPA, so ask them   when you visit. If you can't achieve a 3.0 grade point average, talk to your teachers and counselors, and
                                                          https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                          see if there are any special programs you can join to help you get good grades.
                          Take notes in class


                                                                                                                           How to prepare a tasty hot dog?


                  Hot dogs are a classic comfort food that you can enjoy at home or at a festival. They're easy to make at home with common ingredients, and
                  your friends and family may be surprised at how delicious they can be.
                  You can mix up your own filler to save money and add healthy ingredients; you can also sausage or use turkey bacon to make a veggie-friendly hot
                  dog. Get started by choosing a topping that suits your preferences.
                  Choose the types of hot dog
                     1. Get a homemade hot dog for a more nutritious option. Homemade hot dogs are healthier than store-bought versions since they don't
                         contain primarily processed ingredients. They're also fresher, so you're less likely to get sick from eating them. While you can buy a kit
                         that contains all the ingredients you need to make a homemade hot dog, you can also make your own using common ingredients. The hot dog
                         using the basics of a homemade turkey sausage
                     2. Try a veggie hot dog for a plant based option. Many people eat vegetarian or vegan hot dogs for various reasons. Kosher and soy-based hot
                         dogs are available in bulk or at most grocery stores, and they can be substituted for meat in most recipes. Purchase
                                                         https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


                        Veggie hot dogs cook just as well as bacon-filled hot dogs, and they generally aren't filled with a lot of processed meat (or at all). For
                        meat lovers, you can cook your veggie hot dog using delicious mushrooms, seitan, or tempeh.

                      3. Choose a hot dog seasoning mix for a quick fix. Seasoning a hot dog at home is simple and fast, and it's less expensive than buying a
                      premade seasoning mix. While you can buy hot dog seasoning mixes at most grocery stores, it's easy to make your own using a few spices.
                      Taste your hot dogs as they come out of the oven and add more seasoning if you prefer. Use your finger or a spoon to spread the seasoning
                      evenly over the hot dog. For example, you can use 1 tablespoon (15 ml) each of garlic powder, onion powder, cayenne pepper, lemon pepper
                      seasoning, and herb seasoning. You can try flavoring your hot dogs with different spices, or use a combination of seasonings to create your
                      own unique taste.


                                                                                                                            How can I start to snowboard?


            Snowboarding is a lot of fun. Here are some steps to help you learn how to snowboard.


               1. Get up on the chair lift to go to the top of the mountain. You'll need to buy a ski or snowboard lift ticket.

               2. Begin riding the chair lift to the top of the mountain. Once you've arrived at the top, you can turn around and go back the way you came. You
                   didn't actually have to ride the chair lift all the way to the top --you could have walked, but it's much faster to ride the lift.

               3. Now that you've arrived at the top of the mountain, you can ride your snowboard down the mountain. To go downhill, you need to keep your
                   weight over the front of your snowboard    and release the grip that you have on the back of the board. Engage your brakes so that you can stop
                                                         https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                   when you need to. To go faster, you can push off the side of the snowboard. If you want to turn, you can turn your feet the same way that you
                   would on a skateboard. Releases the pressure on your back foot to start the turn and then catches it with your front foot


                         Figure 8: Generated samples - without retrieval augmentation


                                                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                How can I order a large pizza from Domino's?


         Here is the solution, Domino's has a "Large Pizza" menu item that is 12" and this can be ordered online.


            1. Visit the Domino's website.

            2. Click on the "Pizza" menu and select "Large Pizza".

            3. Enter the desired quantity in the "Quantity" box. For example, 2.

            4. Check the "Grab a Package" box to get a box of 12 slices.

            5. Click on the "Order Now" button.     https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


            6. Provide your name, phone number, address, and the payment method.

            7. Confirm the order and wait for the pizza to be delivered.


                                                                                                                How can I build a wood table for my kitchen?


         Here are some options to consider for your kitchen table:

               Build a table out of panels and a top (this is probably the most common style, and probably the cheapest)
                Build a table out of whole logs (good for a rustic look, and you get to choose the color of the wood)
                 Build a table out of distressed wood (my personal favorite, can be a little more expensive)
                  Build a table with a tile top (not sure why, but there are people that love it)
                   Build a pool table (not really a kitchen table, but can be used in the kitchen)
                    Build a buffet table (these are usually made of brass and wood, and can be quite heavy. Good if you have a lot of guests)
                                                     https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
         Remember, when building any table, the most important part is the frame. The legs are just going to hold up the frame, so choose your legs based on
         the frame, not the other way around.


                                                                                                                     How can I prepare an avocado toast?


         Avocado toast is delicious and relatively easy to make. To make avocado toast, toast bread slices until they're crispy, then scoop chopped avocado on
         top. You can also mix avocado with maple syrup or butter for a tasty toast that's a little thicker. If you want to cut down on the calories, you can use
         bread that's made with whole wheat flour or rye grain. If you want to go vegan, you can use vegan butter or mousse instead.
         Toast and scoop avocado

            1. Preheat the oven to 250 °F (120 °C). Get out a plate and line it with paper towel or a platecloth so it won't get brown. Set the plate aside while
                you toast the bread.
            2. Heat a pan on the stove until it's hot.https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                                                         Place a pan on the stove and heat it over medium heat. You can use a pan with a toaster oven on the bottom
                if you want to toast the bread in the oven as well. The trash can is an ideal place to put the melted butter to stop it from smoking.
            3. Toast the bread until it's crispy


                            Figure 9: Generated samples - without retrieval augmentation


                                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                           How to make shakshuka?


       Shakshuka is a tasty and healthy breakfast dish made with eggs, beans, mushrooms, onions, lettuce and tomato sauce. The shaken eggs are scrambled in a pan before
       being poured over anything else. The dish can be served warm or cold. Read on for some tips on how to make your own shakshuka.
       Make basic shakshuka

       1. Heat olive oil or a tasty oil (like coconut or pistachio) in a pan on medium-high heat. A cast iron pan is best, but you can also use a non-stick pan. You'll also need a
       medium-sized saucepan.

       2. Add onion, garlic and/or mushrooms to the pan and saute them for 5-10 minutes, depending on your taste. Onion is the most common addition, but you can experiment
                                                                  https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
       with other vegetables, like za'atar (middle eastern spice mix), chopped chili pepper, or garlic powder. You can also mix in some spices like cumin and coriander.

       3. Crush the tomatoes (you can crull them up, or simply chop them into small pieces)


                                                                                                         I am going with my friend for an hiking. How should I prepare my backpack?


                Here are some tips to get you started preparing your backpack for a trek.
                   1. Pack your essentials in a lightweight, compact bag.
                   2. Place your care items-including snacks, clothes, and toiletries-in a separate bag.
                   3. Pack your gear in a strap bag, or a pack pouch attached to the main bag.
                   4. Use breathable, lightweight materials in your gear bags.
                   5. Opt for removable straps, bags, or other accessories so you can lighten your load while hiking.
                   6. Pack your clothes in a tarp or a collapsible bag so they'll take up minimal space.
                   7. Use a pack that allows you to easily adjust your carrying capacity according to the terrain and distance of your trek.
                   8. Pack your gear in plastic bags tohttps://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                                                         keep it clean and preserve its durability.
                   9. Use a waterproof bag that can hold everything you need, or create a waterproof bag calculated for your trek.
                  10. Start your trek with fresh clothes so you don't get sweaty or dirty while hiking.


                               Figure 10: Generated samples - without retrieval augmentation


                                                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                         What can I visit in Torino?


         Here are some suggestions for your visit to Torino, Italy:

               The Palazzo Savona, formerly the palace of the Savoys, is a spectacular building located in the city center, constructed in the 17th century.
                The Muse Piemonte, located in the Old Palazzo, houses an impressive collection of art and antiquities, and is one of the largest museums in Italy.
                 Church of the Gesù, designed by Brunelleschi and completed in 1558, is a Gothic-style church located in the church district of the city.
                  Piazza San Marco, or St. Mark's Square, is a beautiful square located in the heart of the city, facing the Basilica.
                   The Torino Dome, constructed in 1878, is an extraordinary example of Italian architecture, created by architects Guglielmo and Achille Villa.
                    The Biblioteca Albertina, located in the University of Torino, houses one of the largest collections of rare books and manuscripts in Italy.
                     The Botanical Garden, located in the https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                                                            heart of the city, is one of the largest and most beautiful gardens


                                                                                                       How can I learn skateboarding?


         Skateboarding is fun, involves a lot of movement and is a good exercise. There are a lot of ways to learn how to skateboard. You can take lessons from
         a professional skater, watch instructional videos, read how-to articles, etc. Try to find a friend that skates and asks to ride with you, or visit a
         skatepark and practice on the bumpy terrain with others.
         Learn from a pro skater

            1. Find a professional skater to teach you. Look online for skater camps or try asking around at your local skatepark. You might even know a skater
                that's willing to teach you how to skate. Organize a lesson with the person and make sure you know what you expect to get out of it. Some
                skaters may be willing to help you for free if they like you, or if you help them with something.
            2. Organize a lesson. Make sure you know    exactly what you need to learn. For example, if you want to learn how to kick turn, you need to know how
                                                     https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                to move your foot from the front to the back, and you need to know how to rotate the deck. You probably also need to know how to balance on a
                skateboard


                                   Figure 11: Generated samples - retrieval augmentation


                                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                        How to fly to Niagara Falls?


       Niagara Falls is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world. You can easily travel to this region from the Canadian or American side, although you may want to explore
       the whole area. The best way to get to Niagara Falls is by plane, as there are several airports in the area. Once you're at Niagara Falls, you can take a number of different activities
       to make the most of your visit.## Fly to niagara falls
       1. Use the Google Flight Search website to book your flight. Google Flight Search is an online flight booking website. You can browse flight prices from a number of different
       airlines. You can also input vacation dates and see what flight prices come up. You don't have to log in or register in any way. Within the flight search box, you can enter the
       following information:

             Year of travel
              Month of travel
                                                                          https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
               Day of travel.
                You can also input where you want to go, and the website will find flights that meet your budget.


                                                                                                                                                          How to make mango lassi?


        Mango lassi is a tasty drink that's made with mango juice and yogurt. It's a good choice for a hot summer day, as it's cold and creamy. You can enjoy it plain, or you can add some
        spices to it. If you want to know how to make it, just follow these steps.
        Make plain mango lassi


           1. Wash the mango. Use your hands to scrub the mango to remove any dirt. Rinse the mango and let it dry.

           2. Prepare the yogurt. Heat the yogurt in a microwave-safe bowl. Place the bowl in the microwave and heat it on medium heat for 1 to 2 minutes. You can use any kind of yogurt.
               Plain yogurt will have less sugar and will be sweetened nicely by the mango juice. You can also use plain cottage cheese instead of yogurt.
                                                                           https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
           3. Mix the yogurt and mango juice. Use a spoon to mix the yogurt and juice together until the mixture is smooth. You may need to stop and scrape down the sides of the bowl
               occasionally.

           4. Pour the mixture into a glass. You can use any kind of glass or mug.


                                                                                                                                  How can I get better at chess? I would like to improve my skills.


       There are several ways you can improve your chess skills.

             Play more chess. Practice several times a week and increase your play time as you get better. You could join a chess club to get better practiced, or play online chess with
              friends or other players.
              Analyze your games. After you have played a game, observe it and think about how you could have done things differently. This will help you grow as a player and evaluate your
               moves in a more objective
               way.
               Study the chess tactics. There are some interesting strategies and concepts in chess that you can learn about by studying them. Some good books to reference are The Art
                of Chess Strategy by Alexander Navolynets, The Chess Improvement           Book by Nikola Kodrina, The Chess Triple Threat by Adrian Menendez.
                                                                         https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
                Understand the chess openings. The way you begin a game of chess depends on whether you want to counteract your opponent's moves, or try to establish your control over
                 the chessboard early on. There are several kinds of openings, such as the Anglicane, Russian, Sicilian, Zusovsky, and Germans. Learn about the strategies behind them and
                 understand which kind of opening you should


                                            Figure 12: Generated samples - retrieval augmentation


                                                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                 How can I start playing basketball?


       Basketball is one of the most popular sports in the world. There are more kids playing basketball now than ever before. There are a lot of ways to start playing basketball, and a lot
       of resources available to help you learn. Checking out some new basketball shoes and adding some new basketball pants to your wardrobe might be a good place to start. Next, you
       might want to consider joining a basketball class or league.
       Finally, to start playing basketball, you'll need to learn the game by playing it. Basketball is a one-on-one sport, but it's also a team sport, and learning how to work as a team and
       play individual games will help you become a better basketball player.
       Get into basketball
       1. Try basketball activities for kids. There are a lot of different activities you can do to get into basketball. Most activities are geared towards kids ages 8-12, but many of them
       might be appropriate for younger children as well. Many of these     activities involve playing basketball in a tested environment, under the supervision of trained coaches. Some of the
                                                                         https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
       more popular activities include:
       * Youth Basketball Program (YBP): YBP is one of the most popular youth


                                                                                                                                          How can I improve my bouldering technique?


       Pushing too hard is a common problem for beginners in bouldering. Here are a few things to keep in mind as you develop your technique:
           Start with small, shallow moves. You need to get your technique down before you start trying big, difficult moves. Start with some simple strategies like
           just getting your foot on the rock, or pushing a grip onto a particular hold. These small strategies will help you build strength and confidence before you
           tackle bigger moves.
           Focus on getting through one grip at a time. When you're just getting started, you'll probably be working on just getting your grip on the rock. Focus on
           just working on a single grip at a time, and get good at that before moving on. For example, you might start by working on a double overhand grip, and only
           work on that grip for the first few sessions. Once you feel more comfortable with the grip, you can start looking at trying a different one.
           Take your time. You really can't learn proper technique      in a single session. You need to practice consistently in order to develop your skills. Set aside 30
                                                                https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg
           minutes or so to practice every day, and make sure you take breaks occasionally. You also need to practice multiple times


                                                                                                                                        How can I improve my rock climbing technique?


       There are a few fundamental concepts that you need to get better at first, before you start getting better at climbing. So, in no particular order:
          Form an essential training routine. If you want to improve your climbing technique, you have to practice it. A lot. And you have to do it consistently. There are a lot
          of different exercises you can do, but they need to be done daily, and they need to be done for a long period of time (at least 3 months, preferably 6 months)
          before you start seeing improvements. If you're just starting out, 3x weekly is good. If you're already more experienced, 2x weekly is good.
          Practice good technique. This includes things like using your arms in synchrony with your legs, using your whole body weight when you can, not pushing too hard, and
          avoiding bad habits (like bouncing). A good way to ensure you're using good technique is to do your exercises in front of a mirror. That way you can see whether or
          not you're actually using your body in the most efficient way.
          Learn to fail safely. Rock climbing is a dangerous activity, so you need to learn how to fail safely.
                                                                       https://t3.ftcdn.net/jpg/05/17/79/88/360_F_517798849_WuXhHTpg2djTbfNf0FQAjzFEoluHpnct.jpg


                                           Figure 13: Generated samples - retrieval augmentation


                                                                                                                22
