Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T IME -E FFICIENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
WITH S TOCHASTIC S TATEFUL P OLICIES

 Firas Al-Hafez1 , Guoping Zhao2 , Jan Peters1,3 , Davide Tateo1
 1
   Intelligent Autonomous Systems, 2 Locomotion Laboratory
 3
  German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Centre for Cognitive Science, Hessian.AI
 TU Darmstadt, Germany
 {name.surname}@tu-darmstadt.de



                                                A BSTRACT
             Stateful policies play an important role in reinforcement learning, such as handling
             partially observable environments, enhancing robustness, or imposing an induc-
             tive bias directly into the policy structure. The conventional method for training
             stateful policies is Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT), which comes with
             significant drawbacks, such as slow training due to sequential gradient propaga-
             tion and the occurrence of vanishing or exploding gradients. The gradient is often
             truncated to address these issues, resulting in a biased policy update. We present
             a novel approach for training stateful policies by decomposing the latter into a
             stochastic internal state kernel and a stateless policy, jointly optimized by follow-
             ing the stateful policy gradient. We introduce different versions of the stateful
             policy gradient theorem, enabling us to easily instantiate stateful variants of pop-
             ular reinforcement learning and imitation learning algorithms. Furthermore, we
             provide a theoretical analysis of our new gradient estimator and compare it with
             BPTT. We evaluate our approach on complex continuous control tasks, e.g. hu-
             manoid locomotion, and demonstrate that our gradient estimator scales effectively
             with task complexity while offering a faster and simpler alternative to BPTT.1


1        I NTRODUCTION
Stateful policies are a fundamental tool for solving complex Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems.
These policies are particularly relevant for RL in a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP), where the history of interactions needs to be processed at each time step. Stateful poli-
cies, such as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), compress the history into a latent recurrent rep-
resentation, allowing them to deal with the ambiguity of environment observations. Ni et al. (2022)
have shown that RNN policies can be competitive and even outperform specialized algorithms in
many POMDP tasks. Besides POMDPs, stateful policies can be used to incorporate inductive biases
directly into the policy, e.g. a stateful oscillator to learn locomotion Ijspeert et al. (2007); Bellegarda
& Ijspeert (2022a), or to solve Meta-RL tasks by observing the history of rewards Ni et al. (2022).
Existing methods for stateful policy learning mostly rely either on black-box/evolutionary optimiz-
ers or on the BPTT algorithm. While black-box approaches struggle with high-dimensional pa-
rameter spaces, making them less suitable for neural approximators, BPTT has shown considerable
success in this domain Bakker (2001); Wierstra et al. (2010); Meng et al. (2021). However, BPTT
suffers from significant drawbacks, including the need for sequential gradient propagation through
trajectories, which significantly slows down training time and can lead to vanishing or exploding
gradients. To address these issues, practical implementations often use a truncated history, intro-
ducing a bias into the policy update and limiting memory to the truncation length. Furthermore,
integrating BPTT into standard RL algorithms is not straightforward due to the requirement of han-
dling sequences of varying lengths instead of single states.
In this paper, we propose an alternative solution to compute the gradient of a stateful policy. We
decompose the stateful policy into a stochastic policy state kernel and a conventional stateless pol-
icy, which are jointly optimized by following the Stochastic Stateful Policy Gradient (S2PG). By
     1
         The code is available at: https://github.com/robfiras/s2pg


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adopting this approach, we can train arbitrary policies with an internal state without BPTT. S2PG
not only provides an unbiased gradient update but also accelerates the training process and avoids
issues like vanishing or exploding gradients. In addition, our approach can be applied to any exist-
ing RL algorithm by modifying a few lines of code. We also show how to extend the S2PG theory
to all modern RL approaches by introducing different versions of the policy gradient theorem for
stateful policies. This facilitates the instantiation of stateful variations of popular RL algorithms
like Soft-Actor Critic (SAC) Haarnoja et al. (2018), Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3) Fujimoto et al.
(2018), Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017), as well as Imitation Learning
(IL) algorithms like Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) Ho & Ermon (2016) and
Least-Squares Inverse Q-Learning (LS-IQ) Al-Hafez et al. (2023). Our approach is also applicable
to settings where the critic has only access to observations. In such cases, we combine our method
with Monte-Carlo rollouts, as typically done in PPO. In the off-policy scenario, we use a critic with
privileged information Pinto et al. (2018); Lee et al. (2020b); Peng et al. (2018).
To evaluate our approach, we conduct a theoretical analysis on the variance of S2PG and BPTT,
introducing two new bounds and highlighting the behavior of each estimator in different regimes.
Empirically, we compare the performances in common continuous control tasks within POMDPs
when using RL. To illustrate the potential use of S2PG for inductive biases in policies, we give an
example of a trainable Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) of an oscillator used in the policy to-
gether with an Feed-Forward Network (FFN) to achieve walking policies under complete blindness.
Finally, We also demonstrate the scalability of our method by introducing two complex locomo-
tion tasks under partial observability and dynamics randomization. Our results indicate that these
challenging tasks can be effectively solved using stateful IL algorithms, and demonstrate that S2PG
offers a simple and efficient alternative to BPTT that scales well with task complexity.
Related Work. RNNs are the most popular type of stateful policy. Among RNNs, gated recur-
rent networks, such as Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997) or
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) Cho et al. (2014) networks, are the most prominent ones Ni et al.
(2022); Wierstra et al. (2010); Meng et al. (2021); Heess et al. (2015); Espeholt et al. (2018); Yang
& Nguyen (2021). Wierstra et al. (2010) introduced the recurrent policy gradient using LSTMs
and the GPOMDP Baxter & Bartlett (2001) algorithm, where BPTT was used to train the trajectory.
Many subsequent works have adapted BPTT-based training of RNNs to different RL algorithms.
Heess et al. (2015) introduced the actor-critic Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradient (RDPG)
and Recurrent Stochastic Value Gradient (RSVG), which were later updated to the current state-
of-the-art algorithms like Recurrent Twin-Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (RTD3) and
Recurrent Soft Actor-Critic (RSAC) Yang & Nguyen (2021). Many works utilize separate RNNs
for the actor and the critic in RTD3 and RSAC, as it yields significant performance gains compared
to a shared RNN Ni et al. (2022); Meng et al. (2021); Heess et al. (2015); Yang & Nguyen (2021).
Although LSTMs have a more complex structure, GRUs have demonstrated slightly better perfor-
mance in continuous control tasks Ni et al. (2022). Stateful Policies can also be used to encode an
inductive bias into the policy. For instance, a Central Pattern Generator (CPG) is a popular choice
for locomotion tasks Ijspeert (2008); Bellegarda & Ijspeert (2022b); Campanaro et al. (2021). We
conduct experiments with CPGs in Section E.2, where we also present relevant related work. Us-
ing a similar approach to the one presented in this paper, Zhang et al. (2016) introduce a stochastic
internal state transition kernel. In this approach, states are considered as a memory that the policy
can read and write. However, they did not extend their approach to the actor-critic case, which is the
main focus of our work. Rakelly et al. (2019) proposed a Meta-RL approach to learn a distribution
over latent variables that encodes history to extract context variables. Similarily, other approaches
such as DVRL Igl et al. (2018) and SLAC Lee et al. (2020a) force the recurrent state to be a belief
state, exploiting a learned environment model. An alternative to stateful policies, particularly useful
in POMDPs settings, is to use a history of observations. These policies use either fully connected
MLPs, time convolution Lee et al. (2020b), or transformers Lee et al. (2023); Radosavovic et al.
(2023). It can be shown that for some class of Markov Decision Processs (MDPs), these archi-
tectures allow learning near-optimal policies Efroni et al. (2022). The main drawback is that they
require high dimensional input, store many transitions in the buffer, and cannot encode inductive
biases in the latent space. Finally, the setting where privileged information from the simulation is
used is widespread in sim-to-real robot learning Lee et al. (2020b); Peng et al. (2018). Compared
to so-called teacher-student approaches Lee et al. (2020b), which learn a privileged policy and then
train a recurrent policy using behavioral cloning, our approach can learn a recurrent policy online
using privileged information for the critic.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     S TOCHASTIC S TATEFUL P OLICY G RADIENTS
Preliminaries. An MDP is a tuple (S, A, P, r, γ, ι), where S is the state space, A is the action
space, P : S × A × S → R+ is the transition kernel, r : S × A → R is the reward function, γ is the
discount factor, and ι : S → R+ is the initial state distribution. At each step, the agent observes a
state s ∈ S from the environment, predicts an action a ∈ A using the policy π : S × A → R+ , and
transitions with probability P (s′ |s, a) into the next
                                                    P∞  state s′ ∈ S, where it receives the reward r(s, a).
We define an occupancy measure ρ (s, z) = t=0 γ t P r{s = st ∧ z = zt |πθ } giving metric on
                                        πθ

how frequently the tuple (s, z) is visited, where zt is the internal state of the policy. The POMDP
is tuple (S, A, O, P, O, r, γ, ι) extending the MDP by the observation space O and the conditional
probability density O : O × S → R+ , such that for every state s ∈ S, the probability density of
o ∈ O is O(o|s). A trajectory τ is a (possibly infinite) sequence of states, actions, and observations
sampled byP  interacting with the environment under a policy π. The return of a trajectory is defined
               ∞
as J(τ ) = i=0 γ t r(st , at ). We define the observed history ht = ⟨s0 , . . . st , ⟩ as the sequence of
states taken up to the current timestep t. In the partially observable case, the history is given by
observations and actions such that ht = ⟨o0 , a0 . . . ot−1 , at−1 , ot ⟩. In general, an optimal policy for
a POMDP depends on the full observed history ht , i.e. a ∼ π(·|ht ). However, most of the time, we
can substitute ht with sufficient statistics zt = S(ht ), namely the internal state of the policy.

2.1   P OLICY G RADIENT OF S TATEFUL P OLICIES
Wierstra et al. (2010) presented the first implementation of the policy gradient for recurrent policies.
This formulation is based on the likelihood ratio trick, i.e. the score function estimator. To obtain
this formulation, the authors consider a generic history-dependant policy ν(a|ht ), obtaining the
following gradient formulation
                                                   "T −1                           #
                                                    X
                               ∇θ J (νθ ) = E              ∇θ log νθ (at |ht )J(τ ) .                     (1)
                                               τ
                                                     t=0

Note that each ∇θ log νθ (at |ht ) term in equation 1 depends on the whole history ht at each timestep
t which makes BPTT necessary for stateful policies, such as RNNs. However, BPTT comes with
many issues. Firstly, this method is inherently sequential, limiting the utilization of potential gradi-
ent computations that could be performed in parallel. Secondly, when dealing with long trajectories,
the gradients may suffer from the problems of exploding or vanishing gradients, which can hinder
the learning process. Therefore, histories are often truncated, leading to a biased gradient estimate.
To solve these issues, we consider a different policy structure. Instead of looking at policies with an
internal state, we model our policy as a joint probability distribution over actions and next internal
states, i.e. (a, z ′ ) ∼ πθ (·|s, z). By considering a stochastic policy state transition, we derive a policy
gradient formulation that does not require the propagation of the policy gradient through time but
only depends on the local information available, i.e. the (extended) state transition.
Lemma 2.1. (Stochastic Stateful Policy Gradient) Let πθ (a, z ′ |s, z) be a parametric policy repre-
senting the joint probability density used to generate the action a and the next internal state z ′ , and
let τ̄ be the extended trajectory including the internal states. Then, the S2PG can be written as
                                             "T −1                                       #
                                              X
                          ∇θ J (πθ ) = E             ∇θ log πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )J(τ̄ ) .              (2)
                                        τ̄
                                              t=0


This lemma is straightforward to derive using the classical derivation of the policy gradient. The
complete proof can be found in Appendix A.1. In contrast to the gradient in equation 1, the gradient
in equation 2 depends on the information of the current timestep t, i.e. at , zt+1 ,st and zt . We can
deduce the following from Lemma 2.1:
The gradient of a stateful policy can be computed stochastically, by treating the internal state of
policy as a random variable. This modification results in an algorithm that does not require BPTT,
but only access to samples from z.
We allow to trade off speed and accuracy while keeping the gradient estimation unbiased.
While truncating the history to save computation time biases the gradient, estimating the expectation
with a finite amount of samples of z does not. In contrast to BPTT, this formulation supports par-
allel computation of the gradient, allowing to fully exploit the parallelization capabilities of modern


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   ...


                                                                            ...


                                                                                                                         ...
                            ...


                                                                                    ...


                                                                                                                                 ...
                    ...                                                      ...                                          ...
 ...


                                          ...


                                                                                              ...


                                                                                                                   ...
Figure 1: Stochastic computational graph illustrating, left to right, a comparison of a stateless policy, a stateful
policy trained with BPTT, and a stateful policy incorporating a stochastic internal state transition kernel. Deter-
ministic nodes (squares) allow for the passage of analytic gradients, while stochastic nodes (circles) interrupt
the deterministic paths. The input node to the graph is represented by θ. The blue lines indicate the determin-
istic paths for which analytic gradients are available for a specific action. For a detailed demonstration of how
stochastic node gradients are calculated compared to deterministic ones, refer to Figure 5 in Appendix B


automatic differentiation tools and parallel simulation environments. As the batch size for gradient
computation increases, the variance of our gradient estimator decreases, as shown later in Section 3.
We present an alternative perspective by explaining the core principle of Lemma 2.1 in the context
of stochastic computation graphs, as proposed by Schulman et al. (2015a). The key idea of Lemma
2.1 is to shield the deterministic path through internal states using a stochastic node, specifically our
stochastic internal state kernel. Figure 1 illustrates this by comparing analytic gradient paths of the
internal state z across different policies. While S2PG resolves issues with exploding and vanishing
gradients in long sequences, it introduces potential high variance due to the stochastic internal state
kernel. To address this, we propose compensating for the added variance by utilizing state-of-the-art
actor-critic methods while maintaining the same policy structure.

2.2    ACTOR -C RITIC M ETHODS FOR S TATEFUL P OLICIES
To define actor-critic methods, we need to extend the definitions of value functions into the stateful
policy setting. Let s be some state of the environment, z some state of the policy, a a given action,
and z ′ the next policy state. We define the state-action value function of our policy π(a, z ′ |s, z) as

          Qπ (s, z, a, z ′ ) = r(s, a) + γ E′
                                                               π ′ ′ ′ ′′
                                                                                   = r(s, a) + γ E′ V π (s′ , z ′ )

                                                         E
                                                        ′ ′′
                                                              Q (s , z , a , z )                                                (3)
                                                s    a ,z                                                s

with s′ ∼ P (·|s, a) and (a′ , z ′′ ) ∼ π(·|s′ , z ′ ). Furthermore, we define the state-value function as
                          V π (s, z) = E ′ Qπ (s, z, a, z ′ )               where (a, z ′ ) ∼ π(·|s, z) .

                                                                                                                                (4)
                                         a,z

Note that these definitions are equivalent to those of the value and action-value functions in a Markov
policy. Indeed, the value function V (s, z) is the expected discounted return achieved by the policy
π starting from the state s with initialRinternal state z. Thus, we can write the expected discounted
return of a stateful policy as J (π) = ι(s, z)V (s, z)dsdz with the initial state distribution ι(s, z).
The fundamental theorem of actor-critic algorithms is the Policy Gradient Theorem (PGT) Sutton
et al. (1999). This theorem lays the connection between value functions and policy gradients. Many
successful practical approaches are based on this idea and constitute a fundamental part of modern
RL. Using our stochastic internal state kernel and the definitions of value and action-value function
in equation 4 and 3, we can provide a straightforward derivation of the PGT for stateful policies.
Theorem 2.2. (Stateful Policy Gradient Theorem) Let ρπθ (s, z) be the occupancy measure and
Qπθ (s, z, a, z ′ ) be the value function of a parametric policy πθ (a, z ′ |s, z), then
                            Z Z                     Z Z
               ∇θ Jθ =                ρπθ (s, z)              ∇θ πθ (a, z ′ |s, z) Qπθ (s, z, a, z ′ ) dz ′ da dz ds,
                             S    Z                 A     Z

is the gradient of the stateful policy.

The proof follows the lines of the original PGT and is given in Appendix A.3. Differently from
Sutton et al. (1999), which considers only the discrete action setting, we provide the full derivation
for continuous state and action spaces.


                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2.2 elucidates the key idea of this work:
We learn a Q-function to capture the values of internal state transitions, compensating the
additional variance in the policy gradient estimate induced by our stochastic internal state transition
kernel. This approach enables the efficient training of stateful policies without the need for BPTT,
effectively reducing the computational time required to train stateful policies to that of stateless
policies. Figure 5 in Appendix B further illustrates and reinforces this concept.
While the PGT is a fundamental building block of actor-critic methods, some of the more successful
approaches, namely the Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) Schulman et al. (2015b) and the
PPO Schulman et al. (2017) algorithm, are based on the Performance Difference Lemma Kakade
& Langford (2002). We can leverage the simplicity of our policy structure to derive Lemma A.1,
a modified version of the original Lemma for stateful policies, allowing us to implement recurrent
versions of PPO and TRPO with S2PG. The Lemma and the proof can be found in Appendix A.4.

2.3   T HE D ETERMINISTIC L IMIT

The last important piece of policy gradient theory is the definition of the Deterministic Policy Gra-
dient Theorem (DPGT) Silver et al. (2014). This theorem can be seen as the deterministic limit of
the PGT for some class of probability distributions. DPGT provides the basis for many successful
actor-critic algorithms, such as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) Lillicrap et al. (2016)
and TD3 Fujimoto et al. (2018). We can derive the DPGT for our stateful policies:
                                                                                                                                ⊤
Theorem 2.3. (Stateful Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem) Let µθ (s, z) = µas,z,θ , µzs,z,θ


be a deterministic policy, where µas,z,θ = µaθ (s, z) represent the action model and µzs,z,θ = µzθ (s, z)
represents the internal state transition model. Then, under mild regularity assumptions, the policy
gradient of the stateful deterministic policy under ρµs,z
                                                        θ
                                                          = ρµθ (s, z) is
              Z
∇θ J (µθ )=             ρµ       a
                         s,z ∇θ µs,z ∇a Q
                           θ             µθ
                                            (s,z,a,µzs,z ) a=µa +∇θ µzs,z ∇z′ Qµθ (s,z,µas,z ,z ′ )|z′ =µzs,z dsdz.
                                                                             s,z
                  S,Z


The proof is given in Appendix A.5. It is important to notice that, while the deterministic policy
gradient theorem allows computing the gradient of a deterministic policy, it assumes the knowledge
of the Q-function for the deterministic policy µθ . However, to compute the Q-function of a given
policy it is necessary to perform exploration. Indeed, to accurately estimate the Q-values, actions
different from the deterministic policy needs to be taken. We want to stress that in this scenario, in-
stead of using the standard Q-function formulation, we use our definition of Q-functions for stateful
policies: therefore, we must also explore the internal state transition. This key concept explains why
in our formulation it is not necessary to perform BPTT even in the deterministic policy scenario.

2.4   T HE PARTIALLY O BSERVABLE S ETTING

Within this section, we introduce the POMDP settings used within this work and adapt the previous
theory accordingly. Therefore, we extend Lemma 2.1 as follows.
Corollary 2.4. The stateful policy gradient in partially observable environments is
                                                              "T −1                                         #
                                                               X
                            ∇θ J (πθ ) =             E                ∇θ log πθ (at , zt+1 |ot , zt )J(τ̄ ) .
                                                     τ̄
                                                 ot ∼O(st )    t=0


The proof is given in Appendix A.2. Corollary 2.4 offers a particularly intriguing perspective: If
we have knowledge of J(τ̄ ), it is possible to learn an internal state representation zt that effectively
encapsulates past information without looking back in time. In other words, it enables to learn the
compression of past information without explicitly considering previous time steps. This stands
in stark contrast to BPTT, where all past information is used to learn a belief of the current state.
Similarly to Corollary 2.4, we can extend Theorem 2.2
                          Z Z Z                                  Z Z
           ∇ θ Jθ =                     ρ   πθ
                                                 (s, z) O(o|s)               ∇θ πθ (a, z ′ |o, z) Qπθ (s, z, a, z ′ ) dads .   (5)
                            S   O   Z                                A   Z

It is important to note the distinction between the Q-function, which receives states, and the pol-
icy, which relies on observations only. While it is possible to learn a Q-function on observations


                                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


via bootstrapping, the task of temporal credit assignment in POMDPs is very challenging, often
requiring specialized approaches Igl et al. (2018); Lee et al. (2020a). This difficulty stems from the
following causality dilemma: On one hand, the policy can learn a condensed representation of the
history assuming accurate Q-value estimates. On the other hand, the Q-function can be learned us-
ing bootstrapping techniques assuming a reliable condensed representation of the history. Because
both, bootstrapping a Q-value function and learning a representation of the history, rely on mean-
ingful representations of the other, doing both at the same time often results in unstable training.
We show in Section 4 that it is possible to combine Monte-Carlo estimates with a critic that uses
observations only using PPO to learn in a true POMDP setting. However, we limit ourselves to the
setting with privileged information in the critic, as shown in Equation 5, for approaches that learn a
value function via bootstrapping.

3    VARIANCE A NALYSIS OF THE G RADIENT E STIMATORS
To theoretically assess our estimator’s variance, we provide the upper bounds of BPTT and S2PG in
the Gaussian policy setting with constant covariance matrix Σ. As done in previous work Papini et al.
(2022); Zhao et al. (2011), we define the variance of a random vector as the trace of its covariance
matrix (see equation equation 17 in Appendix A.6). Furthermore, for both gradient estimators, we
assume that the function approximator for the mean has the following structure
       µaθ (st , zt ) = fθ (st , zt ) µzθ (st , zt ) = ηθ (st , zt ) (for S2PG) zt+1 = ηθ (st , zt ) (for BPTT).   (6)
Hence, fθ (st , zt ) constitutes the mean of the Gaussian for both S2PG and BPTT, while ηθ (st , zt )
constitutes the internal transition function for BPTT and the mean of the Gaussian distribution of the
hidden state in S2PG. Figure 6 in Appendix D illustrates the policy structure. Additionally, Υ consti-
tutes the covariance matrix for the Gaussian distribution of the hidden state in S2PG. Our theoretical
analysis is based on prior work Papini et al. (2022); Zhao et al. (2011), which analyzes the variance
of a REINFORCE-style policy gradient estimator for stateless policies and a univariate Gaussian
distribution. We extend the latter to policy gradient estimators using BPTT and S2PG, and broaden
the analysis to the more general multivariate Gaussian case to allow investigation on arbitrarily large
action spaces. In the following, we derive upper bounds for the variance of the policy gradient for
BPTT and S2PG and highlight the behavior of each estimator in different regimes. Therefore, we
exploit the concept of the Frobenius norm of a matrix A F and consider the following assumptions
Assumption 3.1. r(s, a, s′ ) ∈ [−R, R] for R > 0 and ∀si , zi , ai
                  ∂                        ∂                       ∂
Assumption 3.2. ∂θ  fθ (si , zi ) F ≤ F, ∂θ  ηθ (si , zi ) F ≤ H, ∂z i
                                                                       fθ (si , zi ) F ≤ K ∀si , zi
                        ∂
Assumption 3.3.           η (s , z ) F ≤ Z
                       ∂zi θ i i
                                                 ∀si , zi

extended from Zhao et al. (2011). Then, the upper bound on the variance of BPTT is given by:
Theorem 3.4. (Variance Upper Bound BPTT) Let νθ (at |ht ) be a Gaussian policy of the form
N (at |µaθ (ht ), Σ) and let T be the trajectory length. Then, under the assumptions 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3,
the upper bound on the variance of the REINFORCE-style policy gradient estimate using BPTT is
                  h             i  R2 Σ−1 F (1 − γ T )2
               Var ∇θ JˆBPTT (Θ) ≤                      T F 2 + 2F HK Z̃ + H 2 K 2 Z̄ ,

                                                                                                                   (7)
                                       N (1 − γ)2               |       {z          }
                                                                                      ∆BPTT

                          PT −1 Pt−1                             PT −1  Pt−1                   2
                                              t−i−1                                   t−i−1
where we define Z̃ =         t=0      i=0 Z           and Z̄ =     t=0        i=0 Z                for brevity.

Similarly, the upper bound on the variance of S2PG is given by:
Theorem 3.5. (Variance Upper Bound S2PG) Let πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt ) be a Gaussian policy of the
form N (at , zt+1 |µθ (st , zt ), Σ, Υ) and let T be the trajectory length. Then, under the assumptions
3.1 and 3.2, the upper bound on the variance of the REINFORCE-style policy gradient estimate
using S2PG is
                      h             i  R2 Σ−1 F (1 − γ T )2                 ∥Υ−1 ∥
                   Var ∇θ JˆS2PG (Θ) ≤                      T F 2 + T H 2 · Σ−1 F .                                (8)
                                           N (1 − γ)2                       ∥    ∥F
                                                                    |      {z     }
                                                                                      ∆S2PG


The proof of both Theorems can be found in Appendix A.6.1 and A.6.2. When looking at Theorem
3.4 and 3.5, it can be seen that both bounds consist of a constant factor in front and a sum over


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview of tasks. Top: From left to right, Gym locomotion tasks with randomized masses and
hidden velocities, memory tasks with information hidden outside the observable area, and an ODE tasks where
the policy is blind and the parameters of the ODE and a FFN are learned. Bottom: POMDP Humanoid
walking/running task at 4.5 km/h respectively 9 km/h. The different humanoids should resemble – from left
to right – an adult, a teenager (∼12 years), a child (∼5 years), and a toddler (∼1-2 years). The target speed
is scaled for the smaller humanoid according to size. The type of humanoid is hidden to the policy. A single
policy is able to learn all gaits. On the right, random carry-weight task using the Atlas humanoid. The weight
is randomly sampled between 0.1 kg and 10 kg at the beginning of the episode and is hidden to the policy.

F 2 , which is a constant defining the upper bound on the gradient of fθ (si , zi ). Additionally, both
bounds introduce an additional term, which we consider as ∆. In fact, the latter is a factor defining
the additional variance added when compared to the variance of the stateless policy gradient. Hence,
for ∆ = 0, both bounds reduce to the bounds found by prior work Papini et al. (2022); Zhao et al.
(2011), when considering the univariate Gaussian case.
To understand the difference in the variance of both policy gradient estimators, we need to compare
∆BPTT and ∆S2PG . For S2PG, the additional variance is induced by T H 2 , which is the squared norm
of the gradient of internal transition kernel ηθ (si , zi ) w.r.t. θ, weighted by the ratio of the norms of
the covariance matrices. In contrast, Theorem 3.4 highlights the effect of backpropagating gradients
through a trajectory as ∆BPTT additionally depends on the constants Z̃ and Z̄. First of all, for H ≫ 1,
K ≫ 1 and Z̄ ≫ 1, we can observe that the quadratic term H 2 K 2 Z̄ 2 dominates ∆BPTT . Secondly,
we need to distinguish two cases: as detailed in Lemma A.2 in Appendix A.6.1, for Z ≥ 1, the
term H 2 K 2 Z̄ 2 grows exponentially with the length of the trajectories T , indicating that exploding
gradients cause exploding variance, while, for Z < 1, the gradients grows linearly with T . That
is, while the variance of BPTT heavily depends on the architecture used for ηθ (si , zi ), the variance
of S2PG depends much less on the architecture of the internal transition kernel allowing the use of
arbitrary functions for ηθ (si , zi ) at the potential cost of higher – yet not exploding – variance. Hence,
S2PG does not rely on specialized architectures that account for exploding gradients such as, GRUs
or LSTMs. We note that, for S2PG, we can define a tighter bound than the one in Theorem 3.5 under
the assumption of diagonal covariance matrices as shown in Lemma A.3 in Appendix A.6.2.

4    E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method across four different types of tasks. These tasks include MuJoCo Gym
tasks with partial observability, both with and without a privileged critic, which we consider as
Robust RL experiments, complex IL tasks with a policy under partial observability and a privileged
critic, a memory task, and a task in which we train the parameters of an ODE in a policy. Figure
2 provides an overview. To conduct the evaluation, we compare recurrent versions of three popular
RL algorithms—SAC, TD3, and PPO — that employ S2PG and BPTT. In Appendix C, we present
the algorithm boxes for all S2PG variants. Furthermore, we compare against stateless versions of
these algorithms, which use a window of the last 5 or 32 observations as the input to the policy. To
show the importance of a policy state, we include basic versions of these algorithms, where only the
observation is given to the policy (vanilla) and where the full state is given to the policy (oracle).


                                                      7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                1.0                                                         30                                                                          1.0

                0.8                                                         25                                                                          0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Log Training Time [h]
Normalized Return


                                                                                                                                        Normalized Return
                                                            Training Time [h]
                                                                            20                                                                                                                                        10
                0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                            15
                0.4                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                            10                                                                                                                                            1
                0.2                                                             5                                                                       0.2

                0.0           SAC               TD3                             0                   SAC                 TD3                             0.0                     PPO          SLAC                             PPO        SLAC
                          RS (Ours)             BPTT-5                                        BPTT-32                   Window-5                            Window-32                                  Vanilla                         Oracle

                              AtlasPOMDP-Carry                                                          HumanoidPOMDP-Walk                                                          HumanoidPOMDP-Run
                                                                                                                                                                            800
Cumulative Reward


                                                                                Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                                                                            Cumulative Reward
                    750
                                                                                                400                                                                         600
                    500
                                                                                                                                                                            400
                    250                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                            200
                      0
                                                                                                    0                                                                           0
                          0     500      1000     1500      2000                                        0       500    1000     1500    2000                                        0      5000                10000           15000
                                      Steps (×103)                                                                  Steps (×103)                                                              Steps (×103)
                                                      GAIL-BPTT-5                                           LSIQ-BPTT-5          GAIL-RS (Ours)                                         LSIQ-vanilla
                                                      GAIL-BPTT-32                                          LSIQ-BPTT-32         LSIQ-RS (Ours)                                         GAIL-vanilla
     Figure 3: Top [Results Robust RL]: Comparison of different RL agents on POMDP tasks using our stateful
     gradient estimator, BPTT with a truncation length of 5 and 32, the SLAC algorithm and stateless versions of
     the algorithms using a window of observation with length 5 and 32. The ”Oracle” approach is a vanilla version
     of the algorithm using full-state information. Results show the mean and 95% confidence interval of the nor-
     malized return and the training time needed for 1 million steps across all POMDP Gym tasks. Bottom [Results
     Imitation Learning]: Comparison of different versions of LS-IQ and GAIL on different imitation learning tasks
     under partial observability. Results show the mean and 95% confidence interval of the normalized return.



     To compare with specialized algorithms for POMDPs, we compare with SLAC Lee et al. (2020a).
     SLAC is a model-based approach that learns complex latent variable models that are used for the
     critic, while the policy takes a window of observations as input. Agents that utilize our stochastic
     policy transition kernel are denoted by the abbreviation “RS”, which stands for Recurrent Stochastic.
     We use Gaussian policies – for a and z ′ – in S2PG for all our experiments. The network architectures
     are presented in Appendix D. The initial internal state is always set to 0. When an algorithm has
     a replay buffer, we update its internal states when sampling transitions to resemble BPTT. For a
     fair comparison, all methods, except SLAC, are implemented in the same framework, MushroomRL
     D’Eramo et al. (2021). To properly evaluate the algorithms’ training time, we allocate 4 cores on
     our cluster and average the results and the training time over 10 seeds for all experiments.
     Robust RL Tasks. The first set of tasks includes the typical MuJoCo Gym locomotion tasks to test
     our approach in the RL setting. As done in Ni et al. (2022), we create partial observability by hiding
     information, specifically the velocity, from the state space. Furthermore, we randomize the mass of
     each link (c.f., Fig. 3). As described in Section 2.4, it is challenging to learn a stochastic policy state
     while using bootstrapping. Therefore, we use a privileged critic with a vanilla FFN for bootstrap-
     ping approaches. On the top-left of Figure 3, we show the cumulative returns and training times
     for a TD3 and a SAC-based agents. The overall results show that our approach has major computa-
     tional benefits w.r.t BPTT with long histories at the price of a slight drop in asymptotic performance
     for SAC and TD3. We found that our approach performs better on high-dimensional observation
     spaces – e.g., Ant and Humanoid – and worse on low-dimensional ones. A more detailed discus-
     sion about this is given in Appendix E.4. While the window approach has computational benefits
     compared to BPTT, it did not perform well with increased window length. The full experimental
     campaign, learning curves, and more detailed task descriptions are in Appendix E.4. In the second
     set of tasks, labeled as ’No Privileged Information’ tasks, we aim to showcase the effectiveness of
     our approach without using privileged information, combining the critic with Monte-Carlo rollouts.
     Employing the same tasks as in the privileged information setting but without mass randomization,
     our algorithm differs from BPTT by not utilizing a recurrent critic. The overall results, presented on
     the top-right of Figure 3, consistently demonstrate our method’s superior performance over BPTT.


                                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While the training time of PPO-BPTT with a truncation length of 5 is similar to our approach,
notable differences emerge with longer truncation lengths. Both BPTT and the window approach
exhibit worse performance with a longer history. Comparisons with specialized methods, such as
SLAC Lee et al. (2020a), highlight our method’s better performance and faster training. Further
results, runtimes, and discussions are provided in Appendix E.3.
Imitation Learning Tasks. The main results of our paper are presented at the bottom of Figure 3.
Here, we introduce two novel locomotion tasks. The first task is an Atlas locomotion task, where
a carry-weight is randomly sampled, but the weight is hidden from the policy. The second task
is a Humanoid locomotion task under dynamics randomization. The goal is to imitate a certain
kinematic trajectory – either walking or running – without observing the type of the humanoid. To
generate the different humanoids, we randomly sample a scaling factor. Then the links are scaled
linearly, the masses are scaled cubically, the inertias are scaled quintically, and the actuator torques
are scaled cubically w.r.t. the scaling factor. For both tasks, the policies only observe the positions
and the velocities of the joints. Forces are not observed. As can be seen in Figure 3, our approach
can be easily extended to complex IL tasks using GAIL and LS-IQ. We observe that in the IL setting
our approach is able to outperform the BPTT baselines even in terms of samples. All results are
given in Figure 14 and Figure 15 in Appendix E.5, where we also further discuss the results.
Memory Task. To show that our approach can encode longer his-              1.0
tory, we present two memory tasks. The first task is to move a point       0.8


                                                                         Success Rate
mass to a randomly sampled goal from a randomly sampled initial            0.6
state. The task is shown in Figure 2. While the goal is shown to the       0.4
policy at the beginning of the trajectory, it is hidden when the point     0.2
mass moves away from the initial state. As can be seen in Figure           0.0
4, our approach can outperform BPTT even for longer horizons. In               0    500     1000     1500
the second task, the positions of two doors in a maze are shown to                  Steps (×103)
the policy when close to the initial state and are hidden once going
further away. Figure 8 provides an example and the results. As can                            (Ours)
be seen, our approach outperforms BPTT on short horizons while
being slightly weaker on longer ones in the second task. We expect         Figure 4: Point mass results.
that the reason for the drop in performance is caused by the additional variance of our method in
combination with the additional absorbing states in the environment. The additional variance in our
policy leads to increased exploration, which increases the chances of touching the wall and reaching
an absorbing state. Nonetheless, our approach has a significantly shorter training time, analogously
to the results in Figure 3. All results and a more detailed discussion are given in Appendix E.1.
ODE Task. Until now, all experiments were based on RNNs as stateful policies. As mentioned be-
fore, our gradient estimator could be used to train the parameters of a policy containing an arbitrary
ODE. Such a policy is shown in Figure 2. This setting is particularly interesting to encode inductive
biases directly into policy. To provide a proof of concept, we successfully train a completely blind
policy on the Gym HalfCheetah and Ant tasks, where we used the ODE of a CPG to encode an
oscillation directly into the policy; a bias that is very popular in locomotion research. The ODE is
simulated using the Euler method. More results and discussions are provided in Appendix E.2.


5    C ONCLUSIONS

This work introduced S2PG, an alternative approach for estimating the gradient of stateful policies
without using BPTT by exploiting stochastic transition kernels. S2PG is easy to implement and
computationally efficient. We provide a complete foundation theory of this novel estimator, allowing
its implementation in state-of-the-art deep RL methods, and conduct a theoretical analysis on the
variance of S2PG and BPTT. While this method still cannot replace BPTT in every setting, in the
most challenging scenarios and in the IL settings, S2PG can considerably improve the performance
and learning speed. Unfortunately, while S2PG can replace BPTT in the computation of the policy
gradient, it is still not able to properly learn a value function and an internal policy state at the same
time in the partially observable setting. While we show that our approach works well when the
critic is estimated with Monte-Carlo rollouts, we limit ourselves to the setting where the critic has
privileged information for bootstrapping methods. We plan to investigate solutions to this issue in the
future. Finally, we will investigate how our approach scales using massively parallel environments.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Calculations for this research were conducted on high-performance computers Lichtenberg and
CLAIX at the NHR Centers NHR4CES at TU Darmstadt and RWTH Aachen (project numbers
p0020307 & p0021606). This work was supported by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under
grant number SE1042/41-1. Research presented in this paper has been partially supported by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the subproject “Modeling and
exploration of the operational area, design of the AI assistance as well as legal aspects of the use of
technology” of the collaborative KIARA project (grant no. 13N16274).

R EFERENCES
Firas Al-Hafez and Jochen Steil. Redundancy resolution as action bias in policy search for robotic
  manipulation. In CoRL 2021.
Firas Al-Hafez, Davide Tateo, Oleg Arenz, Guoping Zhao, and Jan Peters. LS-IQ: Implicit reward
  regularization for inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceeding of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations, Kigali, Rwanda, May 2023.
Bram Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. In Proceeding of the Fifteenth
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
  December 2001.
Jonathan Baxter and Peter L. Bartlett. Infinite-horizon policy-gradient estimation. Jounral of Artifi-
  cial Intelligence Research, 15, 2001.
Guillaume Bellegarda and Auke Ijspeert. Cpg-rl: Learning central pattern generators for quadruped
  locomotion. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):12547–12554, 2022a.
Guillaume Bellegarda and Auke Ijspeert. Visual cpg-rl: Learning central pattern generators for
  visually-guided quadruped navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14400, 2022b.
Luigi Campanaro, Siddhant Gangapurwala, Daniele De Martini, Wolfgang Merkt, and Ioannis
  Havoutis. Cpg-actor: Reinforcement learning for central pattern generators. In Towards Au-
  tonomous Robotic Systems: 22nd Annual Conference, TAROS 2021, Lincoln, UK, September
  8–10, 2021, Proceedings, pp. 25–35. Springer, 2021.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. On the properties
  of neural machine translation: Encoder–decoder approaches. In Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth
  Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translatio, pp. 103–11, Doha, Qatar,
  October 2014.
Younggil Cho1, Sajjad Manzoor, and Youngjin Choi. Adaptation to environmental change using
  reinforcement learning for robotic salamander. Intelligent Service Robotics, 12:209 – 2018, June
  2019.
CoRL 2021. Proceeding of the Conference on Robot Learning, London, United Kingdom, Novem-
  ber 2021.
Carlo D’Eramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Mushroomrl:
  Simplifying reinforcement learning research. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:1–5,
  2021.
Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In ICML 2022.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with
  importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In ICML 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In ICML 2018.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML 2018.
Nicolas Heess, Jonathan J Hunt, Timothy P Lillicrap, and David Silver. Memory-based control with
  recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.04455, 2015.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Proceeding of the
  Thirtieth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Barcelona, Spain, December
  2016.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735 – 1780, 1997.
ICML 2018. Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden,
  July 2018.
ICML 2022. Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Baltimore, Mary-
  land, July 2022.
Maximilian Igl, Luisa Zintgraf, Tuan Anh Le, Frank Wood, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep variational
 reinforcement learning for pomdps. In ICML 2018.
Auke Jan Ijspeert. Central pattern generators for locomotion control in animals and robots: a review.
  Neural networks, 21(4):642–653, 2008.
Auke Jan Ijspeert, Alessandro Crespi, Dimitri Ryczko, and Jean-Marie Cabelguen. From swimming
  to walking with a salamander robot driven by a spinal cord model. science, 315(5817):1416–1420,
  2007.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Sydney, Australia, July 2002.
Alex X Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic latent actor-critic:
  Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model. In Proceeding of the Thirty-fourth
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Virtual, December 2020a.
Jonathan N Lee, Annie Xie, Aldo Pacchiano, Yash Chandak, Chelsea Finn, Ofir Nachum, and Emma
  Brunskill. Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14892, 2023.
Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 5(47):eabc5986, 2020b.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Pro-
  ceeding of the International Conference on Learning Representations, San Juan, Puerto Rico,
  May 2016.
Puze Liu, Davide Tateo, Haitham Bou-Ammar, and Jan Peters. Robot reinforcement learning on the
  constraint manifold. In CoRL 2021.
Lingheng Meng, Rob Gorbet, and Dana Kulić. Memory-based deep reinforcement learning for
  pomdps. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
  and Systems, pp. 5619–5626, Virtual, September 2021.
Takahiro Miki, Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hut-
  ter. Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the wild. Science Robotics,
  7(62):eabk2822, 2022.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free rl can be a
  strong baseline for many pomdps. In ICML 2022, pp. 16691–16723.
Matteo Papini, Matteo Pirotta, and Marcello Restelli. Smoothing policies and safe policy gradients.
 Machine Learning, 111(11):4081–4137, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real trans-
  fer of robotic control with dynamics randomization. In Proceeding of the IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Brisbane, Australia, May 2018.
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asym-
  metric actor critic for image-based robot learning. In 14th Robotics: Science and Systems, RSS
  2018. MIT Press Journals, 2018.
Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Bike Zhang, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra Malik, and Koushil Sreenath.
   Learning humanoid locomotion with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03381, 2023.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Deirdre Quillen, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In Proceeding of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, July 2019.
John Schulman, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, and Pieter Abbeel. Gradient estimation using
  stochastic computation graphs. In Proceeding of the Twenty-ninth Conference on Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, Montreal, Canada, December 2015a.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille,
  France, July 2015b.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv, August 2017.
Haojie Shi, Bo Zhou, Hongsheng Zeng, Fan Wang, Yueqiang Dong, Jiangyong Li, Kang Wang, Hao
  Tian, , and Max Q.-H. Meng. Reinforcement learning with evolutionary trajectory generator: A
  general approach for quadrupedal locomotiong. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):
  3085 – 3092, April 2022.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. De-
  terministic policy gradient algorithms. In Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning, Beijing, China, June 2014.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Proceeding of the Thirteen Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12, Denver, Colorado, USA, November 1999.
Daan Wierstra, Alexander Förster, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent policy gradients.
  Logic Journal of the IGPL, 18(5):620–634, 2010.
Zhihan Yang and Hai Nguyen. Recurrent off-policy baselines for memory-based continuous control.
  In Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop, NeurIPS, Sydney, Australia, December 2021.
Marvin Zhang, Zoe McCarthy, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning deep
 neural network policies with continuous memory states. In Proceeding of the IEEE International
 Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 520–527, Stockholm, Sweden, May 2016.
Tingting Zhao, Hirotaka Hachiya, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Analysis and improvement of
  policy gradient estimation. In Proceeding of the Twenty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, Granada, Spain, December 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS
Within this section, we refer to the following regularity conditions on the MDP taken from form
Silver et al. (2014):
Regularity Conditions A.1. — ι(s, z), P (s′ |s, a), ∇a P (s′ |s, a), πθ (a, z ′ |s, z), ∇θ πθ (a, z ′ |s, z),
µθ (s, z), ∇θ µθ (s, z), r(s, a), ∇a r(s, a), ι(s) are continuous in all parameters and variables
s, a, z, θ.
Regularity Conditions A.2. — There exists a b and L such that sups ι(s) < b, sups′ ,a,s p(s′ |s, a) <
b, supa,s r(s, a) < b, sups′ ,a,s ∥∇a p(s′ |s, a)∥ < L, and supa,s ∥∇a r(s, a)∥ < L.

A.1    S TATEFUL P OLICY G RADIENT WITH THE S CORE F UNCTION
Proof. Let
                                                            T
                                                            X −1
                                                 J(τ̄ ) =          γ t r(st , at ),
                                                             t=0

be the discounted return of a trajectory τ̄ = ⟨s0 , z0 , a1 , . . . sT −1 , zT −1 , aT −1 , sT , zT ⟩. Differently
from the standard policy gradient, we define the trajectory as a path of both the environment and the
policy state. The probability of a given trajectory can be written as
                                                     −1
                                                    TY
                           p(τ̄ |θ) = ι(s0 , z0 )          P (st+1 |st , at )πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt ).
                                                    t=0


The continuity of ι(s0 , z0 ), P (st+1 |st , at ), πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt ), ∇θ πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt ) implies that
p(τ̄ |θ) and ∇θ p(τ̄ |θ) are continue as well. Hence, we can apply the Leibniz rule to exchange
the order of integration and derivative, allowing us to follow the same steps as the classical policy
gradient                                 Z                        Z
                          ∇θ J (πθ ) = ∇θ           p(τ̄ |θ)J(τ̄ )dτ̄ =          ∇θ p(τ̄ |θ)J(τ̄ )dτ̄ .

Applying the likelihood ratio trick, we obtain
                                  Z
                   ∇θ J (πθ ) =       p(τ̄ |θ)∇θ log p(τ̄ |θ)J(τ̄ )dτ̄ = E [∇θ log p(τ̄ |θ)J(τ̄ )] .                                (9)
                                                                                      τ̄


To obtain the REINFORCE-style estimator, we note that
                                                 T
                                                 X −1                                      T
                                                                                           X −1
             log p(τ̄ |θ) = log ι(s0 , z0 ) +           log P (st+1 |st , at ) +                  log πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt ) .
                                                 t=0                                       t=0


The gradient ∇θ p(τ̄ |θ) only depends on the policy and not the initial state distribution or the state
transitions. Therefore, we can write the stateful policy gradient as
                                                 "T −1                                                    #
                                                  X
                            ∇θ J (πθ ) = E               ∇θ log πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )J(τ ) ,                                    (10)
                                            τ
                                                  t=0

concluding the proof.

A.2    S TATEFUL P OLICY G RADIENT IN PARTIALLY O BSERVABLE E NVIRONMENTS
Proof. The derivation follows exactly the one for the fully observable scenario, with the difference
that we need to deal with the observations instead of states. The probability of observing a trajec-
tory τ̄ in a POMDP is
                                                  −1
                                                 TY
              p(τ̄ |θ) = ι(s0 , z0 )O(o0 |s0 )          O(ot+1 |st+1 )P (st+1 |st , at )πθ (at , zt+1 |ot , zt ).
                                                 t=0

Computing the term ∇θ log p(τ̄ |θ) and replacing it into equation 9 we obtain
                                                 "T −1                                                    #
                                                  X
                            ∇θ J (πθ ) = E               ∇θ log πθ (at , zt+1 |ot , zt )J(τ̄ ) ,
                                            τ̄
                                                  t=0

using the same simplification as done in equation 10, concluding the proof.


                                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3     S TATEFUL P OLICY G RADIENT T HEOREM

Proof. We can write the objective function as follows


                            Jθ =             E            [Vπθ (s0 , z0 )] =         E         [Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )] .
                                     (s0 ,z0 )∼ι                                (s0 ,z0 )∼ι,
                                                                               (a0 ,z1 )∼πθ


We can now compute the gradient as


           ∇ θ Jθ = ∇ θ              E               [Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )]
                              (s0 ,z0 )∼ι,
                             (a0 ,z1 )∼πθ
                             Z Z Z Z
                   = ∇θ                                   ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 .
                                 S   Z           A    Z



The regularity conditions A.1 imply that Qπθ (s, z ′ , a, z) and ∇θ Qπθ (s, z ′ , a, z) are continuous
functions of θ, s, a, and z. Further, the compactness of S, A and Z implies that for any θ,
∥∇θ Qπθ (s, z ′ , a, z)∥ and ∥∇θ πθ (a, z ′ |s, z)∥ are bounded functions of s, a and z. These conditions
are required to exchange integration and derivatives, as well as the order of integration throughout
the this proof. Hence, the gradient can be written as

                       Z Z Z Z
           ∇ θ Jθ =                              ∇θ [ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , a1 )] da0 dz1 ds0 dz0
                        S    Z       A       Z
                       Z Z Z Z
                   =                             ι(s0 , z0 )∇θ πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )
                        S    Z       A       Z
                       + ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )∇θ Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 .


We now focus on the gradient of the Q-function w.r.t. the policy parameters. Using the following
relationship
                                                                           Z
                Qπθ (st , zt , at , zt+1 ) = r(st , at ) + γ                       P (st+1 |st , at )V πθ (st+1 , zt+1 )dst+1 .
                                                                               S



We can write
                                                                Z
           ∇θ Qπθ (st , zt , at , zt+1 ) = ∇θ r(st , at ) + γ       P (st+1 |st , at )V πθ (st+1 , zt+1 )dst+1
                                                                  S
                                            Z
                                         =γ     P (st+1 |st , at )∇θ V πθ (st+1 , zt+1 )dst+1 .
                                                             S


Similarly, we can compute the gradient of the value function as
                             Z Z
      ∇θ V πθ (st , zt ) =                       ∇θ πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )Qπθ (st , zt , at , zt+1 )
                                A    Z
                                     Z
                             +γ              πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )P (st+1 |st , at )∇θ V πθ (st+1 , zt+1 ) dst+1 dat dzt+1 .
                                         S

We now focus again on ∇θ Jθ . Using the linearity of integrals, we write
                     Z Z Z Z
          ∇θ Jθ =               ι(s0 , z0 )∇θ πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0
                        S    Z       A       Z
                         Z Z Z Z
                       +           ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )∇θ Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 .
                            S    Z       A       Z



                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, using the expressions for ∇θ V πθ and ∇θ Qπθ , we can expand the second term of the previous
sum for one step (limited to one step to highlight the structure)
          Z Z Z Z
                       ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z0 |s0 , z0 )∇θ Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0
          S     Z    A     Z
                 Z Z Z Z Z
              =γ                   ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z0 |s0 )P (s1 |s0 , a0 )∇θ V πθ (s1 , z1 )ds1 da0 dz1 ds0 dz0
                   S Z A Z S
                 Z Z Z Z Z
              =γ                   ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )P (s1 |s0 , a0 )·
                   S Z A Z S
                    Z Z
                 ·        ∇θ πθ (a1 , z2 |s1 , z1 )Qπθ (s1 , z1 , a1 , z2 )
                     A Z
                       Z
                    +γ    πθ (a1 , z2 |s1 , z1 )P (s2 |s1 , a1 )∇θ V πθ (s2 , z2 )ds2 da1 dz2 ds1 da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 .
                               S



By splitting the integrals again and rearranging the terms, we obtain
Z Z Z Z
             ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )∇θ Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 =
  S   Z    A     Z
    Z Z Z Z Z
  γ                   ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )P (s1 |s0 , a0 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 ·
     S Z A Z S
        Z Z
     ·        ∇θ πθ (a1 , z2 |s1 , z1 )Qπθ (s1 , z1 , a1 , z2 )da1 dz2 ds1
         A Z
           Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
         2
     +γ                                     ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )P (s1 |s0 , a0 )πθ (a1 , z2 |s1 , z1 )P (s2 |s1 , a1 )·
                 S   Z     A   Z   S       A     Z    S
               · ∇θ V πθ (s2 , z2 )ds2 da1 dz2 ds1 da0 dz1 ds0 dz0 .


To proceed and simplify the notation, we introduce the notion of t-step transition density Trπt θ , i.e.
the density function of transitioning to a given state and policy state in t steps under the stochastic
policy πθ . In particular, we can write


                π
           Tr0 θ (s0 , z0 ) = ι(s0 , z0 ),
                              Z Z Z
             π
           Tr1 θ (s1 , z1 ) =              ι(s0 , z0 )πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )P (s1 |s0 , a0 )ds0 dz0 da0 ,
                                       A    Z    S
                                   Z                                 t−1
                                                                     Y
                π
           Trt θ (st , zt ) =                          ι(s0 , z0 )         πθ (ak , zk+1 |sk , zk )P (sk+1 |sk , ak )dsk dzk dak .
                                   S t ×Z t ×At                      k=0



Now we can put everything together, expanding the term containing ∇θ V πθ an infinite amount of
times
                     Z Z                    Z Z
                             π
      ∇ θ Jθ =             Tr0 θ (s0 , z0 )         ∇θ πθ (a0 , z1 |s0 , z0 )Qπθ (s0 , z0 , a0 , z1 )da0 dz1 ds0 dz0
                      S Z                    A Z
                        Z Z                      Z Z
                                   πθ
                     +γ         Tr1 (s1 , z1 )          ∇θ πθ (a1 , z2 |s1 , z1 )Qπθ (s1 , z1 , a1 , z2 )da1 dz2 ds1 dz1
                          S Z                      A Z
                          Z Z                      Z Z
                                    π
                     + γ2         Tr2 θ (s2 , z2 )       ∇θ πθ (a2 , z3 |s2 , z2 )Qπθ (s2 , z2 , a2 , z3 )da2 dz3 ds2 dz2
                           S Z                      A Z
                          Z Z                      Z Z
                                    π
                     + γ3         Tr3 θ (s3 , z3 )       ∇θ πθ (a3 , z4 |s3 , z3 )Qπθ (s3 , z3 , a3 , z4 )da3 dz4 ds3 dz4
                               S   Z                         A   Z
                   + ...
                   ∞
                   X     Z Z
                               π
                 =    γt     Trt θ (st , zt )·
                     t=0       S       Z
                                           Z Z
                                       ·             ∇θ πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )Qπθ (st , zt , at , zt+1 )dat dzt+1 dst dzt .
                                           A    Z



                                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Exchanging the integral and the series we obtain
                                ∞
                            Z Z X
                                               π
            ∇θ Jθ =                     γ t Trt θ (st , zt )·
                            S   Z t=0
                                          Z Z
                                                   ∇θ πθ (at , zt+1 |st , zt )Qπθ (st , zt , at , zt+1 )dat dzt+1 dst dzt .
                                           A   Z

Now, with the definition of the occupancy metric
                                                                        ∞
                                                                        X                π
                                                    ρπθ (s, z) =               γ t Trt θ (s, z),
                                                                         t=0


and by relabelling st , zt , at , zt+1 into s, z, a and z ′ we obtain
                                Z Z                    Z Z
                 ∇θ Jθ =                  ρπθ (s, z)                ∇θ πθ (a, z ′ |s, z) Qπθ (s, z, a, z ′ )da dz ′ ds dz.
                                 S    Z                 A       Z


A.4     S TATEFUL P ERFORMANCE D IFFERENCE L EMMA

This lemma is particularly useful because it allows using the advantage function Aq computed for
an arbitrary policy q to evaluate the performance of our parametric policy πθ . As q is an arbitrary
policy not depending on θ, the left-hand side of the Performance difference lemma can be used as a
surrogate loss. This lemma allows to easily derive S2PG version of PPO and TRPO.
Lemma A.1. (Performance Difference Lemma for Stateful Policies) For any stateful policy π
and q in an arbitrary MDP, the difference of performance of the two policies in terms of expected
discounted return can be computed as
                                                                         "∞                                      #
                                                                          X         t     q
                                     J (π) − J (q) =               E             γ A (st , zt , at , zt+1 )
                                                             τ̄ ∼π,P
                                                                          t=0


Proof. Starting from the lemma
                                                                        "∞                                      #
                                                                         X
                                     J (π) − J (q) =            E                γ t Aq (st , zt , at , zt+1 ) ,
                                                            τ̄ ∼π,P
                                                                         t=0

we can rewrite the advantage as
                      Aq (st , zt , at , zt+1 ) =       E          [r(st , at ) + γV q (st+1 , zt+1 ) − V q (st , zt )] .
                                                    st+1 ∼P


We can then manipulate the right-hand side as follows
                "∞                                 #                    "∞                                                                             #
                 X      t   q
                                                                         X      t                           q                              q
        E             γ A (st , zt , at , zt+1 ) =             E               γ (r(st , at ) + γV (st+1 , zt+1 ) − V (st , zt ))
      τ̄ ∼π,P                                              τ̄ ∼π,P
                t=0                                                     t=0
                                                                        "∞                          #
                                                                         X
                                                       =       E               γ t r(st , at )
                                                           τ̄ ∼π,P
                                                                        t=0
                                                                         "∞                                          ∞
                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                          X             t+1     q
                                                                                                                     X         t       q
                                                           +        E               γ         V (st+1 , zt+1 ) −           γ V (st , zt )
                                                               τ̄ ∼π,P
                                                                           t=0                                       t=0
                                                                                    "∞                           ∞
                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                     X          t       q
                                                                                                                 X         t       q
                                                       =J (π) +            E                  γ V (st , zt ) −         γ V (st , zt )
                                                                        τ̄ ∼π,P
                                                                                        t=1                      t=0
                                                                                         q
                                                       =J (π) +            E        [V (s)]
                                                                        (s,z)∼ι

                                                       =J (π) − J (q),

concluding the proof.


                                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5     S TATEFUL D ETERMINISTIC P OLICY G RADIENT T HEOREM

Proof. The proof proceeds in a very similar fashion as the one for the standard DPGT. We start by
computing the gradient of a value function at an arbitrary state s and an arbitrary policy state z


      ∇θ V µθ (s, z) =∇θ Qµθ (s, z, µaθ (s, z), µzθ (s, z))
                                               Z
                     =∇θ r(s, µaθ (s, z)) +         γP (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z))V µθ (s′ , µzθ (s, z))ds′
                                                 S
                                                                    Z
                          a
                     =∇θ µθ (s, z)∇a r(s, a)|a=µaθ (s,z) + ∇θ           γP (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z))V µθ (s′ , µzθ (s, z))ds′
                                                                      S
                                                               Z
                           a
                     =∇θ µθ (s, z)∇a r(s, a)|a=µθ (s,z) +
                                                     a             γ P (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z))∇θ V µθ (s′ , µzθ (s, z))
                                                                S

                      + ∇θ µaθ (s, z)∇a P (s′ |s, a)|a=µaθ (s,z) V (s, µzθ (s, z)) ds′
                                                       Z
                     =∇θ µaθ (s, z)∇a r(s, a) +          γP (s′ |s, a)V µθ (s′ , µzθ (s, z))ds′
                                                                      S                                                a=µa
                                                                                                                          θ
                                                                                                                            (s,z)
                                                Z
                           + ∇θ µzθ (s, z)               γP (s′ |s, a)|a=µaθ (s,z) ∇z′ V µθ (s′ , z ′ )ds′
                                                     S                                                             z ′ =µz
                                                                                                                         θ
                                                                                                                           (s,z)
                               Z
                           +        γP (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z)) ∇θ V µθ (s′ , z ′ ) z′ =µz (s,z) ds′ .                                   (11)
                                S                                                          θ



Now, we can observe that
                                                              Z
                     ∇z′ Qµθ (s, z, a, z ′ ) = ∇z′ r(s, a) +      γP (s′ |s, a)V µθ (s′ , z ′ )ds′
                                                                S
                                               Z
                                             =        ′
                                                 γP (s |s, a)∇z′ V µθ (s′ , z ′ )ds′ .                                              (12)
                                                          S


Substituting equation 12 into equation 11 yields
                    ∇θ V µθ (s, z) =∇θ µaθ (s, z)∇a Qµθ (s, z, a, µzθ (s, z))|a=µa (s,z)
                                                                                                      θ

                                            + ∇θ µzθ (s, z) ∇z′ Qµθ (s, z, µaθ (s, z), z ′ ) z′ =µz (s,z)
                                                                                                  θ
                                              Z
                                            +    γP (s |s, µθ (s, z)) ∇θ V (s , z ) z′ =µz (s,z) ds′ .
                                                        ′    a              µθ     ′  ′
                                                                                                                                    (13)
                                                 S                                                        θ



To simplify the notation we write
                       Gµθ (s, z) =∇θ µaθ (s, z)∇a Qµθ (s, z, a, µzθ (s, z))|a=µa (s,z)
                                                                                                     θ

                                           + ∇θ µzθ (s, z) ∇z′ Qµθ (s, z, µaθ (s, z), z ′ ) z′ =µz (s,z) .
                                                                                                           θ


Therefore, equation 13 can be written compactly as
                                                         Z
              ∇θ V µθ (s, z) = Gµθ (s, z) +                      γP (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z)) ∇θ V µθ (s′ , z ′ ) z′ =µz (s,z) ds′ .      (14)
                                                             S                                                     θ



Using equation 14, we can write the gradient of the objective function as
                  Z Z
  ∇θ J (µθ ) =∇θ        ι(s0 , z0 )V µθ (s0 , z0 )ds0 dz0
                   S Z
               Z Z
             =      ι(s0 , z0 )Gµθ (s0 , z0 )ds0 dz0
                S Z
                 Z Z               Z
               +       ι(s0 , z0 )    γP (s1 |s0 , µaθ (s0 , z0 )) ∇θ V µθ (s1 , z1 )|z1 =µz (s0 ,z0 ) ds1 ds0 dz0 . (15)
                                                                                                               θ
                       S    Z                S


Before continuing the proof, we need to notice that the variables s′ and z ′ are conditionally indepen-
dent if the previous states s and z are given. Furthermore, it is important to notice that, even if the

                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


policy state z is a deterministic function of the previous state and previous policy state, the variable
z is still a random variable if we consider its value after more than two steps of the environment,
as its value depends on a set of random variables, namely the states encountered during the path.
Using these two assumptions, we extract the joint occupancy measure of s and z. Unfortunately, to
proceed with the proof we need to abuse the notation (as commonly done in engineering) and use
the Dirac’s delta distribution δ(x).
Due to conditional independence, we can write the joint transition probability under the deterministic
policy µθ as

                 P µθ (s′ , z ′ |s, z) = P µθ (s′ |s, z)δ µθ (z ′ |s, z) = P (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z))δ(z ′ − µzθ (s, z)),

with P µθ (s′ |s, z) = P (s′ |s, µaθ (s, z)) and δ µθ (z ′ |s, z) = δ(z ′ − µzθ (s, z)).
Now we can write
                                                    Z                                        Z
                      P µθ (s′ |s, z) =                     P µθ (s′ , z ′ |s, z)dz ′ =              P µθ (s′ |s, z)δ µθ (z ′ |s, z)dz ′ .
                                                    Z                                            Z


We introduce, as done for the PGT, the t-steps transition density Trµt θ under the deterministic policy
µθ
                      µ
                 Tr0 θ (s0 , z0 ) = ι(s0 , z0 ),
                                    Z Z
                   µ
                 Tr1 θ (s1 , z1 ) =         ι(s0 , z0 )P µθ (s1 |s0 , z0 )δ µθ (z1 |s0 , z0 )ds0 dz0 ,
                                                S       Z
                                            Z                              t−1
                                                                           Y
                      µ
                  Trt θ (st , zt ) =                         ι(s0 , z0 )         P µθ (sk+1 |sk , zk )δ µθ (zk+1 |sk , zk )dsk dzk .
                                            S t ×Z t                       k=0


Using the previously introduced notation, we can expand equation 15, by recursion, infinitely many
times
  Z Z                                                Z Z
         ι(s0 , z0 ) Gµθ (s0 , z0 ) + ι(s0 , z0 )             γP µθ (s1 , z1 |s0 , z0 )∇θ V µθ (s1 , z1 )ds1 dz1 ds0 dz0
   S   Z                                               S Z
         Z Z                                                   Z Z Z Z
                     µθ
       =          Tr0 (s0 , z0 )Gµθ (s0 , z0 )ds0 dz0 +                          γι(s0 , z0 )P µθ (s1 , z1 |s0 , z0 )·
           S Z                                                   S Z S Z
                                 Z Z
          · Gµθ (s1 , z1 ) +             γP µθ (s2 , z2 |s1 , z1 )∇θ V µθ (s2 , z2 )ds2 dz2 ds1 dz1
                                   S Z
         Z Z                                                   Z Z
                     µθ                                                      µ
       =          Tr0 (s0 , z0 )Gµθ (s0 , z0 )ds0 dz0 +                γTr1 θ (s1 , z1 )Gµθ (s1 , z1 )ds1 dz1
           S Z                                                   S Z
            Z
          +            γ 2 ι(s0 , z0 )P µθ (s1 , z1 |s0 , z0 )P µθ (s2 , z2 |s1 , z1 )∇θ V µθ (s2 , z2 )ds2 dz2 ds1 dz1 ds0 dz0
                 S 3 ×Z 3
           ∞ Z Z
           X                        µ
       =                      γ t Trt θ (st , zt )Gµθ (st , zt )dst dzt .                                                                            (16)
           t=0    S       Z


Now, we notice that the occupancy measure is defined as
                                                                             ∞
                                                                             X               µ
                                                             ρµθ (s, z) =              γ t Trt θ (st , zt ) .
                                                                                 t=0


Therefore, by exchanging the order of series and integration we obtain:
                                       ∞
                                   Z Z X
                                                               µ
           ∇θ J (µθ ) =                             γ t Trt θ (s, z)Gµθ (s, z)dsdz
                                    S   Z t=0
                                   Z Z
                               =            ρµθ (s, z) ∇θ µaθ (s, z)∇a Qµθ (s, z, a, µzθ (s, z))|a=µa (s,z)
                                                                                                                                θ
                                    S   Z

                                                                    +∇θ µzθ (s, z) ∇z′ Qµθ (s, z, µaθ (s, z), z ′ ) z′ =µz (s,z)                 ,
                                                                                                                                       θ

which concludes the proof.


                                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6     VARIANCE A NALYSIS OF P OLICY G RADIENT E STIMATES
In the following section, we define the variance of a random vector A = (A1 , . . . , Al )⊤ as in Papini
et al. (2022); Zhao et al. (2011)
                                                  h                        i
                                     Var[A] = tr E (A − E [A])(A − E [A])⊤                                                 (17)
                                                      l
                                                      X        h                i
                                              =               E (Am − E [Am ])2                                            (18)
                                                      m=1


Using this definition, we can compute the variance of the policy gradient estimators for stateful
policies using BPTT and S2PG.

A.6.1     BACKPROPAGATION T HROUGH T IME
Proof. We consider a policy of the following form

                                                         1            1
      ν(at |ht , Θ) = N (at |µθ (ht ), Σ) = p                    exp − (at − µθ (ht ))⊤ Σ−1 (at − µθ (ht )) ,              (19)
                                                        2π d |Σ|      2

where Θ = {θ, Σ}. For a fixed covariance Σ, a REINFORCE-style gradient estimator for this policy
depends on the following gradient
                        T
                        X −1                                   T
                                                               X −1
             f (τ ) =          ∇θ log π(at |ht , Θ) =                 ∇θ µθ (ht )∇mt log N (at |mt , Σ)|mt =µθ (ht )
                        t=0                                    t=0
                        T
                        X −1
                               ∇θ µθ (ht ) Σ−1 (at − mt ) |mt =µθ (ht ) .

                   =
                        t=0


Given the total discounted return of a trajectory
                                                              T
                                                              X −1
                                           G(τ ) =                   γ t−1 r(st , at , st+1 ) ,
                                                              t=0

the variance of the empirical gradient approximator is given by
                                           h
                                               ˆ
                                                   i   1
                                        Var ∇θ J(Θ)  =   Var [G(τ )f (τ )] ,                                               (20)
                                                       N
where N is the number of trajectories used for the empirical gradient estimator. Therefore, we can
just focus on Var [G(τ )f (τ )]. Using equation 18, we can define an upper bound on Var [G(τ )f (τ )]
                                              l
                                              X
                                                       E (Gfi )2

                    Var [G(τ )f (τ )] ≤
                                              i=1
                                             h         i
                                          = E G2 f ⊤ f
                                              Z                 T −1
                                                                                                  !2
                                                                X          t−1
                                          =           p(τ )            γ         r(st , at , st+1 )
                                                  τ             t=0
                                                      T −1
                                                                                                                   !⊤
                                                      X                            −1
                                              ·               ∇θ µθ (ht ) Σ             (at − mt ) |mt =µθ (ht )
                                                      t=0
                                                        −1
                                                      T
                                                                                                                   !
                                                      X                            −1
                                              ·               ∇θ µθ (ht ) Σ             (at − mt ) |mt =µθ (ht )       .
                                                      t=0

Let ξt = Σ−1 (at − mt ) where at ∼ N (mt , Σ), then ξt (mt ) are random variables drawn
from a Gaussian distribution N (0, Σ−1 ). Hence, we define p(ξt ) = N (0, Σ−1 ) and treat
ξt as an independent random variable sampled from p(ξt ). For compactness of notation,
                                ⊤               QT
we define ξ = [ξ0 , . . . , ξT ] , where p(ξ) =   t=0 p(ξt ). In a similar way we define


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   QT
p(τ |ξ) = ι(s0 )      t=0 P (st+1 |st , ξt ). Using this notation, we can write


                      Z                                T −1
                                                                                             !2   T −1
                                                                                                                          !⊤     T −1
                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                       X          t−1
                                                                                                  X                              X
Var [G(τ )f (τ )] ≤             p(ξ) p(τ |ξ)                  γ         r(st , at , st+1 )               ∇θ µθ (ht ) ξt                 ∇θ µθ (ht ) ξt
                          τ,ξ                          t=0                                        t=0                            t=0
                                       "T −1 T                                   #
                     R2 (1 − γ T )2      XX ⊤                   ⊤
                   ≤                E             ξt ∇θ µθ (ht ) ∇θ µθ (ht′ ) ξt
                      (1 − γ)2 τ,ξ t=0 ′
                                             t =1
                                          "T −1                               #
                     R2 (1 − γ T )2        X ⊤                ⊤
                   =                  E         ξt ∇θ µθ (ht ) ∇θ µθ (ht ) ξt                                                                     (21)
                      (1 − γ)2        τ,ξ
                                           t=0
                                                                                       
                                                  T
                                                  X −1
                                                          ⊤            ⊤
                                      + E               ξt ∇θ µθ (ht ) ∇θ µθ (ht′ ) ξt  .
                                                        τ,ξ
                                                                  t,t′ =0,t̸=t′



Now, we take a look at the last term. Without loss of generality, we will assume t′ > t. As ξt
is a random variable drawn from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean, and as ht′ and ht are
independent from ξt′ , we can write
                                                                                                    
                                                T
                                                X −1
                                  E                        ξt⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht )⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht′ )ξt′ 
                                  τ,ξ
                                            t,t′ =0,t̸=t′

                                                    T
                                                    X −1            h                                 i
                                            =                      E ξt⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht )⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht′ )ξt′
                                                                  τ,ξ
                                                t,t′ =0,t̸=t′
                                                    T
                                                    X −1            h                             i
                                            =                      E ξt⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht )⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht′ ) E [ξt′ ]
                                                                  τ,ξ                                         ξt′
                                                t,t′ =0,t̸=t′

                                            =      0.

where in the last line we used the fact that Eξt′ [ξt′ ] = 0. The same result holds for t > t′ , following
a similar derivation.
Continuing from equation 21, let Ξt = ∇θ µθ (ht )⊤ ∇θ µθ (ht ) . Noticing that Ξt is a square positive
semi-definite matrix, we can write
                                    "T −1                                  #
                   R2 (1 − γ T )2      X ⊤               ⊤
                                  E        ξt ∇θ µθ (ht ) ∇θ µθ (ht )ξt
                    (1 − γ)2 τ,ξ t=0
                                          T −1
                           R2 (1 − γ T )2 X
                                                    h                                      i
                                                         ⊤               ⊤
                        =                      E   E  ξ t  ∇ θ µ θ (h t )  ∇θ µ θ (h t )ξt
                              (1 − γ)2    t=0
                                               τ,ξ ξt

                                                         T −1
                                 R2 (1 − γ T )2 X h                       ⊤                 −1
                                                                                                i
                            =                       E   tr ∇ θ µ θ (h t )   ∇θ µ θ (h t ) Σ
                                  (1 − γ)2      t=0
                                                    τ,ξ

                                                         T −1
                                 R2 (1 − γ T )2 X h                                          i
                            ≤                       E ∇θ µθ (ht )⊤ F · ∇θ µθ (ht ) F · Σ−1 F
                                  (1 − γ)  2
                                                t=0
                                                    τ,ξ

                                                         T −1
                                 R2 (1 − γ T )2 X h               2
                                                                           i
                            ≤                       E ∇θ µθ (ht ) F · Σ−1 F ,
                                  (1 − γ)  2
                                                t=0
                                                    τ,ξ



where ∥.∥F is the Frobenius norm. When µ(ht ) is implemented as a recursive function µ(ht ) =
fθ (st , zt+1 ) where zt+1 = ηθ (st , zt ) the gradient is given by

                                                              t−1                        t
                                                                                                                    !
                        ∂                                     X   ∂                      Y∂                              ∂
          ∇θ µθ (ht ) =    fθ (st , zt ) +                           ηθ (si , zi )            ηθ (sj , zj )                 fθ (st , zt ) .       (22)
                        ∂θ                                    i=0
                                                                  ∂θ               j=i+1
                                                                                         ∂z j                           ∂zt



                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using this gradient and using the Assumptions 3.2 and 3.3, we bound the norm of the gradient of
µθ (ht ) as follows
                                                   t−1                           t
                                                                                                                              !
                  ∂                                X        ∂                   Y     ∂                                                ∂
  ∇θ µθ (ht ) F ≤    fθ (st , zt ) +                           ηθ (si , zi )              ηθ (sj , zj )                                   fθ (st , zt )
                  ∂θ              F                i=0
                                                            ∂θ               F j=i+1 ∂z j               F                             ∂zt               F

                            t−1         t
                                                   !
                            X           Y
                ≤F +              H            Z       K
                            i=0        j=i+1
                                 t−1
                                                   !
                                 X         t−i−1
                =F + H                 Z               K.
                                 i=0


Hence, the final bound is given by


                                                       −1
                                                                                                                                  !       !2
                 h           i  R2 Σ−1 F (1 − γ T )2 TX                                                    t−1
                                                                                                           X
            Var ∇θ JˆBPTT (Θ) ≤                           F +H                                                        Z   t−i−1
                                                                                                                                      K
                                    N (1 − γ)2        t=0                                                  i=0

                                             R2 Σ−1 F (1 − γ T )2
                                                                  T F 2 + 2F HK Z̃ + H 2 K 2 Z̄ 2 ,

                                        =
                                                 N (1 − γ)2
                            PT −1 Pt−1                                               PT −1  Pt−1                               2
                                                       t−i−1                                                          t−i−1
 where we define Z̃ =            t=0         i=0 Z               and Z̄ =                 t=0             i=0 Z                       for brevity, con-
cluding the proof.

We can further analyze the properties of the BPTT estimator with the following lemma:
Lemma A.2. For Z < 1 the two constants Z̃ and Z̄ grow linearly with T , while for Z > 1 the two
constants grow exponentially with T .

Proof. The series expressing Z̄ can be written as
               T −1   t−1
                                        !2       T −1      t−1
                                                                         !2       T −1
               X      X         t−i−1
                                                 X         X         k
                                                                                  X   (1 − Z t )2
        Ẑ =                Z                =                   Z            =
               t=0    i=0                        t=0                              t=0
                                                                                      (1 − Z)2
                                                           k=0
                                                                                −1                   −1
                                                                              T                    T
                                                                                                                  !
                                                   1                          X          2t
                                                                                                   X          t
                                             =                       T+              Z        −2          Z
                                               (1 − Z)2                       t=0                  t=0

                                                  T       1 − Z 2T     1 − ZT
                                             =          +          − 2
                                               (1 − Z)2    1 − Z2       1−Z
                                                                     1 − Z 2T − 2(1 − Z T )(1 + Z)

                                                  T           1
                                             =          +
                                               (1 − Z)2   (1 − Z)2          (1 − Z)(1 + Z)
                                                    T       (1 − Z T )(1 + Z T ) − 2(1 − Z T )(1 + Z)
                                             =            +
                                                 (1 − Z)2               (1 − Z)3 (1 + Z)
                                                    T        (1 − Z T )(Z T − 2Z − 1)
                                             =             +
                                                 (1 − Z) 2       (1 − Z)3 (1 + Z)
                                                    T       (Z T − 1)(Z T − 2Z − 1)
                                             =            +                                                                                           (23)
                                                 (1 − Z)2       (Z − 1)3 (1 + Z)


                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From equation 23 we see that Z̄ is composed of two terms, where the first is O(T ) while the second
one is O(Z 2T ). The series expressing Z̃ can be written as

                               T −1 X
                                    t−1               T −1 X
                                                           t−1            T −1
                               X                      X             1 − ZtX
                        Z̃ =              Z t−i−1 =              Zk =
                               t=0 i=0             t=0 k=0     t=0
                                                                    1−Z
                                                                −1
                                                              T
                                                                       !
                                                     1        X      t      T     ZT − 1
                                                 =         T−      Z     =     +                                               (24)
                                                   1−Z        t=0
                                                                           1−Z   (1 − Z)2



From equation 24 we see that Z̃ is composed of two terms, where the first is O(T ) while the second
one is O(Z T ). These observations conclude the proof.


A.6.2    S TOCHASTIC S TATEFUL P OLICIES

Proof. For stochastic stateful policies, we consider similar policies of the form


          π(at , zt+1 |st , zt , Θ̃) = N (ϑθ (st , zt+1 ), Γ)                                                                  (25)

                                           1                1
                                     = p           exp − (at − ϑθ (st , zt ))⊤ Γ−1 (at − ϑθ (st , zt )) ,
                                         2π d |Γ|           2



where Θ̃ = {θ, Γ}, where ϑθ is the mean vector containing the means corresponding to an action
                                                                               ⊤
and a hidden state such that ϑθ (st , zt ) = µaθ (st , zt )⊤ , µzθ (st , zt )⊤ , and Γ is a covariance

                                                                                                       matrix

                                                                                                   Σ 0
containing the covariances corresponding to an action and a hidden state such that Γ =                    .
                                                                                                    0 Υ
Then, we can write the gradient with respect to a trajectory as follows

                 T
                 X −1                                         T
                                                              X −1
     f˜(τ̄ ) =          ∇θ log π(at , zt+1 |st , zt , Θ̃) =          ∇θ log π(at |st , zt , Θ̃) + log π(zt+1 |st , zt , Θ̃)
                 t=0                                          t=0
                 T
                 X −1
           =            ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )∇mt log N (mt , Σ)|mt =µθ (st ,zt )
                 t=0
                 + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )∇bt log N (bt , Υ)|bt =µzθ (st ,zt )
                 T
                 X −1
                        ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) Σ−1 (at − mt ) |mt =µθ (st ,zt )

           =
                 t=0

                 + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt ) Υ−1 (zt+1 − bt ) |bt =µzθ (st ,zt ) ,


where we have used the fact that at and zt+1 are independent for decomposing the gradient into a
part corresponding to the mean of the Gaussian used for sampling action and a part corresponding
to the mean of the Gaussian used to sample the next hidden state.
Let ξ˜t = Υ−1 (zt+1 − bt ) where zt+1 ∼ N (bt , Υ), then ξ˜t (bt ) are random variables drawn from a
Gaussian distribution N (0, Υ−1 ). Hence, we define p(ξ˜t ) = N (0, Υ−1 ) and treat ξ˜t as an indepen-
dent random variable sampled from p(ξ˜t ). Then we can use equation 18 again to define an upper


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bound on the variance such that

                                                                                                    T −1
                                                                                                                                           !2
                             h      i Z                                                             X
                   Var G(τ̄ )f˜(τ̄ ) ≤                                                ˜
                                                                        p(τ̄ ) p(ξ) p(ξ)                   γ   t−1
                                                                                                                     r(st , at , st+1 )
                                                                τ̄ ,ξ                               t=0
                                                                    T −1
                                                                                                                                  !⊤
                                                                    X
                                                            ·                  ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                                     t=0
                                                                      −1
                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                    X
                                                            ·                  ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                                     t=0
                                                                                  "T −1 T
                                                           R (1 − γ T )2
                                                                2                  X X                                                      ⊤
                                                         ≤                  E                  ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                            (1 − γ) 2
                                                                         τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
                                                                                   t=0 t′ =1
                                                                                                               #

                                                           · ∇θ µθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′ + ∇θ µθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′
                                                                  a                          z


                                                                                   "T −1
                                                           R2 (1 − γ T )2           X                                                 ⊤
                                                         =                   E           ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                            (1 − γ)  2
                                                                          τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
                                                                                    t=0
                                                                                                          #

                                                           · ∇θ µθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                                   a                     z


                                                                           
                                                                                  T
                                                                                  X −1                                                       ⊤
                                                            · E                                ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                                                τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
                                                                               t,t′ =0,t̸=t′
                                                                                                                                       #

                                                            ·        ∇θ µaθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′ + ∇θ µzθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′                     .


Again, the last term can be dropped due to

                                                                                                                                            
                       T
                       X −1                                                             ⊤
    E                                     ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t     ∇θ µaθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′ + ∇θ µzθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′ 
  τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
                 t,t′ =0,t̸=t′

                       −1
                     T
                                                 "                                                                                                           #
                     X                                                                             ⊤
       =                                E             ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t      ∇θ µaθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′ + ∇θ µzθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′
                                      τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
             t,t′ =0,t̸=t′
                     T
                     X −1                                                                                        ⊤
       =                                E             ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                                      τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
             t,t′ =0,t̸=t′
                             "                                                                              #

             · E                     ∇θ µaθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′ + ∇θ µzθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′
                 τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃

                     T
                     X −1                        h                  i        h                   i
       =                                    E ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ξt⊤ + E ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ξ˜t⊤
                                          τ̄ ,ξ,                      τ̄ ,ξ̃
             t,t′ =0,t̸=t′                |          {z             } |          {z              }
                                                            =0                                                 =0
                             h                                    i               h                             i
             ·        E          ∇θ µaθ (st′ , zt′ ) ξt′                +E            ∇θ µzθ (st′ , zt′ )ξ˜t′         = 0.
                     τ̄ ,ξ                                               τ̄ ,ξ̃
                     |                      {z                    }      |                    {z                }
                                           =0                                                =0


Noticing that ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) and ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt ) are square positive
semi-definite matrices, allows us to write


                                                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    "T −1                                                                                                 #
R2 (1 − γ T )2        X         a                       z           ˜
                                                                        ⊤
                                                                                  a                                  ˜

                E         ∇   µ   (s
                            θ θ t t  , z  ) ξt +  ∇   µ   (s ,
                                                     θ θ t t t z  ) ξ         ∇ µ   (s
                                                                               θ θ t t , z  ) ξt +  ∇   µ̃ (s ,
                                                                                                       θ θ t t tz  ) ξ
 (1 − γ)2 τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃ t=0
                     T −1
      R2 (1 − γ T )2 X
                                                                               ⊤
  =                       E      ∇   µ a
                                         (s
                                    θ θ t t  , z ) ξt +  ∇   µ z
                                                                 (s
                                                            θ θ t t t , z ) ˜
                                                                            ξ      ∇   µ a
                                                                                           (s
                                                                                      θ θ t t  , z ) ξt +  ∇  µ̃  (s
                                                                                                             θ θ t t t , z ) ˜
                                                                                                                             ξ
        (1 − γ)2 t=0 τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
        R2 (1 − γ T )2
   =
          (1 − γ)2
          TX−1                             ⊤                                                    ⊤
       ·       E     ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt      ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt + E   ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t      ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t
                 τ̄ ,ξ                                                                     τ̄ ,ξ̃
           t=0
                                           ⊤                                                            ⊤
         + E         ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt      ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t + E           ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )ξ˜t      ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) ξt
          τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃                                                    τ̄ ,ξ,ξ̃
          |                             {z                          } |                              {z                           }
                                                     =0                                                                =0
          2              T 2     −1
                                TX
       R (1 − γ )                      h                                             i
   =                                  E tr ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) Σ−1
        (1 − γ)2                t=0
                                      τ̄

                                         h                                            i
                                      + E tr ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )Υ−1
                                           τ̄

          2              T 2     −1
                                TX                                                                                                        i
     R (1 − γ )                            h
                                                                   2         −1
                                                                                      i         h
                                                                                                                       2         −1
   ≤                                  E          ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) F ·   Σ                +E         ∇θ µzθ (st , zt ) F ·   Υ                 .
      (1 − γ)2                  t=0
                                      τ̄                                          F        τ̄                                         F



To align with the notation from the previous proof, we define µaθ (st , zt ) = fθ (st , zt ) and
µzθ (st , zt ) = ηθ (st , zt ) and get
                                   −1
                                  TX
              R2 (1 − γ T )2                         h
                                                                           2
                                                                                    i   h
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                    i
                                                E         ∇θ fθ (st , zt ) F · Σ−1 F + E ∇θ νθ (st , zt ) F · Υ−1 F
               (1 − γ)2               t=0
                                                τ̄                                                  τ̄

                                                 −1
                                                TX
                         R2 (1 − γ T )2

                 ≤                                         F 2 · Σ−1 F + H 2 · Υ−1 F
                          (1 − γ)2                   t=0

such that the final bound on the variance of the S2PG is given by
                                                                   −1
                                             R2 Σ−1 F (1 − γ T )2 TX               Υ−1 F
                            h             i
                         Var ∇θ JˆS2PG (Θ) ≤                           F 2
                                                                           + H 2
                                                                                 ·         ,
                                                 N (1 − γ)2        t=0
                                                                                   Σ−1 F

concluding the proof.
Lemma A.3.
           Given  a policy, similarily to equation 25, π(at , zt+1 |st , zt , Θ̃) = N (ϑθ (st , zt+1 ), Γ)
           Σ 0
with Γ =           and limiting the covariance matrices Σ and Υ to be diagonal, then the bound
           0 Υ
from Theorem 3.5 can be replaced by a tighter bound
                                               R2 tr(Σ−1 )(1 − γ T )2 T                  −1

                                                                                  2 tr(Υ    )
                              h             i
                           Var ∇θ JˆS2PG (Θ) ≤                            F 2
                                                                            d + H d             .
                                                     N (1 − γ)2                     tr(Σ−1 )


Proof. Indeed, when B is diagonal it is easy to show that
                                                             tr(AB) = diag(A)⊤ diag(B) .                                                           (26)

Let diag(Σ) = σ = [σ0 , . . . , σ|a| ]⊤ , and diag(Υ) = υ = [υ0 , . . . , υ|z| ]⊤ . Using equation 26 we
can write
                                                                                                 ⊤
         tr ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) Σ−1 = diag ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) diag Σ−1


                                                                                                 ⊤
         tr ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )Υ−1 = diag ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt ) diag Υ−1 .


                                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let X [i] be the i-th row of the matrix X. We observe that


                                                                      ∇θ (µaθ (st , zt )[0] )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )[0]
                                                                                                                       

         diag       ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )       =                         ...                           
                                                                  ∇θ (µaθ (st , zt )[|a|−1] )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )[|a|−1]
                                                                                               
                                                                   ∥∇θ µaθ (st , zt )[0] ∥22
                                                               =             ...               .
                                                                  ∥∇θ µaθ (st , zt )[|a|−1] ∥22
 The same observation can be done by exchanging µaθ with µzθ . Notice that the resulting vector is
a vector of the norms of the gradient of the mean functions w.r.t. a specific action (or internal state
component).
If we assume the existence of two positive constants Fd and Hd such that ∥∇θ µaθ (st , zt )[i] ∥22 ≤ Fd2
and ∥∇θ µzθ (st , zt )[i] ∥22 ≤ Hd2 , ∀i, st , zt then we can write


                       tr ∇θ µaθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µaθ (st , zt ) Σ−1 ≤ Fd2 · 1⊤ diag(Σ−1 )
                                                                                   |a|−1
                                                                        X 1
                                                                           = Fd2= Fd2 tr(Σ−1 )
                                                                         i=0
                                                                             σi

                       tr ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )Υ−1 ≤ Hd2 · 1⊤ diag Υ−1
                                                                                   |a|−1
                                                                                   X 1
                                                                           = Hd2          = Hd2 tr(Υ−1 ).                   (27)
                                                                                   i=0
                                                                                       υi



Using equation 27 the bound of the variance of the single gradient estimator is
             h             i R2 (1 − γ T )2  TX−1    h                                                   i
                                                                             ⊤                       −1
          Var G(τ̄ )f˜(τ̄ ) ≤                     E   tr ∇ θ µ a
                                                               θ (st , z t )   ∇ θ µ a
                                                                                     θ (st , z t ) Σ
                              (1 − γ)2        t=0
                                                  τ̄

                                                       h                                                  i
                                                  + E tr ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )⊤ ∇θ µzθ (st , zt )Υ−1
                                                                      τ̄

                                                  T 2 T −1
                                       R2 (1 − γ )    X
                                                                   Fd2 tr(Σ−1 ) + Hd2 tr(Υ−1 )

                                   ≤
                                        (1 − γ)2           t=0

                                     R2 (1 − γ T )2 T
                                                      Fd2 tr(Σ−1 ) + Hd2 tr(Υ−1 ) .

                                   =
                                        (1 − γ)2

Therefore, the gradient of the S2PG estimator in the diagonal Gaussian setting is
                                           R2 tr(Σ−1 )(1 − γ T )2 T                −1

                                                                             2 tr(Υ   )
                          h             i
                       Var ∇θ JˆS2PG (Θ) ≤                           F 2
                                                                       d + H d
                                                 N (1 − γ)2                    tr(Σ−1 )
concluding the proof.

Notice that, when the action is a scalar, we get
                              h             i  R2 (1 − γ T )2 T
                           Var ∇θ JˆS2PG (Θ) ≤                  Fd2 + Hd2 tr(Υ−1 )σ 2 ,

                                               N (1 − γ) σ2  2


 matching closely both the previous results of Papini et al. (2022)— with the addition of the term
depending on the internal state variance —and the special scalar action case of the generic bound
derived with a full covariance matrix.


                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON OF THE G RADIENT E STIMATORS
In this section, we analyze the difference between the stochastic gradient estimator for stateful poli-
cies and the BPTT approach in greater detail.
In BPTT, the gradient needs to be propagated back to the initial state. This requires the algorithm to
store the history of execution up to the current timestep, if we want to compute an unbiased estimate
of the policy gradient. The common approach in the literature is to truncate the gradient propagation
for a fixed history length. This approach is particularly well-suited if the recurrent policy does not
require to remember long-term information.
Instead, our approach incorporates the learning of the policy state transitions into the value function,
compensating for the increased variance of the policy gradient estimate (coming from the stochas-
ticity of the policy state kernel) and allowing for the parallelization of the gradient computation.
As shown in Figure 5, the stochastic gradient for stateful policies only uses local information at
timestep t to perform the update, while the BPTT uses the full history until the starting state s0 .
The choice between the two estimators is non-trivial: a high dimensionality of the policy state may
cause the Q-function estimation problem challenging. However, in practical scenarios, tasks can be
solved with a relatively low-dimensional policy state vector. In contrast, a long trajectory implies
multiple applications of the chain rule, that may consequently produce exploding or vanishing gra-
dients, causing issues during the learning. This problem is not present when using stochastic stateful
policies.


Figure 5: Comparison of the gradient at the state st and action at in BPTT –left – and our stochastic gradient
estimator – right– using the PGT. The red and green colors represents the value of future state, where green
means high Q-value and red means low Q-value.


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A LGORITHM P SEUDOCODE
In the following, we present the pseudocode for SAC-RS, TD3-RS and PPO-RS algorithms. The
algorithms are a straightforward modification of the vanilla SAC, TD3, and PPO approaches to sup-
port the internal policy state. In all cases, the algorithm receives in input a dataset of interaction (in
our experiments one single step for SAC-RS and TD3-RS, while for PPO-RS is a batch of experi-
ence composed of multiple trajectories) coming from the current policy rollouts on the environment.
In the pseudocode below we denote the parameter of the policy as θ, the target policy parameters
as θ̌. Furthermore, we name the parameters of the i-th value function as ψi and the corresponding
target network ψ̌i . In the following, we use the square bracket notation to denote the component of
a vector. In this context, we refer to the vector of states, actions, and internal states inside the dataset
(seen as an ordered list).

Algorithm 1 TD3-RS
 1: function UPDATE TD3(D)
 2:    M . ADD(D)                         ▷ Add the dataset of transitions D to the replay memory M
 3:    if SIZE(M ) > Smin then                   ▷ Wait until the replay memory has Smin transitions
 4:        Sample a minibatch B from M
 5:        q̂ ←COMPUTE TARGET(B)
 6:        Qψi . FIT(B, q̂), for each i ∈ {0, 1}
 7:        if it mod D = 0 then                       ▷ Perform the policy update every D iterations
 8:             Compute the loss
                                                     1 X
                                       Lθ (B) = −          Qψ0 (s, z, µaθ (s), µzθ (s))
                                                     N s∈B

 9:            θ ← OPTIMIZE(Lθ (B), θ)
10:        end if
11:        θ̌ ← τ θ + (1 − τ )θ̌
12:        ψ̌i ← τ ψi + (1 − τ )ψ̌i
13:        it ← it + 1                                                              ▷ Update the iteration counter
14:    end if
15:    return θ
16: end function

17: function COMPUTE TARGET(B)
18:    for (s, z, a, r, z ′ , s′ ) ∈ B do
19:        if s′ is absorbing then
20:             vnext (s′ , z ′ ) ← 0
21:        else
22:             a′ , z ′′ ← µθ̌ (s′ , z ′ )
23:             Sample ϵa , ϵz ∼ N (0, σϵ )
24:             ϵaclp ← CLIP(ϵa , −δϵ , δϵ)
25:             ϵzclp ← CLIP(ϵz , −δϵ , δϵ)
26:             asmt ← a′ + ϵaclp
27:             zsmt ← z ′′ + ϵzclp
28:             aclp ←CLIP(asmt , amin , amax )
29:             zclp ←CLIP(zsmt , zmin , zmax )
30:             vnext (s′ , z ′ ) ← mini Qψ̌i (s′ , z ′ , aclp , zclp )
31:        end if
32:        q̂(s, z, a, z ′ ) ← r + γvnext (s′ , z ′ )
33:    end for
34:    return q̂
35: end function


                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 SAC-RS
 1: function UPDATE SAC(D)
 2:    M . ADD(D)
 3:    if SIZE(M ) > Smin then
 4:        Sample a minibatch B from M
 5:        q̂ ←COMPUTE S OFT TARGET(B)
 6:        if SIZE(M ) > Swarm then                      ▷ Perform the policy update after Swarm samples
 7:            Sample a′ , z ′ ∼ πθ (·|s, z) ∀(s, z) ∈ B
 8:            Compute the policy loss
                                                                         1 X
               Lθ (B) = αa log πθa (a′ |s, z) + αz log πθz (z ′ |s, z) −      min Qψi (s, z, a′ , z ′ )
                                                                         N s∈B i

 9:               θ ← OPTIMIZE(Lθ (B), θ)
10:               Compute the αa and αz losses with target entropies H̄a and H̄z
                                               1       X
                                                                  αa log πθa (a|s, z) + H̄a

                                Lαa (B) = −
                                               N
                                                   (s,z,a)∈B

                                              1       X
                                                                  αz log πθz (z ′ |s, z) + H̄z

                                Lαz (B) = −
                                              N
                                                   (s,z,z ′ )∈B
                   a
11:            α ← OPTIMIZE(Lαa (B), α)
12:            αz ← OPTIMIZE(Lαz (B), α)
13:        end if
14:        q̂ ←COMPUTE S OFT TARGET(B)
15:        Qψ . FIT(B, q̂)
16:        ψ̌i ← τ ψi + (1 − τ )ψ̌i
17:    end if
18:    return θ
19: end function

20: function COMPUTE S OFT TARGET(B)
21:    for (s, z, r, a′ , z ′ , s′ ) ∈ B do
22:        if s′ is absorbing then
23:             vnext (s′ , z ′ ) ← 0
24:        else
25:             Sample a′ , z ′′ ∼ πθ (·|s′ )
26:             hbonus ← −αa log πθ (a′ |s′ , z ′ ) − αz log πθ (z ′′ |s′ , z ′ )
27:             vnext (s′ , z ′ ) ← mini Qψ̌i (s′ , z ′ , a′ , z ′′ ) + hbonus
28:        end if
29:        q̂(s, z, a, z ′ ) ← r + γvnext (s′ , z ′ )
30:    end for
31:    return q̂
32: end function


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 PPO-RS
 1: function UPDATE PPO(θ, D)
 2:    V ′ , A ←COMPUTE GAE(Vψ , D)
 3:    Vψ . FIT(D, V ′ )                                                                ▷ Update the value function
 4:    for i ← 0 to N do
 5:          Split the dataset D in K minibatches {Bk |k ∈ [0, K − 1]}
 6:          for k ← 0 to K do
 7:              compute the surrogate loss on the minibatch
                                                  πθ (a, z ′ |s, z)

                          1      X
              Lθ (Bk ) =                    min           ′ |s, z)
                                                                    A(s, z, a, z ′ ),
                         N                         q(a, z
                            (s,z,a,z ′ )∈Bk

                                                          πθ (a, z ′ |s, z)

                                                                                                           ′
                                                  clip                      , 1 −  ε, 1 + ε   A(s, z, a, z   )
                                                            q(a, z ′ |s, z)
 8:           θ ← OPTIMIZE(Lθ (Bk ), θ)
 9:        end for
10:    end for
11:    return θ
12: end function

13: function COMPUTE GAE(Vψ , D)
14:    for k ← 0 . . . len(D) do
15:        v[k] ← Vψ (s[k], z[k])
16:        vnext [k] ← Vψ (s′ [k], z ′ [k])
17:    end for
18:    for krev ← 0 . . . len(D) do
19:        k ← len(D) − krev − 1
20:        if s′ [k] is last then
21:             if s′ [k] is absorbing then
22:                  A(s[k], z[k], a[k], z ′ [k]) ← r[k] − v[k]
23:             else
24:                  A(s[k], z[k], a[k], z ′ [k]) ← r[k] + γvnext [k] − v[k]
25:             end if
26:        else
27:             δ ← A(s[k + 1], z[k + 1], a[k + 1], z ′ [k + 1])
28:             A(s[k], z[k], a[k], z ′ [k]) ← r[k] + γvnext [k] − v[k] + γλδ
29:        end if
30:    end for
31:    return v, A
32: end function


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     N ETWORK S TRUCTURES
In this section, we describe the structure of the networks used in this paper. Figure 6 presents all
networks used for the policies and the critics in the RL setting. For the BPTT, the policy networks
were used, yet the red paths were dropped. Also, the critics did not use the hidden states as inputs.
For the IL setting, the networks from SAC are used for LS-IQ, and the networks from PPO are
used for GAIL. For the recurrent networks, we generally use GRUs even though any other recurrent
network, such as LSTMs, can also be used.


                    TD3 and PPO Policy                                         SAC Policy
      Observation                                                Observation
       Embedder                                                   Embedder


      Observation                                                Observation
       Embedder                                                   Embedder
                                         Output
                             RNN          Layer                                   RNN             MLP

        Action                                                    Action
       Embedder                                                  Embedder


                    TD3 and SAC Critic                                         PPO Critic
                      State/Action
                       Embedder

                                      MLP                                          MLP
                     Hidden State
                      Embedder



Figure 6: Network architectures used for the policies and critics in PPO-RS, TD3-RS, SAC-RS, PPO-BPTT,
TD3-BPTT, and SAC-BPTT. For the BPTT variants, the red paths do not exist. For the S2PG approach, the
internal state is sampled from the noisy distribution. These architectures of the policies were originally used in
Ni et al. (2022).


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Randomly selected Goals
                                                               1.0
                                                               0.8                                         Figure 7: Point mass experiments.


                                           Success Rate
       Blind                                                                                               In the blind area, the goal is not
       Area                                                    0.6                                         visible. The task involves remem-
                                                               0.4                                         bering its position. Initial states,
                           Observable                          0.2                                         goals, and blind areas are randomly
                             Area                                                                          sampled. SAC-RS is a recurrent-
                                                               0.0                                         stochastic version of SAC, using
                                                                     0        500        1000     1500     S2PG.
    Randomly selected initial Positions                                       Steps (×103)

                                          SAC-BPTT-5                                SAC-BPTT-10          SAC-RS


                   Goal
                                                           1000
                                                                                                           Figure 8: Point mass door exper-
                                           Cumulative Reward
                                                                800                                        iments. In the blind area, the po-
                                                                600                                        sitions of the two doors are not
                                                                                                           visible.   The task involves re-
      Randomly selected Door Positions                          400
                                                                                                           membering its position, which are
                                                                200                                        randomly sampled. SAC-RS is
       Blind
       Area                                                          0                                     a recurrent-stochastic version of
                          Observable                                     0   500     1000 1500 2000        SAC, using S2PG.
                            Area                                               Steps (×103)

                                          SAC-BPTT-5                                SAC-BPTT-10          SAC-RS


E      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

E.1      M EMORY TASK

These tasks are about moving a point mass in a 2D environment. They are shown in Figure 7 and
8. For the first task, a random initial state and a goal are sampled at the beginning of each episode.
The agent reads the desired goal information while it is close to the starting position. Once the
agent is sufficiently far from the starting position, the information about the goal position is zeroed-
out. The task consists of learning a policy that remembers the target goal even after leaving the
starting area. As the distance to the goal involves multiple steps, long-term memory capabilities are
required. Similarly, the second task hides the position of two randomly sampled doors in a maze
once the agent leaves the observable area. Once the agents touches the black wall, an absorbing
state is reached, and the environment is reset. We test our approach in the privileged information
setting using SAC. We compare our approach with SAC-BPTT with a truncation length of 5 and 10.
For the first task, our approach – SAC-RS – outperforms BPTT, while it performs slightly weaker
compared to BPTT with a truncation length of 10 on the second task. We expect that the reason
for the drop in performance is caused by the additional variance of our method in combination with
the additional absorbing states in the environment. The additional variance in our policy leads to
increased exploration, which increases the chances of touching the wall and reaching an absorbing
state. Nonetheless, our approach has a significantly shorter training time, analogously to the results
shown in Figure 3, for both tasks.

E.2      S TATEFUL P OLICIES AS I NDUCTIVE B IASES

Adding inductive biases into the policy is a common way to impose prior knowledge into the policy
Ijspeert et al. (2007); Bellegarda & Ijspeert (2022a); Al-Hafez & Steil (2021); Liu et al. (2021).
To show that stateful policies are of general interest in RL – not only for POMDPs – we show in
this section that they can be used to elegantly impose an arbitrary inductive bias directly into the
policy. In contrast to commonly used biases, our approach allows learning the parameters of the
inductive bias as well. We conduct experiments with a policy that includes oscillators -– coupled
Central Pattern Generators (CPG) – to impose an oscillation into the policy. The latter is common


                                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Ant-v3
                            1400
                                                                    Coupled Oscillators


        Cumulative Reward
                            1200


                            1000


                            800


                            600
                                   0    500   1000    1500   2000                         MLP
                                           Steps (×103)

                                       HalfCheetah-v3
                            3000
        Cumulative Reward


                            2000



                            1000



                              0
                                   0    500   1000    1500   2000
                                           Steps (×103)


Figure 9: Experiments in which a set of coupled central pattern generators are used as a policy. The left side
shows the cumulative reward on HalfCheetah and Ant. The right side shows the structure of the policy. Note
that the policy does not use the environment state making it blind.


for locomotion tasks Miki et al. (2022). We model the oscillators as a set of ordinary differential
equations and simulate the latter using the explicit Euler integrator. Figure 9 presents the results.
Using our algorithm, we are able to train the parameters of the CPGs and an the additional network to
learn simple locomotion skills on HalfCheetah and Ant. These policies solely rely on their internal
state and do not use the environment state making them blind. With this simple experiment, we
want to show that we can impose arbitrary dynamics on the policy and train the latter using our
approach. Note that plain oscillators do not constitute a very good inductive bias. More sophisticated
dynamical models that also take the environment state into account are needed to achieve better
results.

Related Work. Shi et al. (2022) train CPGs using a black-box optimizer instead of BPTT, while
simultaneously learning an RL policy for residual control. Cho1 et al. (2019) optimize a CPG policy
using RL without BPTT by exposing the internal state to the environment but do not provide a
theoretical derivation of the resulting policy gradient. Campanaro et al. (2021) train a CPG policy
using PPO without BPTT. However, the authors neglect the influence of the internal state on the
value function.

E.3    C OMPARISON ON S TANDARD POMDP B ENCHMARKS

In the following, we evaluate the two gradient estimators in standard MuJoCo POMDP benchmarks,
in the on-policy setting. These tasks are taken from Ni et al. (2022) and hide the velocity. All
experiments use the PPO algorithm as a learning method. Figure 10 presents the results. Our
approach outperforms BPTT in all benchmarks in terms of the number of used samples and time.
Unfortunately, using on-policy approaches on these benchmarks, we do not achieve satisfactory
performances in all environments (e.g. Hopper and Walker). This is probably due to the increased
difficulty of exploring with partial observation, rather than an issue in gradient estimation. Indeed,
in the other tasks, where more information is available, or the exploration is less problematic –
e.g., the failure state is more difficult to reach – we outperform the baseline. It should be noted
that the performance gain in terms of computation time is not massive: this is due to the reduced
number of gradient computations in the on-policy scenario, which is performed in batch after many
environment steps. Table 1 presents the training time needed to run 1 million environment steps for
all versions of PPO. Accordingly, table 2 illustrates the training time factors for each PPO version
in comparison to the vanilla variant.


                                                                     32
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               AntPOMDP-v3                                   HalfCheetahPOMDP-v3                                      HumanoidPOMDP-v3
Cumulative Reward


                                                     Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                           Cumulative Reward
                                                                     6000                                                  4000
                4000
                                                                     4000                                                  3000
                2000                                                 2000                                                  2000
                                                                                                                           1000
                    0                                                    0
                                                                                                                              0
                        0    1000 2000 3000 4000                             0    1000 2000 3000 4000                             0    1000 2000 3000 4000
                                 Steps (×103)                                         Steps (×103)                                         Steps (×103)

                            HopperPOMDP-v3                                       Walker2dPOMDP-v3
Cumulative Reward


                                                     Cumulative Reward


                2000                                                 4000

                1000                                                 2000

                    0                                                    0
                        0    1000 2000 3000 4000                             0    1000 2000 3000 4000
                                 Steps (×103)                                         Steps (×103)
                        PPO-RS (Ours)   PPO-BPTT-5          PPO-BPTT-32              PPO-Vanilla   PPO-Oracle                     PPO-Window-5   PPO-Window-32
    Figure 10: Comparison of PPO with the proposed stochastic policy state kernel and PPO with BPTT on fully
    partially observable MuJoCo Gym Tasks. The number behind the BPTT implementations indicates the trunca-
    tion length. Abscissa shows the cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).


                                                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Example images of the Mujoco Gym randomized mass environment used within this work. The
upper row shows three randomly sampled Ant environments, while the lower row show three Humanoid envi-
ronments.


E.4   C OMPARISON ON ROBUSTNESS B ENCHMARKS WITH P RIVILEGE I NFORMATION

In this section, we evaluate the performance of S2PG against BPTT on the POMDP setting with
additional randomized masses. For the latter, masses of each link in a model are randomly sampled
in a ±30% range. Figure 11 shows examples of randomly sampled Ant and Humanoid environments.
Here, we consider the scenario where the critic has privileged information (knowledge of velocities
and mass distributions), while the policy uses only partial observability.
Figure 12 presents the reward plots. Figure 3 also presents the average runtime of each approach
used for these tasks. The experiment run for a maximum of two million steps and four days
of computation. The results do not show an approach clearly outperforming the others in all
tasks. S2PG based approaches seem to work more robustly in high-dimensional tasks, such as
AntPOMDP-v3 and HumanoidPOMDP-v3. Curiously, the BPTT version of TD3 is not able to
learn in the AntPOMDP-v3 task. In general, S2PG seems to struggle in the HalfCheetahPOMDP-
v3, HopperPOMDP-v3 and in WalkerPOMDP-v3 tasks. To better compare the performance of
all approaches on the low-dimensional tasks – Hopper, Walker and HalfCheetah – and the high-
dimensional tasks – Humanoid and Ant –, we presents the averaged performance plots in Figure
13. As can be seen, our approach performs significantly better on the high-dimensional tasks while
being worse on the low-dimensional ones. We believe that the reason for the worse performance of
BPTT on high-dimensional tasks could be the potential risk of exploding gradients, which in turn
cause exploding variance (c.f., Section 3). In contrast, we believe that the worse performance of
our method on low-dimensional tasks can be traced back to the increased amount of variance in the
policy in conjunction with the presence of absorbing states in the case of Hopper and Walker, similar
to the memory tasks. Table 1 presents the training time needed to run 1 million environment steps
for all versions of SAC and TD3. Accordingly, table 2 illustrates the training time factors for each
version in comparison to the vanilla variant.


                                                 34
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  AntPOMDP-v3                                                                              HumanoidPOMDP-v3                                                                  Walker2dPOMDP-v3
                    4000
Cumulative Reward


                                                                                         Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                                                                                                Cumulative Reward
                                                                                                         4000                                                                                   4000
                    2000
                                                                                                         2000                                                                                   2000
                      0
                                                                                                                   0                                                                                 0
                           0          500      1000 1500               2000                                            0       500       1000      1500           2000                                   0      500                           1000    1500     2000
                                            Steps (×103)                                                                             Steps (×103)                                                                     Steps (×103)

                               HalfCheetahPOMDP-v3                                                                             HopperPOMDP-v3
                                                                                                              3000
Cumulative Reward


                                                                                              Cumulative Reward
                    10000
                                                                                                              2000
                    5000
                                                                                                              1000
                       0                                                                                               0
                            0         500      1000 1500                     2000                                          0    500       1000      1500                2000
                                            Steps (×103)                                                                              Steps (×103)
                           TD3-BPTT-5            TD3-RS (Ours)                                   SAC-BPTT-5                          TD3-vanilla          TD3-oracle                                      SAC-Window-5                               TD3-Window-5
                           TD3-BPTT-32           SAC-RS (Ours)                                   SAC-BPTT-32                         SAC-vanilla          SAC-oracle                                      SAC-Window-32                              TD3-Window-32
     Figure 12: SAC and TD3 results on the MuJoCo Gym Tasks with partially observable policies and privileged
     critics. Additionally, masses of each link are randomly sampled at the beginning of each episode. The number
     behind the BPTT implementations indicates the truncation length. Abscissa shows the cumulative reward.
     Ordinate shows the training time in hours.


                                               Privileged Information                                                                                                                      No Privileged Information
                1.0                                                              40                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                 35
                0.8                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Training Time [h]
Normalized Return


                                                                                                                                                           Normalized Return


                                                                                 30
                                                                 Training Time [h]


                                                                                 25                                                                                                                                                       10
                0.6                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                 20
                0.4                                                              15                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                 10                                                                                                                                                           1
                0.2                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                  5
                0.0             SAC              TD3                              0                               SAC                 TD3                                  0.0                      PPO         SLAC                                 PPO       SLAC
                1.0                                                              30                                                                                        1.0

                0.8                                                              25                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Training Time [h]
Normalized Return


                                                                                                                                                           Normalized Return
                                                                 Training Time [h]


                                                                                 20                                                                                                                                                       10
                0.6                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                 15
                0.4                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                 10                                                                                                                                                           1
                0.2                                                                  5                                                                                     0.2

                0.0             SAC              TD3                                 0                            SAC                 TD3                                  0.0                      PPO         SLAC                                 PPO       SLAC
                       RS (Ours)                   BPTT-5                                         BPTT-32                             Window-5                                 Window-32                                   Vanilla                           Oracle
     Figure 13: Results show the mean and 95% confidence interval of the normalized return and the training time
     needed for 1 million steps across high-dimensional – TOP row; Ant and Humanoid – and low-dimensional
     – BOTTOM row; Hopper, Walker and HalfCheetah – POMDP Gym tasks. Comparison of different RL agents
     on POMDP tasks using our stateful gradient estimator, BPTT with a truncation length of 5 and 32, the SLAC
     algorithm and stateless versions of the algorithms using a window of observation with length 5 and 32. The
     ”Oracle” approach is a vanilla version of the algorithm using full-state information.


                                                                                                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Runtime comparison of different algorithms on all reinforcement learning tasks. For SAC and TD3,
privileged information for the critic is used, and the tasks include randomization of the masses and occlusion of
the velocities, while for PPO no privileged information is used and only occlusion of the velocities is used for
the tasks. The window, vanilla, and oracle approaches are grayed out as they do not constitute stateful policies.
The bold values indicate the lowest training time across all stateful algorithms. All values are computed by
taking the mean over 10 seeds and computing the 95% confidence interval.

                     Time in hours needed for 1 million environment steps [lower is better]
                                    BPTT                                Window
                                                                                                   Vanilla            Oracle      RS (Ours)
       Env.                    5               32                  5               32
       Stateful Policy        yes              yes                no               no                no                 no           yes
       Ant               7.8 ± 0.067       30.4 ± 1.018    4.8 ± 0.120         10.6 ± 0.548    2.8 ± 0.047          2.5 ± 0.092   6.2 ± 0.256
       Hopper            6.8 ± 0.168       22.3 ± 0.406    3.5 ± 0.036          4.5 ± 0.089    2.3 ± 0.026          2.2 ± 0.070   5.9 ± 0.017
 SAC   HalfCheetah        6.9 ± 0.291      27.1 ± 0.361    3.7 ± 0.054          5.1 ± 0.106    2.3 ± 0.071          2.4 ± 0.010   6.0 ± 0.041
       Humanoid          10.1 ± 0.285      32.9 ± 1.317    6.5 ± 0.118         14.1 ± 0.478    3.4 ± 0.049          3.3 ± 0.079   7.9 ± 0.027
       Walker2d           6.8 ± 0.202      22.7 ± 0.696    3.7 ± 0.051          4.6 ± 0.104    2.4 ± 0.034          2.3 ± 0.067   6.0 ± 0.026
       Ant                 3.0 ± 0.019     6.6 ± 0.119     2.3 ± 0.017         3.8 ± 0.127     1.5 ± 0.018          1.5 ± 0.010   3.0 ± 0.124
       Hopper              2.6 ± 0.058     4.5 ± 0.176     1.9 ± 0.054         2.1 ± 0.030     1.3 ± 0.025          1.3 ± 0.018   2.8 ± 0.093
 TD3   HalfCheetah         2.6 ± 0.010     5.8 ± 0.089     2.0 ± 0.086         2.4 ± 0.070     1.3 ± 0.022          1.2 ± 0.042   2.7 ± 0.100
       Humanoid            3.6 ± 0.042     8.1 ± 0.325     2.7 ± 0.047         5.2 ± 0.165     1.8 ± 0.030          1.8 ± 0.022   3.6 ± 0.053
       Walker2d            2.4 ± 0.006     5.1 ± 0.242     1.9 ± 0.018         2.2 ± 0.062     1.3 ± 0.024          1.3 ± 0.012   2.9 ± 0.052
       Ant                 2.8 ± 0.001     3.3 ± 0.001     0.7 ± 0.088         1.6 ± 0.079     0.4 ± 0.005          0.6 ± 0.007   2.1 ± 0.036
       Hopper              2.5 ± 0.001     3.1 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.004         0.5 ± 0.006     0.3 ± 0.006          0.4 ± 0.004   1.8 ± 0.061
 PPO   HalfCheetah         2.5 ± 0.001     3.1 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.003         0.6 ± 0.003     0.4 ± 0.012          0.4 ± 0.001   2.2 ± 0.044
       Humanoid            2.9 ± 0.001     3.5 ± 0.001     3.5 ± 0.001         3.5 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.052          0.7 ± 0.009   2.1 ± 0.033
       Walker2d            2.5 ± 0.001     3.1 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.004         0.5 ± 0.008     0.3 ± 0.022          0.4 ± 0.003   1.8 ± 0.041


Table 2: Runtime comparison of different algorithms on all reinforcement learning tasks. For SAC and TD3,
privileged information for the critic is used, and the tasks include randomization of the masses and occlusion of
the velocities, while for PPO no privileged information is used and only occlusion of the velocities is used for
the tasks. The window, vanilla, and oracle approaches are grayed out as they do not constitute stateful policies.
The factors are computed for 1 million environment steps. The bold values indicate the lowest factor across all
stateful algorithms. All values are computed by taking the mean over 10 seeds.

                     Factor of time increase compared to Vanilla version [lower is better]
                                                        BPTT            Window
                                                                                         Vanilla          RS (Ours)
                             Env.                   5       32          5    32
                             Stateful Policy     yes        yes         no        no          no              yes
                             Ant                2.804     10.935       1.730     3.822   1.000               2.241
                             Hopper             2.935      9.599       1.497     1.956   1.000               2.531
                     SAC     HalfCheetah        3.022     11.859       1.614     2.213   1.000               2.610
                             Humanoid           2.936      9.580       1.887     4.106   1.000               2.290
                             Walker2d           2.878      9.597       1.578     1.948   1.000               2.526
                             Ant                2.024      4.535       1.546     2.620   1.000               2.056
                             Hopper             2.012      3.476       1.489     1.643   1.000               2.146
                     TD3     HalfCheetah        2.069      4.606       1.555     1.864   1.000               2.120
                             Humanoid           2.037      4.555       1.512     2.896   1.000               2.024
                             Walker2d           1.913      4.024       1.527     1.724   1.000               2.245
                             Ant                7.845     9.457        2.120     4.637   1.000               5.815
                             Hopper             9.128     11.194       1.706     1.825   1.000               6.602
                     PPO     HalfCheetah        6.888     8.454        1.331     1.536   1.000               6.023
                             Humanoid           6.018      7.183       7.183     7.183   1.000               4.264
                             Walker2d           8.735     10.698       1.666     1.829   1.000               6.048


                                                                   36
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                1000
                               AtlasPOMDP-Carry                                                  HumanoidPOMDP-Walk                                                      HumanoidPOMDP-Run
                                                                                                                                                        800
Cumulative Reward


                                                               Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                                                        Cumulative Reward
                    750                                                        750
                                                                                                                                                        600
                    500                                                        500                                                                      400
                    250                                                        250                                                                      200
                      0                                                                      0                                                                 0
                          0       5000      10000      15000                                     0        5000       10000      15000                               0                   5000         10000     15000
                                       Steps (×103)                                                          Steps (×103)                                                                 Steps (×103)
                                                    GAIL-BPTT-5                                      GAIL-BPTT-32            GAIL-RS (Ours)                                     GAIL-vanilla
    Figure 14: GAIL results on all IL tasks with partially observable policies and privileged critics. The number
    behind the BPTT implementations indicates the truncation length. Abscissa shows the cumulative reward.
    Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).

                               AtlasPOMDP-Carry                                                      HumanoidPOMDP-Walk                                                             HumanoidPOMDP-Run
Cumulative Reward


                                                                         Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                                                                            Cumulative Reward
                    750                                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                         400
                    500                                                                                                                                                     400
                    250                                                                  200                                                                                200
                     0
                                                                                                 0                                                                              0
                          0      500      1000 1500 2000                                             0      500    1000 1500 2000                                                   0          500      1000     1500   2000
                                       Steps (×103)                                                             Steps (×103)                                                                         Steps (×103)
                                                  LSIQ-BPTT-5                                        LSIQ-BPTT-32       LSIQ-RS (Ours)                                          LSIQ-vanilla
    Figure 15: LS-IQ results on all IL tasks with partially observable policies and privileged critics. The number
    behind the BPTT implementations indicates the truncation length. Abscissa shows the cumulative reward.
    Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).


    E.5                       I MITATION L EARNING E XPERIMENTS

    In this section, we present further results of the IL tasks from the main paper. As can be seen in
    Figure 14 and 15, our results show that the S2PG version of GAIL and LS-IQ – GAIL-RS and
    LSIQ-RS – are competitive with the BPTT variants, even when the truncation length is increased.
    In the HumanoidPOMDP-Walk task, GAIL-RS is even able to outperform by a large margin the
    BPTT variant. As stressed in the paper, the advantage of using S2PG over BPTT is the reduced
    computation time. As LS-IQ runs SAC in the inner RL loop, and GAIL runs PPO, the runtimes
    of these algorithms are very similar to their RL counterparts. For the Atlas experiments, it can
    be seen that the vanilla policy in GAIL is already performing well, despite being outperformed by
    our method. This shows that this task does not require much memory. In contrast, the humanoid
    tasks require much more memory, as can be seen by the poor results of the vanilla approaches.
    Interestingly, we found the GAIL-BPTT variants are often very difficult to train on these tasks,
    which is the reason why they often result in unstable learning.


                                                                                                                    37
