Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NFORMED POMDP: L EVERAGING A DDITIONAL
I NFORMATION IN M ODEL -BASED RL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

         In this work, we generalize the problem of learning through interaction in a POMDP
         by accounting for eventual additional information available at training time. First,
         we introduce the informed POMDP, a new learning paradigm offering a clear
         distinction between the training information and the execution observation. Next,
         we propose an objective that leverages this information for learning a sufficient
         statistic of the history for the optimal control. We then adapt this informed objective
         to learn a world model able to sample latent trajectories. Finally, we empirically
         show a significant learning speed improvement in most environments using this
         informed world model in the Dreamer algorithm. These results and the simplicity
         of the proposed adaptation advocate for a systematic consideration of eventual
         additional information when learning in a POMDP using model-based RL.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn to act optimally through interaction with environments
whose dynamics are unknown. A major challenge in this field is partial observability, where only
a partial observation o of the Markovian state of the environment s is available for taking action a.
Such an environment can be formalized as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
In this context, an optimal policy η(a|h) generally depends on the history h of all observations and
previous actions, which grows linearly with time. Fortunately, it is theoretically possible to find a
statistic f (h) of the history h that is updated recurrently and that summarizes all relevant information
to act optimally. Such a statistic is said to be recurrent and sufficient for the optimal control. Formally,
a recurrent statistic is a statistic f (h) updated according to f (h′ ) = u(f (h), a, o′ ) each time an action
a is taken and a new observation o′ is received, with h′ = (h, a, o′ ). A sufficient statistic for the
optimal control is a statistic f (h) for which there exists an optimal policy η(a|h) = g(a|f (h)).
In view of the existence of recurrent and sufficient statistics, many approaches have relied on learning
a recurrent policy ηθ,ϕ (a|h) = gϕ (a|fθ (h)) using a recurrent neural network (RNN) fθ for the
statistic. These policies are simply trained by stochastic gradient ascent of a RL objective using
backpropagation through time (Bakker, 2001; Wierstra et al., 2010; Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Heess
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2017). In this case, the RNN learns a sufficient statistic
fθ (h) as it learns an optimal policy (Lambrechts et al., 2022; Hennig et al., 2023). Although these
approaches theoretically allow implicit learning of a sufficient statistic, sufficient statistics can also be
learned explicitly. Notably, many works (Igl et al., 2018; Buesing et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2018; Gregor
et al., 2019; Han et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020) focused on
learning a recurrent statistic that encodes the reward and next observation distribution given the action:
p(r, o′ |h, a) = p(r, o′ |f (h), a), a property known as predictive sufficiency (Bernardo & Smith, 2009).
A recurrent and predictive sufficient statistic is indeed proven to be sufficient for the optimal control
(Subramanian et al., 2022). The sufficiency objective is usually pursued jointly with the RL objective.
While these methods can learn sufficient statistics and optimal policies in the context of POMDPs,
they learn solely from the observations. However, assuming the same partial observability at
training time and execution time is too pessimistic for many environments, notably for those that are
simulated. We claim that additional information about the state s, be it partial or complete, can be
leveraged during training for learning sufficient statistics more efficiently. To this end, we generalize
the problem of learning from interaction in a POMDP by proposing the informed POMDP. This
formalization introduces the training information i about the state s, which is only available at training


                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


time. Importantly, this training information is designed such that the observation is conditionally
independent of the state given the information. Note that it is always possible to design such an
information i, possibly by concatenating the observation o with the eventual additional observations
o+ , such that i = (o, o+ ). This formalization offers a new learning paradigm where the training
information is used along the reward and observation to supervise the learning of the policy.
In this context, we prove that recurrent statistics are sufficient for the optimal control when they are pre-
dictive sufficient for the reward and next information given the action: p(r, i′ |h, a) = p(r, i′ |f (h), a).
We then derive a learning objective for finding a predictive sufficient statistic, which amounts to
approximating the conditional distribution p(r, i′ |h, a) through likelihood maximization using a
model qθ (r, i′ |fθ (h), a), where fθ is the statistic. Compared to the classic objective for learning
sufficient statistics (Igl et al., 2018; Buesing et al., 2018; Han et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019), this
objective approximates p(r, i′ |h, a) instead of p(r, o′ |h, a). Next, we show that this learned model
qθ (r, i′ |fθ (h), a) can be adapted to provide a world model from which latent trajectories can be
sampled without explicitly reconstructing the observation. This approach boils down to adapting
world models such as those of PlaNet or Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; 2021; 2023) by relying
on a model of the information instead of a model of the observation. Our claims are supported
by experiments in several environments that we formalize as informed POMDPs (Mountain Hike,
Velocity Control, Pop Gym, Flickering Atari and Flickering Control). The informed adaptation of
Dreamer exhibits a significant improvement in terms of convergence speed and policy performance
in most environments, while sometimes hurting performance in others.
This work is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present some related works in asymmetric
learning and multi-agent RL. In Section 3, the informed POMDP is presented with the underlying
execution POMDP. In Section 4, we provide a learning objective for sufficient statistics in this context.
In Section 5, we adapt the Dreamer algorithm to informed POMDPs using this informed objective. In
Section 6, we compare the Uninformed Dreamer and the Informed Dreamer in several environments.


2    R ELATED WORKS

In RL for POMDPs, asymmetric learning consists of exploiting state information during training.
These approaches usually learn policies for the POMDP by imitating a policy conditioned on the state
(Choudhury et al., 2018). However, these heuristic approaches lack a theoretical framework, and the
resulting policies are known to be suboptimal for the POMDP (Warrington et al., 2021; Baisero et al.,
2022). Intuitively, optimal policies in POMDP might indeed need to consider actions that reduce the
state uncertainty. Warrington et al. (2021) addressed this issue by constraining the expert policy so
that its imitation results in an optimal policy in the POMDP. Alternatively, asymmetric actor-critic
approaches use a critic conditioned on the state (Pinto et al., 2018). These approaches have been
proven to provide biased gradients by Baisero & Amato (2022), who also proposed an unbiased
actor-critic approach by introducing the history-state value function V (h, s). Baisero et al. (2022)
adapted this method to value-based RL, where the history-dependent value function V (h) uses the
history-state value function V (h, s) in its temporal difference target. Alternatively, Nguyen et al.
(2021) proposed to enforce that the statistic f (h) encodes the belief p(s|h), a sufficient statistic for the
optimal control (Åström, 1965). It requires making the strong assumption that beliefs b(s) = p(s|h)
are available at training time. Finally, in the work that is the closest to ours, Avalos et al. (2023) learns
a statistic f (h) that encodes the belief distribution p(s|h) by leveraging the states during training.
In multi-agent RL, exploiting additional information available at training time was extensively studied
under the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) framework (Oliehoek et al., 2008).
In CTDE, it is assumed that the histories of all agents, or even the environment state, are available
to all agents at training time. To exploit this additional information, several asymmetric actor-critic
approaches have been developed by leveraging an asymmetric critic conditioned on all histories,
including COMA (Foerster et al., 2018), MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017), M3DDPG (Li et al., 2019)
and R-MADDPG (Wang et al., 2020). While efficient in practice, Lyu et al. (2022) showed that
these asymmetric actor-critic approaches provide biased gradient estimates, which generalizes results
developed for asymmetric learning in POMDP (Baisero & Amato, 2022) to the multi-agent setting.
In the cooperative CTDE setting, another line of work focuses on value decomposition to learn a
utility function for each agent, including QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), QVMix (Leroy et al., 2021)
and QPLEX (Wang et al., 2021). These approaches use the additional information to modulate the


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


contribution of each utility function in the global value function, while ensuring that maximizing the
local utility functions also maximize the global value function, a property known as individual global
max (IGM). Other methods relax this IGM requirement but still condition the value function on all
histories, including QTRAN (Son et al., 2019) and WQMix (Rashid et al., 2020). Recently, Hong
et al. (2022) established that the IGM decomposition is not attainable in the general case.
In contrast to the existing literature on asymmetric learning in POMDP, we introduce an approach that
is guaranteed to provide a sufficient statistic for the optimal control, and that leverages the additional
information only through the objective. Moreover, our new learning paradigm is not restricted to state
supervision, but supports any level of additional information. Finally, to the best of our knowledge,
our method is the first to exploit additional information for learning an environment model of the
POMDP. While our approach is probably applicable to the CTDE setting for learning sufficient
statistics from the local histories of each agent, we leave it as future work.

3     I NFORMED POMDP
In this section, we introduce the informed POMDP and the associated training information, along
with the underlying execution POMDP and the RL objective in this context.

3.1    I NFORMED POMDP AND EXECUTION POMDP

Formally, an informed POMDP P           e is defined as a P                         T
                                                                                                              ...
                                                                      s               s              s
tuple Pe = (S, A, I, O, T, R, Ie, O,  e P, γ) where S is
the state space, A is the action space, I is the informa- ˜
                                                                  I
tion space, and O is the observation space. The initial               i       r       i      r       i      training
                                                                            R
state distribution P gives the probability P (s0 ) of
s0 ∈ S being the initial state of the decision process. Õ
                                                                      o       a       o      a       o     execution
The dynamics are described by the transition dis-
tribution T that gives the probability T (st+1 |st , at )
of st+1 ∈ S being the state resulting from action Figure 1: Bayesian network of an informed
at ∈ A in state st ∈ S. The reward function R gives POMDP execution.
the expected immediate reward rt = R(st , at ) obtained at each transition. The information distribu-
tion Ie gives the probability Ie(it |st ) to get information it ∈ I in state st ∈ S, and the observation
distribution Oe gives the probability O(oe t |it ) to get observation ot ∈ O given information it . Finally,
the discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1] gives the relative importance of future rewards. The main assumption
about an informed POMDP is that the observation ot is conditionally independent of the state st given
the information it : p(ot |it , st ) = O(o
                                       e t |it ). In other words, the random variables st , it and ot satisfy
the Bayesian network st −→ it −→ ot . In practice, it is always possible to define such a training
information it . For example, the information it = (ot , o+         t ) satisfies the aforementioned conditional
independence for any o+    t . Taking a sequence of t actions in the informed POMDP conditions its
execution and provides samples (i0 , o0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , it , ot ) at training time, as illustrated in Figure 1.
For each informed POMDP, there is an underlying R          execution POMDP that is defined as P =
(S, A, O, T, R, O, P, γ), where O(ot |st ) = I O(o  e t |i)Ie(i|st ) di. Taking a sequence of t actions in
the execution POMDP conditions its execution and provides the history ht = (o0 , a0 , . . . , ot ) ∈ H,
where H is the set of histories of arbitrary length. Note that the information samples i0 , . . . , it and
reward samples r0 , . . . , rt−1 are not included, since they are not available at execution time.

3.2    RL OBJECTIVE

A policy η ∈ H is a mapping from histories to probability measures over the action space, where
H = H → ∆(A) is the set of such mappings. A policy is said to be optimal for an informed POMDP
when it is optimal in the underlying execution POMDP, i.e., when it maximizes the expected return,
                                                 "∞                  #
                                                  X
                              J(η) =       E          γ t R(st , at ) .                        (1)
                                                P (s0 )
                                               O(ot |st )       t=0
                                               η(at |ht )
                                            T (st+1 |st ,at )



                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The RL objective for an informed POMDP is thus to find an optimal policy η ∗ ∈ arg maxη∈H J(η)
for the execution POMDP from interaction with the informed POMDP.

4     O PTIMAL CONTROL WITH RECURRENT SUFFICIENT STATISTICS
In this section, we introduce the notion of sufficient statistic for the optimal control and derive an
objective for learning such a statistic in an informed POMDP. For the sake of conciseness, we simply
use x to denote a random variable at the current time step and x′ to denote it at the next time step.
Moreover, we use the composition notation g ◦ f to denote the history-dependent policy g(·|f (·)).

4.1   R ECURRENT SUFFICIENT STATISTICS

Let us first define the concept of sufficient statistic, and derive a necessary condition for optimality.
Definition 1 (Sufficient statistic). In an informed POMDP P    e and in its underlying execution POMDP
P, a statistic of the history f : H → Z is sufficient for the optimal control if, and only if,
                                    max       J(g ◦ f ) =           max       J(η).                        (2)
                                g : Z→∆(A)                       η : H→∆(A)


Corollary 1 (Sufficiency of optimal policies). In an informed POMDP P      e and in its underlying
execution POMDP P, if a policy η = g ◦ f is optimal, then the statistic f : H → Z is sufficient for
the optimal control.
In this work, we focus on learning recurrent policies, i.e., policies η = g ◦ f for which the statistic f
is recurrent. Formally, we have,
                                η(a|h) = g(a|f (h)), ∀(h, a),                                              (3)
                                     ′                       ′       ′            ′
                                 f (h ) = u(f (h), a, o ), ∀h = (h, a, o ).                                (4)
This enables the history to be processed iteratively each time that an action is taken and an observation
is received. According to Corollary 1, when learning a recurrent policy η = g ◦ f , the objective can
be broken down into two problems: finding a sufficient statistic f and an optimal distribution g,
                                               max           J(g ◦ f ).                                    (5)
                                               f : H→Z
                                             g : Z→∆(A)


4.2   L EARNING RECURRENT SUFFICIENT STATISTICS

Below, we provide a sufficient condition for a statistic to be sufficient for the optimal control.
Theorem 1 (Sufficiency of recurrent predictive sufficient statistics). In an informed POMDP P,             e a
statistic f : H → Z is sufficient for the optimal control if it is (i) recurrent and (ii) predictive sufficient
for the reward and next information given the action,
                             (i) f (h′ ) = u(f (h), a, o′ ), ∀h′ = (h, a, o′ ),                            (6)
                                         ′               ′                            ′
                            (ii) p(r, i |h, a) = p(r, i |f (h), a), ∀(h, a, r, i ).                        (7)

The proof for this theorem is in Appendix A, generalizing earlier work by Subramanian et al. (2022).
Now, let us consider a distribution over the histories and actions whose density function is denoted as
p(h, a). For example, we consider the stationary distribution induced by the current policy η in the
informed POMDP P.   e Let us also assume that the density function p(h, a) is non-zero everywhere.
As shown in Appendix B, under mild assumption, any statistic fθ satisfying the following objective,

                                     max             E           log q(r, i′ |f (h), a),                   (8)
                                   f : H→Z   p(h,a,r,i′ )
                              q : Z×A→∆(R×I)

also satisfies (ii). This variational objective jointly optimizes the statistic function f : H → Z with a
conditional probability density function q : Z × A → ∆(R × I). According to Theorem 1, a statistic
that is recurrent and that satisfies objective (8) is sufficient for the optimal control.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In practice, both the recurrent statistic and the density function are implemented with neural networks
fθ and qθ respectively, both parametrized by θ ∈ Rd . In this case, the objective can be maximized
by stochastic gradient ascent. Regarding the statistic function fθ , it is implicitly implemented by
the update function zt = uθ (zt−1 ; xt ) of an RNN. The inputs are xt = (at−1 , ot ), with a−1 the null
action that is typically set to zero. The hidden state of the RNN zt = fθ (ht ) is thus a statistic of
the history that is recurrently updated using uθ . Regarding qθ , it is implemented by a parametrized
probability density function estimator. In such a context, we obtain the following objective,

                                  max         E          log qθ (r, i′ |fθ (h), a) .                     (9)
                                    θ     p(h,a,r,i′ )
                                          |                   {z                 }
                                                            L(fθ )


We might wonder whether this informed objective is better than the classic objective, where i = o.
In this work, we hypothesize that regressing the information distribution instead of the observation
distribution is a better objective in practice. This is motivated by the data processing inequality
applied to the Bayesian network s′ −→ i′ −→ o′ , which concludes that the information i′ is more
informative than the observation o′ about the Markovian state s′ of the environment,
                                        I(s′ , i′ |h, a) ≥ I(s′ , o′ |h, a).                            (10)
where I denotes the conditional mutual information. We thus expect the statistic fθ (h) to converge
faster towards a sufficient statistic, and the policy to converge faster towards an optimal policy. It is
however important to note that the information i might contain irrelevant or exogenous state variables.
In practice, the conditional distribution p(i′ |h, a) may thus be much more difficult to approximate
than p(o′ |h, a), while not being much more useful to the control task. While we consider this study
out of the scope of this work, ensuring that the sufficient representations of the histories are also
necessary for the control task is a promising avenue for future work.

4.3   O PTIMAL CONTROL WITH RECURRENT SUFFICIENT STATISTICS

As seen from Corollary 1, sufficient statistics are needed for the optimal control of POMDPs.
Moreover, as we focus on recurrent policies implemented with RNNs, we can exploit objective (9) to
learn a sufficient statistic fθ . In practice, we jointly maximize the RL objective J(ηθ,ϕ ) = J(gϕ ◦ fθ )
and the statistic objective L(fθ ). This enables one to use the information i to guide the statistic
learning through L(fθ ). This joint maximization results in the following objective,
                                          max J(gϕ ◦ fθ ) + L(fθ ).                                     (11)
                                           θ,ϕ

Note that a policy maximizing (11) also maximizes the return J(gϕ ◦ fθ ) if fθ and qθ are expressive
enough, such that this objective provides optimal policies in the sense of objective (5).

5     M ODEL - BASED RL THROUGH INFORMED WORLD MODELS
Model-based RL focuses on learning a model of the dynamics p(r, o′ |h, a) of the environment,
known as a world model, that is exploited to derive a near-optimal policy. Since the approximate
model usually allows one to generate trajectories, many works derive a near-optimal policy by online
planning (e.g., model-predictive control) or by optimizing a parametrized policy based on these
trajectories (Sutton, 1991; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Chua et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Hafner
et al., 2019; 2020). In this section, we first modify the model qθ (r, i′ |fθ (h), a) in order to get a world
model from which trajectories can be sampled. We then adapt the DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023)
algorithm using this world model, resulting in the Informed Dreamer algorithm.

5.1   I NFORMED WORLD MODEL

In this work, we implement the informed world model with a variational RNN (VRNN) as introduced
by Chung et al. (2015), also known as a recurrent state-space model (RSSM) in the RL context
(Hafner et al., 2019). It is worth noticing that such a model performs its recurrent update using a
latent stochastic representation of the observation. When generating trajectories, it also samples latent
representations of the observations without explicitly reconstructing them, which we refer to as latent


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trajectories. This key design choice enables the sampling of trajectories without explicitly learning
the observation distribution, but the reward and information distribution only. Formally, we have,
                                                         ê ∼ qθp (·|z, a),                                    (prior, 12)
                                                         r̂ ∼ qθr (·|z, ê),                         (reward decoder, 13)
                                                         î′ ∼ qθi (·|z, ê),                    (information decoder, 14)
where ê is the latent variable of the VRNN when generating trajectories. The prior qθp and the
decoders qθi and qθr are jointly trained with the encoder,
                                                         e ∼ qθe (·|z, a, o′ ),                              (encoder, 15)
to maximize the likelihood of reward and next information samples. The latent representation
e ∼ qθe (·|z, a, o′ ) of the next observation o′ can be used to update the statistic to z ′ ,
                                                         z ′ = uθ (z, a, e).                               (recurrence, 16)
                                                                                         ′             ′
Note that the statistic z is no longer deterministically updated to z given a and o , instead we have
z ∼ fθ (·|h), which is induced by uθ and qθe . In practice, we maximize the evidence lower bound
(ELBO), a variational lower bound on the likelihood of reward and next information samples given
the statistic (Chung et al., 2015),

                             ′
                                             E ′ ′ e E ′ log qθi (i′ |z, e) + log qθr (r|z, e)

             E ′ log qθ (r, i |z, a) ≥
        p(h,a,r,i )                    p(h,a,r,i ,o ) qθ (e|z,a,o )
          fθ (z|h)                        fθ (z|h)
                                                                 e        ′     p
                                                       − KL (qθ (·|z, a, o ) ∥ qθ (·|z, a)) .     (17)

As illustrated in Figure 2 for a trajectory sampled in the informed POMDP, the ELBO maximizes
the conditional log-likelihood qθr (r|z, e) and qθi (i|z, e) of r and i′ for a sample of the encoder
e ∼ qθe (·|z, a, o′ ), and minimizes the KL divergence from qθe (·|z, a, o′ ) to the prior distribution
qθp (·|z, a). Note that when i = o, it corresponds to Dreamer’s world model and learning objective.
                                                          s                     s            s



                                               /          i        r            i   r        i

                                   qθr             qθi
                                               /          o        a            o   a        o


                                         qθe
                               /               e         z         e            z   e        z
                                                         uθ
                                    − KL
                                                   p
                                               ê qθ               ê               ê

      Figure 2: VRNN loss for a given trajectory at training time. Dependence of qθr and qθi on z is omitted.

As can be noticed from Equation 17 and Figure 2, the encoder is conditioned on the observation only.
While this is required for the encoder to be used at execution time, it certainly loosen the lower bound
and limits the quality of the conditional information distribution that can be learned. Future work
may improve the quality of the information reconstruction by considering an additional information
encoder, also conditioned on the statistic of the history, whose samples are not used in the recurrence.

5.2     I NFORMED D REAMER

As explained above, while our informed world model does not learn the observation distribution,
it is still able to sample latent trajectories. Indeed, the VRNN only uses the latent representation
e ∼ qθe (·|z, a, o′ ) of the observation o′ , trained to reconstruct the information i′ , in order to update
z to z ′ . Consequently, we can use the prior distribution ê ∼ qθp (·|z, a), trained according to (17) to
minimize the KL divergence from e ∼ qθp (·|z, a, o′ ) in expectation, to sample latent trajectories.
The Informed Dreamer algorithm leverages such trajectories to learn a latent critic vψ (z) and a latent
policy a ∼ gϕ (·|z). Figure 3a illustrates the generation of a latent trajectory, along with estimated

                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rewards r̂ ∼ qθr (·|z, e) and values v̂ = vψ (z). The actions are sampled according to the latent
policy, and any RL algorithm can be used to maximize the estimated return. Moreover, note that the
estimated return is given by a function that is differentiable with respect to ϕ, and it can be directly
maximized by stochastic gradient ascent. In the experiments, we use an actor-critic approach for
discrete actions and direct maximization for continuous actions, following DreamerV3 (Hafner et al.,
2023). Finally, as shown in Figure 3b, when deployed in the execution POMDP, the encoder qθe is
used to compute the latent representations of the observations and to update the statistic. The actions
are then selected according to a ∼ gϕ (·|z).
                                gϕ                                                               gϕ
      /     /   v̂         r̂        a    v̂       r̂   a    v̂                     /     o           a       o         a         o
     qθr     vψ
                                                                              qθe
 /          ê p      z              ê        z        ê        z       /         e     z           e       z         e         z
              qθ      uθ                                                                  uθ
(a) Imagination of a trajectory using policy gϕ with estimated rewards (b) Execution of the policy on a trajectory of the POMDP using the
and values. Dependence of qθr and vψ on z is omitted.                  encoder qθe to condition the latent policy gϕ .

                   Figure 3: Bayesian graph of a VRNN evaluation during imagination and execution.

A pseudocode for the adaptation of the DreamerV3 algorithm using this informed world model is
given in Appendix C. We also detail some divergences of our formalization with respect to the
original DreamerV3 algorithm. As in DreamerV3, we use symlog predictions, a discrete VAE, KL
balancing, free bits, reward normalisation, a distributional critic, and entropy regularization.


6      E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we compare Dreamer to the Informed Dreamer on several informed POMDPs, all con-
sidered with a discount factor of γ = 0.997. For reproducibility purposes, we use the implementation
and hyperparameters of DreamerV3 released by the authors at github.com/danijar/dreamerv3, and
release our adaptation to informed POMDPs using the same hyperparameters at [anonymized].

6.1        VARYING M OUNTAIN H IKE

In the Varying Mountain Hike environments, the agent should walk throughout a mountainous terrain
to reach the mountain top as fast as possible while avoiding the valleys. There exists four versions of
this environment, depending on the agent orientation (north or random) and on the observation that is
available (position or altitude). More formally, the agent has a position x and a fixed orientation c in
each episode. The orientation c is either always north or a random cardinal orientation, depending on
the environment version. It can take four actions to move relative to its orientation (right, forward, left
and backward). The orientation is not observed by the agent, but it receives a Gaussian observation
of its position, or its altitude, depending on the environment version (σo = 0.1 in both cases). The
reward is given by its altitude relative to the mountain top, such that the goal of the agent is to obtain
the highest cumulative altitude. Around the mountain top, states are terminal and the trajectories
are truncated at t = 160 in practice. We refer the reader to Lambrechts et al. (2022) for a formal
description of these environments, strongly inspired by the Mountain Hike of Igl et al. (2018).
For this environment, we first consider the position and orientation to be available as additional
information at training time. In other words, we consider the state-informed POMDP with i = s.
As can be seen in Figure 4a, the speed of convergence of the policies is improved in all four
environments when using the Informed Dreamer. Moreover, as shown in Table 1 in Appendix D, the
final performance of the Informed Dreamer is better in 3 out of 4 environments.
We also experiment with other types of information in the Varying Mountain Hike with position
observation and random orientation. More precisely, we consider an information i = (x̃, c̃) about the
state s = (x, c), where x̃ is an observation of the position x with Gaussian noise of standard deviation
σi ∈ [0, σo ], and c̃ is a noisy observation of the orientation c replaced by a random orientation with
probability ϵi ∈ [0, 1]. Note that when σi = 0, the position x is encoded in the information, while
when σi = σo , the observation o is encoded in the information. As shown in Figure 4b, without
confidence intervals for the sake readability, the better the information, the faster the policy converges.
It supports the idea that the more information about the state is exploited, the faster an optimal

                                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                      Uninformed                    Informed
                                Position, North               Position, Random                                        Position, Random, i = (x̃, c̃) and σi /σo =  i

                                                        −50                                                  −20
                      −50
                                                                                                                                                            i=s
                  −100                                −100                                                   −40                                             i = 0.2
                                                                                                             −60                                             i = 0.4
                                Altitude, North               Altitude, Random                                                                               i = 0.6
                                                                                                             −80
                                                        −50                                                                                                  i = 0.8
                      −50                                                                                    −100                                            i = 1.0
                                                      −100
                  −100                                                                                       −120                                           i=o
                            0                     1           0                   1                                 0.0      0.2      0.4       0.6       0.8       1.0
                                      Environment steps (M)                                                                Environment steps (M)

                 (a) Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer                                             (b) Informed Dreamer with i = (x̃, c̃) with
                 with i = s in the four environments.                                                    position observation and random orientation.

      Figure 4: Varying Mountain Hike environments: average return and standard error over five trainings.

policy for the POMDP is learned. Moreover, we observe that the Informed Dreamer with ϵi = 1 and
σi = 0.1 performs even worse than the Uninformed Dreamer. It suggests that considering additional
information that is not informative about the state (i.e., I(s, i|o) = 0), such as c̃ with ϵi = 1, can
degrade learning. Similar results are obtained for the other three environments in Subsection E.1.

6.2       V ELOCITY C ONTROL

In the Velocity Control environments, we consider the standard DeepMind Control tasks (Tassa et al.,
2018), where only the joints velocities are available as observations and not their absolute positions,
which is a standard benchmark in the partially observable RL literature (Han et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2020). These environments consists of controlling different multi-joints robots to achieve several
tasks. We consider the absolute positions to be available at training time along with the velocities,
which results in a Markovian information i = s.
                                                                              Uninformed                       Informed
      Acrobot Swingup                  Cartpole Balance             Cartpole Balance Sparse              Cartpole Swingup            Cartpole Swingup Sparse                   Cheetah Run
                                500                               500
100                                                                                                300                             100                              200
                                                                  250                              200
                                250
                                                                                                   100
  0                                                                                                                                  0                                 0

          Cup Catch                       Finger Spin                   Finger Turn Easy                 Finger Turn Hard                    Hopper Hop                        Hopper Stand
500
                                                                                                                                   100
                                200
                                                                  250                              250                                                              250

  0                               0                                 0                                0                               0                                 0

      Pendulum Swingup                    Reacher Easy                      Reacher Hard                      Walker Run                     Walker Stand                      Walker Walk
                                500                               500
                                                                                                                                   400
                                                                                                   200
200                                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                                                                   200
  0                               0                                 0                                0                                                                 0
      0                1              0                   1             0                  1             0                    1          0                      1          0                  1
                                                                                Environment steps (M)

Figure 5: Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer with i = s in the Velocity Control environments: average
return and standard error over five trainings.

Figure 5 shows that the convergence speed of the policies is greatly improved in this benchmark, for
nearly all of the considered games. Moreover, the final returns are given in Table 2 in Appendix D,
and show that policies obtained after one million time steps are better in 13 out of 18 environments
when considering additional information.

6.3       P OP G YM

The Pop Gym environments have been specifically designed to benchmark the ability of handling
partial observability (Morad et al., 2023). The latter notably includes memory games, board games,
or control problems involving partial observability and noise. For these environments, we consider
the state to be available as additional information.
Figure 6 shows that learning in those POMDPs usually benefits from the exploitation of additional
information as proposed in the Informed Dreamer. The learning of the Informed Dreamer seems
to suffer from the approximation of the information distribution in only 2 out of those 10 environ-
ments (Concentration and Higher Lower). The final returns are given in Table 3 in Appendix D,


                                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                      Uninformed                   Informed
                   Concentration                   Count Recall                     Higher Lower                  Mine Sweeper         Noisy Position Cart Pole
         0.0                           −0.50                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                         0.25
                                       −0.75                                                                                          0.2
        −0.5                                                             0.00
                                                                                                       −0.5

         Noisy Position Pendulum               Position Cart Pole               Position Pendulum                 Repeat First              Repeat Previous
                                        0.75                                                                                          0.5
        0.50                                                                                            0.5
                                        0.50                             0.50
                                                                                                        0.0                           0.0
        0.25                            0.25                             0.25
                                                                                                       −0.5                          −0.5
               0                   1           0                  1             0                  1          0                  1          0             1
                                                                      Environment steps (M)
Figure 6: Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer with i = s in the Pop Gym environments: average return
and standard error over five trainings.
showing a better final performance in 7 out of 10 environments. In particular, like in the Velocity
Control environments, we observe for the Cart Pole and Pendulum environments that the Informed
Dreamer converges to a better performance. This also holds for the Repeat First and Repeat Previous
environments, that both require discovering long time dependencies. The exploitation of additional
information seems crucial in these environments, and we study this in depth for the Repeat Previous
environment in Subsection E.2. This analysis shows that the Informed Dreamer can learn near-optimal
policies in environments for which the Uninformed Dreamer does not learn at all.

6.4   F LICKERING ATARI AND F LICKERING C ONTROL

While arguably not constituting a relevant benchmark for measuring the ability of handling partial
observability (Shao et al., 2022; Avalos et al., 2023), the Flickering Atari and Flickering Control
environments have become standard benchmarks in the partially observable RL literature (Hausknecht
& Stone, 2015; Zhu et al., 2017; Igl et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2020). For completeness, the results for
these environments are reported in Appendix E. We observe that the speed of convergence and final
performance of the agent is sometimes greatly improved when considering additional information
(e.g., Asteroids, Pong, Breakout). However, we also observe that the performance is lower in some
environments. As far as the Flickering Atari environments are concerned, the Informed Dreamer
only outperforms Dreamer in 6 out of 12 environments. In the Flickering Control environments, the
Informed Dreamer tends to systematically underperform the Uniformed Dreamer, attaining a better
performance in only 2 out of 18 environments. It suggests that exploiting additional state information
is not useful in these environments. We hypothesize that the conditional information distribution is
difficult to approximate, which may cause learning to degrade. This shows that not all information is
worth exploiting, particularly when the level of partial observability is low.

7     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduced a new formalization for considering additional information available at
training time for POMDP, called the informed POMDP. In this context, we proposed an objective for
learning recurrent sufficient statistic for the optimal control. Next, we adapted this objective to provide
an environment model from which latent trajectories can be sampled. We then adapted a successful
model-based RL algorithm, known as Dreamer, with this informed world model, resulting in the
Informed Dreamer algorithm. By considering several environments from the partially observable RL
literature, we showed that this informed learning objective improves the convergence speed and quality
of the policies in most cases. Given the similarities with the CTDE context, this work motivates future
work and lays the foundations for developing multi-agent methods that learn sufficient statistics from
the local history of each agent. This work also presents several limitations. First, a formal theoretical
justification for the use of the information instead of the observation is still lacking. One solution
might be to consider the notion of approximate information states to bound the suboptimality of the
policy for a given error on the information distribution instead of the observation distribution. Second,
we observed that this informed objective hurts performance in some environments, motivating further
work in which particular attention is paid to the design of the information. In particular, it would
be worth drawing connection to the exogenous RL literature that would complement this work by
focusing on discarding irrelevant information. Third, the ELBO learning objective is probably a
loose lower bound on the information likelihood, and future works might improve the quality of the
information distribution by considering informed world models with two encoders.


                                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Unsupervised State Representation Learning in Atari. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal Control of Markov Processes with Incomplete State Information.
 Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10:174–205, 1965.
Raphaël Avalos, Florent Delgrange, Ann Nowe, Guillermo Perez, and Diederik M Roijers. The
  Wasserstein Believer: Learning Belief Updates for Partially Observable Environments through
  Reliable Latent Space Models. In Sixteenth European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, 2023.
Andrea Baisero and Christopher Amato. Unbiased Asymmetric Reinforcement Learning under Partial
  Observability. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
  Multiagent Systems, pp. 44–52, 2022.
Andrea Baisero, Brett Daley, and Christopher Amato. Asymmetric DQN for Partially Observable
  Reinforcement Learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 107–117. PMLR, 2022.
Bram Bakker. Reinforcement Learning with Long Short-Term Memory. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 14, 2001.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The Arcade Learning
 Environment: An Evaluation Platform for General Agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
 Research, 47:253–279, 2013.
José M Bernardo and Adrian FM Smith. Bayesian Theory, volume 405. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Sébastien Racaniere, SM Eslami, Danilo Rezende, David P Reichert,
  Fabio Viola, Frederic Besse, Karol Gregor, Demis Hassabis, et al. Learning and Querying Fast
  Generative Models for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03006, 2018.
Sanjiban Choudhury, Mohak Bhardwaj, Sankalp Arora, Ashish Kapoor, Gireeja Ranade, Sebastian
  Scherer, and Debadeepta Dey. Data-Driven Planning via Imitation Learning. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 37(13-14):1632–1672, 2018.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep Reinforcement
  Learning in a Handful of Trials Using Probabilistic Dynamics Models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Junyoung Chung, Kyle Kastner, Laurent Dinh, Kratarth Goel, Aaron C Courville, and Yoshua
  Bengio. A Recurrent Latent Variable Model for Sequential Data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 32 (1), 2018.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Yan Wu, Hamza Merzic, and Aaron van den
  Oord. Shaping Belief States with Generative Environment Models for RL. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Bernardo A Pires, and Rémi Munos.
  Neural Predictive Belief Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.06407, 2018.
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bernardo Avila Pires, Bilal Piot, Jean-Bastien Grill, Florent Altché, Rémi
  Munos, and Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar. Bootstrap Latent-Predictive Representations for Multi-
  task Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3875–3886.
  PMLR, 2020.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent World Models Facilitate Policy Evolution. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to Control: Learning
  Behaviors by Latent Imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering Atari with
  Discrete World Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering Diverse Domains
  through World Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.

Dongqi Han, Kenji Doya, and Jun Tani. Variational Recurrent Models for Solving Partially Observable
  Control Tasks. In Internal Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep Recurrent Q-Learning for Partially Observable MDPs.
 In 2015 AAAI Fall Symposium Series, 2015.

Nicolas Heess, Jonathan J Hunt, Timothy P Lillicrap, and David Silver. Memory-Based Control with
  Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.04455, 2015.

Jay A Hennig, Sandra A Romero Pinto, Takahiro Yamaguchi, Scott W Linderman, Naoshige Uchida,
  and Samuel J Gershman. Emergence of Belief-Like Representations through Reinforcement
  Learning. PLOS Computational Biology, 19(9):e1011067, 2023.

Yitian Hong, Yaochu Jin, and Yang Tang. Rethinking Individual Global Max in Cooperative
  Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  32438–32449, 2022.

Maximilian Igl, Luisa Zintgraf, Tuan Anh Le, Frank Wood, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep Variational
 Reinforcement Learning for POMDPs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 2117–2126. PMLR, 2018.

Gaspard Lambrechts, Adrien Bolland, and Damien Ernst. Recurrent Networks, Hidden States and
  Beliefs in Partially Observable Environments. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
  ISSN 2835-8856.

Alex X Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic Latent Actor-Critic:
  Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Latent Variable Model. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:741–752, 2020.

Pascal Leroy, Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, Gilles Louppe, Jonathan Pisane, and Matthia Sabatelli.
  QVMix and QVMix-Max: Extending the Deep Quality-Value Family of Algorithms to Cooperative
  Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In AAAI Workshop on Reinforcement Learning in Games,
  2021.

Shihui Li, Yi Wu, Xinyue Cui, Honghua Dong, Fei Fang, and Stuart Russell. Robust Multi-Agent
  Reinforcement Learning via Minimax Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33 (01), pp. 4213–4220, 2019.

Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-Agent
  Actor-Critic for Mixed Cooperative-Competitive Environments. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Xueguang Lyu, Andrea Baisero, Yuchen Xiao, and Christopher Amato. A Deeper Understanding
  of State-Based Critics in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36 (9), pp. 9396–9404, 2022.

Xiao Ma, Peter Karkus, David Hsu, Wee Sun Lee, and Nan Ye. Discriminative Particle Filter
  Reinforcement Learning for Complex Partial Observations. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Steven Morad, Ryan Kortvelesy, Matteo Bettini, Stephan Liwicki, and Amanda Prorok. POPGym:
  Benchmarking Partially Observable Reinforcement Learning. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Hai Nguyen, Brett Daley, Xinchao Song, Christopher Amato, and Robert Platt. Belief-Grounded
  Networks for Accelerated Robot Learning under Partial Observability. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 1640–1653. PMLR, 2021.
Frans A Oliehoek, Matthijs TJ Spaan, and Nikos Vlassis. Optimal and Approximate Q-Value
  Functions for Decentralized POMDPs. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 32:289–353,
  2008.
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asym-
  metric Actor Critic for Image-Based Robot Learning. In 14th Robotics: Science and Systems, RSS
  2018. MIT Press Journals, 2018.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Rein-
  forcement Learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR,
  2018.
Tabish Rashid, Gregory Farquhar, Bei Peng, and Shimon Whiteson. Weighted QMix: Expanding
  Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10199–10210, 2020.
Yang Shao, Quan Kong, Tadayuki Matsumura, Taiki Fuji, Kiyoto Ito, and Hiroyuki Mizuno. Mask
  Atari for Deep reinforcement Learning as POMDP Benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16777,
  2022.
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. QTRAN:
  Learning to Factorize with Transformation for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.
Jayakumar Subramanian, Amit Sinha, Raihan Seraj, and Aditya Mahajan. Approximate Information
  State for Approximate Planning and Reinforcement Learning in Partially Observed Systems.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(12):1–83, 2022.
Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an Integrated Architecture for Learning, Planning, and Reacting. ACM
  Sigart Bulletin, 2(4):160–163, 1991.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind Control Suite. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. QPLEX: Duplex Dueling
   Multi-Agent Q-Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Rose E Wang, Michael Everett, and Jonathan P How. R-MADDPG for Partially Observable Environ-
  ments and Limited Communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06684, 2020.
Andrew Warrington, Jonathan W Lavington, Adam Scibior, Mark Schmidt, and Frank Wood. Robust
  Asymmetric Learning in POMDPs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11013–
 11023. PMLR, 2021.
Daan Wierstra, Alexander Förster, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent Policy Gradients.
  Logic Journal of the IGPL, 18(5):620–634, 2010.
Marvin Zhang, Zoe McCarthy, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning Deep
 Neural Network Policies with Continuous Memory States. In IEEE International Conference on
 Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 520–527. IEEE, 2016.
Marvin Zhang, Sharad Vikram, Laura Smith, Pieter Abbeel, Matthew Johnson, and Sergey Levine.
 SOLAR: Deep Structured Representations for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7444–7453. PMLR, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pengfei Zhu, Xin Li, Pascal Poupart, and Guanghui Miao. On Improving Deep Reinforcement
  Learning for POMDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07978, 2017.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     S UFFICIENCY OF RECURRENT PREDICTIVE SUFFICIENT STATISTICS
In this section, we prove Theorem 1, that is recalled below.
Theorem 1 (Sufficiency of recurrent predictive sufficient statistics). In an informed POMDP P,             e a
statistic f : H → Z is sufficient for the optimal control if it is (i) recurrent and (ii) predictive sufficient
for the reward and next information given the action,
                                (i) f (h′ ) = u(f (h), a, o′ ), ∀h′ = (h, a, o′ ),                         (6)
                                            ′                          ′                            ′
                               (ii) p(r, i |h, a) = p(r, i |f (h), a), ∀(h, a, r, i ).                     (7)

Proof. From Proposition 4 and Theorem 5 by Subramanian et al. (2022), we know that a statistic
is sufficient for the optimal control of an execution POMDP if it is (i) recurrent and (ii’) predictive
sufficient for the reward and next observation given the action: p(r, o′ |h, a) = p(r, o′ |f (h), a). Let
us consider a statistic f : H → A satisfying (i) and (ii). Let us show that it satisfies (ii’). We have,
                                            Z
                       p(r, o′ |f (h), a) =    p(r, o′ , i′ |f (h), a) di′                           (18)
                                             I
                                            Z
                                          =    p(o′ |r, i′ , f (h), a)p(r, i′ |f (h), a) di′ ,       (19)
                                                     I

using the law of total probability and the chain rule. As can be seen from the informed POMDP
formalization of Section 3 and the resulting Bayesian network in Figure 1, the Markov blanket of o′
is {i′ }. As a consequence, o′ is conditionally independent of any other variable given i′ . In particular,
p(o′ |i′ , r, f (h), a) = p(o|i′ ), such that,
                                                   Z
                              p(r, o′ |f (h), a) =   p(o′ |i′ )p(r, i′ |f (h), a) di′ .               (20)
                                                               I

From hypothesis (ii), we can write,
                                                               Z
                                    p(r, o′ |f (h), a) =               p(o′ |i′ )p(r, i′ |h, a) di′ .     (21)
                                                                   I

Finally, exploiting the Markov blanket {i′ } of o′ , the chain rule and the law of total probability again,
we have,
                                              Z
                         p(r, o′ |f (h), a) =    p(o′ |i′ , r, h, a)p(r, i′ |h, a) di′                (22)
                                               I
                                              Z
                                            =    p(o′ , r, i′ |h, a) di′                              (23)
                                                          I
                                                     = p(r, o′ |h, a).                                    (24)
This proves that (ii) implies (ii’). As a consequence, any statistic fθ satisfying (i) and (ii) is a sufficient
statistic of the history for the optimal control of the informed POMDP.

B    R ECURRENT SUFFICIENT STATISTIC OBJECTIVE
First, let us consider a fixed history h and action a. Let us recall that two density functions p(r, i′ |h, a)
and p(r, i′ |f (h), a) are equal almost everywhere if, and only if, their KL divergence is zero,
                                                                p(r, i′ |h, a)
                                                E′       log                      = 0.                    (25)
                                          p(r,i |h,a)          p(r, i′ |f (h), a)
Now, let us consider a probability density function p(h, a) that is non zero everywhere. We have that
the KL divergence from p(r, i′ |h, a) to p(r, i′ |f (h), a) is equal to zero for almost every history h and
action a if, and only if, it is zero on expectation over p(h, a), since the KL divergence is non-negative,
                                     p(r, i′ |h, a) a.e.                       p(r, i′ |h, a)
                    E′        log                      = 0 ⇔     E        log                    = 0.     (26)
                p(r,i |h,a)         p(r, i′ |f (h), a)       p(h,a,r,i′ )     p(r, i′ |f (h), a)


                                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rearranging, we have that p(r, i′ |h, a) is equal to p(r, i′ |f (h), a) for almost every h, a, r and i′ if,
and only if,
                                 E         log p(r, i′ |h, a) =        E         log p(r, i′ |f (h), a).                (27)
                            p(h,a,r,i′ )                          p(h,a,r,i′ )

Now, we recall the data processing inequality, enabling one to write, for any statistic f ′ ,
                                E          log p(r, i′ |h, a) ≥        E         log p(r, i′ |f ′ (h), a).              (28)
                            p(h,a,r,i′ )                          p(h,a,r,i′ )

since h(r, i′ |h, a) = h(r, i′ |h, f (h), a) ≤ h(r, i′ |f (h), a), ∀(h, a), where h(x) is the differential
entropy of random variable x. Assuming that there exists at least one f : H → Z for which the
inequality is tight, we obtain the following objective for a predictive sufficient statistic f ,
                                             max         E        log p(r, i′ |f (h), a).                               (29)
                                           f : H→Z p(h,a,r,i′ )

Unfortunately, the probability density p(r, i′ |f (h), a) is unknown. However, knowing that the
distribution that maximizes the log-likelihood of samples from p(r, i′ |f (h), a) is p(r, i′ |f (h), a)
itself, we can write,
                 E          log p(r, i′ |f (h), a) =              max                 E       log q(r, i′ |f (h), a).   (30)
             p(h,a,r,i′ )                               q : Z×A→∆(R×I) p(h,a,r,i′ )

By jointly maximizing the probability density function q : Z × A → ∆(R × I), we obtain,
                                             max             E          log q(r, i′ |f (h), a).                         (31)
                                          f : H→Z   p(h,a,r,i′ )
                                     q : Z×A→∆(R×I)

This objective ensures that the statistic f (h) is predictive sufficient for the reward and next information
given the action. If f (h) is a recurrent statistic, then it is also sufficient for the optimal control,
according to Theorem 1.

C      I NFORMED D REAMER
The Informed Dreamer algorithm is presented in Algorithm 3. Differences with the Uninformed
Dreamer algorithm (Hafner et al., 2020) are highlighted in blue. In addition, it can be noted that in
the original Dreamer algorithm, the statistic zt encodes ht = (o0 , a0 , . . . , ot ) and at , instead of ht
only. As a consequence, the prior distribution et ∼ qθp (·|zt ) can be conditioned on the statistic zt only,
instead of the statistic and last action. Similarly, the encoder distribution et ∼ qθp (·|zt , ot+1 ) can be
conditioned on the statistic zt only, instead of the statistic and last action. On the other hand, the latent
policy at+1 ∼ g(·|zt , et ) should be conditioned on the statistic zt and the new latent et to account
for the last observation, and the same is true for the value function vψ (zt , et ). In the experiments,
we follow the original implementation for both the Uninformed Dreamer and the Informed Dreamer,
according to the code that we release at [anonymized].
Following Dreamer, the algorithm introduces the continuation flag ct , which indicates whether state
st is terminal. A terminal state st is a state from which the agent can never escape, and in which any
further action provides a zero reward. It follows that the value function of a terminal state is zero, and
trajectories can be truncated at terminal states since we do not need to learn their value or the optimal
policy in those states. Alternatively, ct can be interpreted as an indicator that can be extracted from
the observation ot , but we made it explicit in the algorithm.

Algorithm 1 Encode
                                                                      n W −1 N −1
    Inputs: Update function uθ , encoder qθe , and histories (an

                                                               w−1 , ow )w=0 n=0 .
         n
    Let z−1 = 0.
    for w = 0 . . . W − 1 do
       Let en          e     n     n     n
            w−1 ∼ qθ (·|zw−1 , aw−1 , ow ).
            n            n
       Let zw = uθ (zw−1     , an  , e n
                                w−1 w−1 ).
    end for                       N −1
                   n        W −2
    Returns: (zw     , enw )w=−1 n=0 .


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Imagine
  Inputs: Update function uθ , prior qθp , policy gϕ , statistics, encoded latents and actions
    n n n W −2 N −1
    (zw , ew , aw )w=−1 n=0 .
       n,w
  Let z−1    = zw n
                    , ên,w       n    n,w
                        −1 = ew , a−1 = aw .
                                                 n

  for k = 0 . . . K − 1 do
     Let zkn,w = uθ (zk−1 n,w
                               , an,w     n,w
                                  k−1 , êk−1 ).
           n,w        p     n,w     n,w
     Let êk ∼ qθ (·|zk , ak ).
     Let an,w
           k    ∼ gϕ (·|zkn,w ).
  end for n
                  n,w n,w K−1 W −2 oN −1
  Returns:       (zk , êk )k=0 w=−1               .
                                            n=0


Algorithm 3 Informed Dreamer - direct reward maximization
  Hyperparameters: Environment steps S, steps before training F , train ratio R, backpropagation horizon W ,
  imagination horizon K, batch size N , replay buffer capacity B.
  Initialize neural network parameters θ, ϕ, ψ randomly, initialize empty replay buffer B.
  Let g = 0, t = 0, a−1 = 0, r−1 = 0, z−1 = 0.
  Reset the environment and observe o0 and c0 (true at reset).
  for s = 0 . . . S − 1 do
     // Environment interaction
     Encode observation ot to et−1 ∼ qθe (·|zt−1 , at−1 , ot ).
     Update zt = uθ (zt−1 , at−1 , et−1 ).
     Given the current history ht , take action at ∼ gϕ (·|zt ).
     Observe reward rt , information it+1 , observation ot+1 and continuation flag ct+1 .
     if ct+1 is false (terminal state) then
         Reset t = 0.
         Reset the environment and observe o0 and c0 (true at reset).
     end if
     Update t = t + 1.
     Add trajectory of last W time steps (aw−1 , rw−1 , iw , ow , cw )tw=t−W +1 to the replay buffer B.
     // Learning
     while |B| ≥ F ∧ g < Rs do
         // Environment learning
                                                                         n W −1 N −1
         Draw N trajectories of length W (an            n        n  n

                                                 w−1 , rw−1 , iw , ow , cw )w=0 n=0 uniformly from the replay
         buffer B.
         Compute statistics and encoded latents
                          n                oN −1                       n                  oN −1
                             n       W −2                                          n W −1
                           (zw , en
                                  w )w=−1        = Encode uθ , qθe , (an    w−1 , ow )w=0         .
                                           n=0                                               n=0

                            PN      PW −2    n          n
       Update θ using ∇θ    n=0     w=−1 Lw , where a−1 = 0 and,
                      Lw = log qθ (iw+1 |zw , ew ) + log qθc (cn
                       n        i n       n    n                      n    n          r n n        n
                                                                w+1 |zw , ew ) + log qθ (rw |zw , ew )
                                     e    n    n   n          p    n    n
                           − KL (qθ (·|zw , aw , ow+1 ) ∥ qθ (·|zw , aw )) .
       // Behaviour learning
       Sample latent trajectories
              n                       oW −2  N −1                               n                      oN −1
                                                                                                n W −2
                 (zkn,w , ên,w
                            k   ) K−1
                                  k=0             = Imagine   u θ , q p
                                                                      θ , g ϕ ,  (z n
                                                                                    w , e n
                                                                                          w , a  )
                                                                                                w w=−1         .
                                      w=−1     n=0                                                       n=0


       Predict rewards rkn,w ∼ qθr (·|zkn,w , ên,w                        n,w    c    n,w
                                                k ), continuations flags ck+1 ∼ qθ (·|zk   , ên,w
                                                                                               k ), and values
        n,w         n,w
       vk = vψ (zk ).
       Compute value targets using λ-returns, with Gn,w           n,w
                                                       K−1 = vK−1 and
                                  n,w        n,w      n,w             n,w
                                                                          + λGn,w

                                Gk = rk + γck               (1 − λ)vk+1        k+1 .
                           P −1 PW −2 PK−1 n,w
       Update ϕ using ∇ϕ N                       k=0 Gk .
                            Pn=0−1 Pw=−1
                                      W −2 PK−1
       Update ψ using ∇ψ N    n=0     w=−1        k=0 ∥vψ (zk
                                                             n,w
                                                                 ) − sg(Gn,w   2
                                                                          k )∥ , where sg is the stop-gradient
       operator.
       Count gradient steps g = g + 1
    end while
  end for


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     F INAL RETURNS
We provide the final returns obtained by Dreamer and the Informed Dreamer for the Varying Mountain
Hike environments in Table 1, for the Velocity Control environments in Table 2, and for the Pop Gym
environments in Table 3.
 Table 1: Average final return and standard deviation over five trainings in the Mountain Hike environments.

                       Altitude     Random       Uninformed              Informed
                        False        False    −13.70 ± 03.32        −13.35 ± 02.93
                        False        True     −18.32 ± 06.04        −17.72 ± 04.19
                        True         False    −14.78 ± 02.44        −14.98 ± 04.73
                        True         True     −67.05 ± 21.76        −45.94 ± 32.77

Table 2: Average final return and standard deviation over five trainings in the Velocity Control environments.

                             Task                  Uninformed               Informed
                      Acrobot Swingup           113.73 ± 108.03          112.49 ± 54.67
                       Cartpole Balance           511.60 ± 01.95       513.22 ± 00.82
                   Cartpole Balance Sparse       491.07 ± 00.00          485.34 ± 49.39
                      Cartpole Swingup            347.58 ± 18.30       371.24 ± 05.62
                   Cartpole Swingup Sparse         36.98 ± 42.83       102.44 ± 139.79
                         Cheetah Run             315.40 ± 39.64         305.91 ± 103.62
                          Cup Catch               465.23 ± 28.77       468.32 ± 12.53
                          Finger Spin             186.66 ± 39.34       245.77 ± 61.99
                       Finger Turn Easy           359.32 ± 76.13       414.82 ± 46.09
                      Finger Turn Hard            347.91 ± 81.80       398.38 ± 63.40
                         Hopper Hop                91.05 ± 29.62        97.50 ± 29.83
                         Hopper Stand             350.77 ± 88.92       384.44 ± 74.34
                     Pendulum Swingup            301.01 ± 39.80         233.66 ± 199.66
                         Reacher Easy             463.30 ± 17.78       477.51 ± 14.02
                         Reacher Hard            391.94 ± 148.99       466.35 ± 25.94
                          Walker Run              238.07 ± 76.42       271.72 ± 63.37
                         Walker Stand            462.81 ± 18.20          460.51 ± 41.87
                         Walker Walk              429.65 ± 27.06        440.85 ± 49.87

    Table 3: Average final return and standard deviation over give trainings in the Pop Gym environments.

                                  Task               Uninformed            Informed
                          Concentration           00.01 ± 00.16        −0.24 ± 00.09
                          Count Recall            −0.66 ± 00.17        −0.58 ± 00.24
                          Higher Lower            00.39 ± 00.07         00.31 ± 00.12
                          Mine Sweeper            −0.06 ± 00.32        −0.07 ± 00.38
                     Noisy Position Cart Pole      00.21 ± 00.19       00.23 ± 00.27
                     Noisy Position Pendulum       00.54 ± 00.06       00.55 ± 00.05
                        Position Cart Pole         00.75 ± 00.00       00.75 ± 00.00
                       Position Pendulum           00.64 ± 00.07       00.65 ± 00.04
                           Repeat First            00.24 ± 00.87       00.56 ± 01.00
                         Repeat Previous          −0.01 ± 00.18        00.44 ± 00.13



E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide results for non-Markovian information in the Varying Mountain Hike
environments, for harder Pop Gym environments, along with the results of the flickering environments.

E.1   N ON -M ARKOVIAN INFORMATION

We experiment with other levels of information in the Varying Mountain Hike environments. More
precisely, we consider an information i that contains an observation x̃ of the position x (or an


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observation ỹ of the altitude y) with Gaussian noise of standard deviation σi ∈ [0, σo ]. In addition, in
the case of environments with random orientation, we consider an information that also contains a
noisy observation of the orientation c replaced with a random orientation with probability ϵi ∈ [0, 1].
Note that when σi = 0, the exact position x (or altitude y) is encoded in the information, while when
σi = σo , the observation o is encoded in the information.
                          Position, North, i = x̃ and σi /σo =  i                    Position, Random, i = (x̃, c̃) and σi /σo =  i
                                                                               −20
              −25                                                                                                           i=s
                                                                               −40
              −50                                                                                                            i = 0.2
                                                                               −60                                           i = 0.4
              −75                                                              −80                                           i = 0.6
                                                                                                                             i = 0.8
             −100                                                          −100                                              i = 1.0
             −125                                                          −120                                             i=o

                          Altitude, North, i = ỹ and σi /σo =  i                    Altitude, Random, i = (ỹ, c̃) and σi /σo =  i

              −20
                                                                               −60
              −40

              −60                                                              −80

              −80                                                          −100
             −100
                                                                           −120
             −120
                    0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8        1.0              0.0      0.2         0.4   0.6     0.8        1.0
                                                         Environment steps (M)
Figure 7: Varying Mountain Hike environments: average return of the Informed Dreamer with various level of
information over five trainings.

As shown in Figure 7, without confidence intervals for the sake of readability, the better the informa-
tion, the faster the policy converges. These results hold in all environments except that with altitude
observation and fixed orientation, for which the results are more mixed. As said in Subsection 6.1,
it supports the hypothesis that the more informative about the state the information is, the faster an
optimal policy is learned. Moreover, it can be observed on the right in Figure 7 that when an additional
information c̃ is not informative about the state, convergence is even slower than for the Uninformed
Dreamer. This highlights again the importance of the quality of the additional information.

E.2   H ARDER P OP G YM ENVIRONMENTS

Despite the optimal informed policy being equal to the optimal uninformed policy at convergence,
there may exist environments for which uninformed policies do not succeed in converging to the
optimal policy. One class of environments for which it seems to be the case are the environments
with long time dependencies, such as the Repeat Previous environment of the Pop Gym suite. In
this subsection, we study in depth this failure case of the Uninformed Dreamer for this particular
environment. In the Repeat Previous environment, the agent is observing random noise, and is
rewarded for outputting the observation that it got k time steps ago. While in Subsection 6.3 we only
considered the default Pop Gym environments, where k = 4 for the Repeat Previous environment,
we here consider the Medium (k = 32) and Hard (k = 64) versions of this environment.
                                                      Uninformed                           Informed
                         Repeat Previous Easy              Repeat Previous Medium                   Repeat Previous Hard
                      0.5                                 0.5
                                                                                              0.25
                      0.0                                 0.0                                 0.00
                                                                                             −0.25
                    −0.5                                −0.5
                             0                   1              0                      1              0                 4
                                                      Environment steps (M)
Figure 8: Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer with i = s in the Repeat Previous environments: average
return and standard error over five trainings.

In Figure 8, we show that the Uninformed Dreamer does not learn at all in these harder environments,
while the Informed Dreamer still seems to converge towards a near-optimal policy. It once again


                                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


validates empirically the assumption that exploiting additional information about the state improves
the speed of convergence towards an optimal policy. Even more, it shows that exploiting additional
information about the state can lead to convergence in environments where traditional approaches fail,
such as those with long time dependencies. The additional supervision provided by this Markovian
information (the last k observations) certainly endows the statistic z ∼ f (·|h) with a useful encoding
of the last k observations, which is then decoded by the policy. Table 4 provides the final return
obtained by the Uninformed Dreamer and the Informed Dreamer for these environments.
Table 4: Average final return and standard deviation over five trainings in the Repeat Previous environments.

                                                          Task                         Uninformed                           Informed
                                       Repeat Previous Easy                           −0.01 ± 00.18                   00.44 ± 00.13
                                      Repeat Previous Medium                          −0.41 ± 00.06                   00.46 ± 00.16
                                       Repeat Previous Hard                           −0.36 ± 00.07                   00.33 ± 00.19


E.3          F LICKERING ATARI

In the Flickering Atari environments, the agent is tasked with playing the Atari games (Bellemare
et al., 2013) on a flickering screen. The dynamics are left unchanged, but the agent may randomly
observe a blank screen instead of the game screen, with probability p = 0.5. While the classic Atari
games are known to have low stochasticity and few partial observability challenges (Hausknecht
& Stone, 2015), their flickering counterparts have constituted a classic benchmark in the partially
observable RL literature (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Zhu et al., 2017; Igl et al., 2018; Ma et al.,
2020). Moreover, regarding the recent advances in sample-efficiency of model-based RL approaches,
we consider the Atari 100k benchmark, where only 100k actions can be taken by the agent for
generating samples of interaction.
For these environments, we consider the RAM state of the simulator, a 128-dimensional byte vector,
to be available as additional information for supervision. This information vector is indeed guaranteed
to satisfy the conditional independence of the informed POMDP: p(o|i, s) = p(o|i). Moreover, we
postprocess this additional information by only selecting the subset of variables that are relevant to the
game that is considered, according to the annotations provided by Anand et al. (2019). Depending on
the game, this information vector might contain the number of remaining opponents, their positions,
the player position, etc.
                                                                            Uninformed                   Informed
             Asteroids                      Battle Zone                     Bowling                       Boxing                        Breakout                     Frostbite
                                                                 10                           5                                                          200
 500                           1000
                                                                                              0                               2
                                500                               5                                                                                      100
 250
                                                                                            −5                                0

               Hero                         Ms Pacman                        Pong                       Private Eye                      Qbert                       Seaquest
                                                                  0                                                                                      100
                                500                                                         100                             500
2000
                                                                                                                                                          50
                                250                              −5                           0                             250
   0
       0.0               0.1          0.0                 0.1         0.0             0.1         0.0                 0.1         0.0              0.1         0.0               0.1
                                                                             Environment steps (M)

Figure 9: Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer with i = ϕ(RAM) in the Flickering Atari environments:
average return and standard error over five trainings.

Figure 9 shows that the speed of convergence and the performance of the policies is greatly improved
by considering additional information for six environments, while degraded for four others and left
similar for the rest. The final returns are given in Table 5, offering similar conclusions.

E.4          F LICKERING C ONTROL

In the Flickering Control environments, the agent performs one of the standard DeepMind Control
tasks from images but through a flickering screen. As with the Flickering Atari environments, the
dynamics are left unchanged, except that the agent may randomly observe a blank screen instead
of the task screen, with probability p = 0.5. For these environments, we consider the state to be
available as additional information, as for the Velocity Control environments.


                                                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 5: Average final return and standard deviation over five trainings in the Flickering Atari environments.

                                          Task                      Uninformed                              Informed
                                      Asteroids                 362.17 ± 112.95                     580.92 ± 95.61
                                     Battle Zone                706.67 ± 776.00                    849.61 ± 357.35
                                      Bowling                    07.89 ± 02.00                      09.17 ± 01.24
                                       Boxing                   03.54 ± 12.33                        −0.06 ± 05.66
                                      Breakout                   02.06 ± 01.32                      02.59 ± 01.47
                                      Frostbite                174.96 ± 84.31                        115.43 ± 30.20
                                        Hero                  2864.66 ± 1054.84                    2033.51 ± 226.50
                                     Ms Pacman                 534.67 ± 117.97                      455.02 ± 155.17
                                        Pong                     −3.49 ± 01.19                      −0.90 ± 01.78
                                     Private Eye                74.27 ± 42.00                         29.66 ± 67.47
                                        Qbert                   401.27 ± 117.26                     574.70 ± 26.92
                                      Seaquest                  91.44 ± 13.60                         83.95 ± 21.11

                                                                    Uninformed                  Informed
       Acrobot Swingup           Cartpole Balance         Cartpole Balance Sparse     Cartpole Swingup           Cartpole Swingup Sparse               Cheetah Run
                           500                          500                       400
 100                                                                                                            250                          250
                           250                                                       200
   0                                                      0                                                       0                            0

           Cup Catch                 Finger Spin               Finger Turn Easy            Finger Turn Hard               Hopper Hop                   Hopper Stand
 500                                                    500
                           250                                                                                  100
                                                                                     250                                                     250

   0                         0                            0                            0                          0                            0

       Pendulum Swingup              Reacher Easy                 Reacher Hard                 Walker Run                 Walker Stand                 Walker Walk
                           500                                                                                  500
 250                                                                                 200
                                                        250                                                     250                          250

   0                         0                            0                            0                                                       0
       0               2         0                  2         0                  2         0                2         0                  2         0                  2
                                                                      Environment steps (M)

Figure 10: Uninformed Dreamer and Informed Dreamer with i = s in the Flickering Control environments:
average return and standard error over five trainings.


Regarding this benchmark, considering additional information seems to degrade learning, generally
resulting in worse policies. This suggests that not all information is good to learn, some might be
irrelevant to the control task and hinders the learning of optimal policies. The final returns are given
in Table 6, and offer similar conclusions.
Table 6: Average final return and standard deviation over five trainings in the Flickering Control environments.

                                             Task                                Uninformed                       Informed
                               Acrobot Swingup                              104.87 ± 54.88                    141.49 ± 72.53
                                Cartpole Balance                           508.01 ± 00.92                      499.95 ± 24.87
                            Cartpole Balance Sparse                        507.94 ± 03.04                      495.14 ± 69.63
                               Cartpole Swingup                            384.37 ± 14.66                      377.60 ± 32.62
                            Cartpole Swingup Sparse                        347.07 ± 27.63                      284.53 ± 72.05
                                  Cheetah Run                              372.96 ± 30.98                      296.70 ± 23.34
                                   Cup Catch                               478.61 ± 12.53                      455.59 ± 13.58
                                   Finger Spin                            349.85 ± 123.88                      303.03 ± 76.30
                                Finger Turn Easy                           441.53 ± 47.13                      441.16 ± 66.91
                               Finger Turn Hard                            323.19 ± 200.67                    392.48 ± 85.25
                                  Hopper Hop                               126.72 ± 37.89                       81.92 ± 19.90
                                  Hopper Stand                             420.38 ± 57.48                      331.48 ± 27.61
                              Pendulum Swingup                             329.35 ± 82.31                     286.53 ± 102.18
                                  Reacher Easy                             479.25 ± 18.15                      457.72 ± 19.31
                                  Reacher Hard                            433.40 ± 214.42                      412.97 ± 27.10
                                   Walker Run                              239.22 ± 92.40                      180.63 ± 27.73
                                  Walker Stand                             485.78 ± 46.26                      457.36 ± 37.65
                                  Walker Walk                              447.03 ± 26.83                      409.72 ± 68.67



                                                                                  20
