Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TADIS: S TEERING M ODELS FOR D EEP -T HINKING
ABOUT D EMONSTRATION E XAMPLES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Instruction tuning has been demonstrated that could significantly improve the
         zero-shot generalization capability to unseen tasks by an apparent margin. By
         incorporating additional context (e.g., task definition, examples) during the fine-
         tuning process, Large Language Models (LLMs) achieved much higher perfor-
         mance than before. However, recent work reported that delusive task examples
         can achieve almost the same performance as correct task examples, indicating the
         input-label correspondence is less important than previously thought. Intrigued
         by this counter-intuitive observation, we suspect models have the same illusion of
         competence as humans. Therefore, we propose a novel method called TADIS that
         steers LLMs for Deep-Thinking about demonstration examples instead of merely
         seeing. To alleviate the illusion of competence of models, we first ask the model
         to verify the correctness of shown examples. Then, using the verification results
         as conditions to elicit models for a better answer. Our experimental results show
         that TADIS consistently outperforms competitive baselines on in-domain and out-
         domain tasks (improving 2.79 and 4.03 average ROUGLE-L on out-domain and
         in-domain datasets, respectively). Despite the presence of generated examples
         (not all of the thinking labels are accurate), TADIS can notably enhance perfor-
         mance in zero-shot and few-shot settings. This also suggests that our approach
         can be adopted on a large scale to improve the instruction following capabilities
         of models without any manual labor. Moreover, we construct three types of think-
         ing labels with different model sizes and find that small models learn from the
         format of TADIS but larger models can be steered for Deep-Thinking.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recently, instruction tuning (IT) has attracted much attention in the NLP community, which has
shown effectiveness in improving the zero-shot generalization capability and gradually boosting
performance on unseen tasks as the number of training tasks increases (Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Taori et al., 2023). Researchers have explored efficient approaches
to generate instructions (Wang et al., 2022; 2023; Xu et al., 2023), resulting in dozens of powerful
large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Taori
et al., 2023). However, LLMs still struggle to follow the instruction precisely in some scenarios (Li
et al., 2023; AlShikh et al., 2023), which hinders the applications and alignment of LLMs.
When applying instruction tuning with examples on LLMs, previous work provides either all pos-
itive examples (Ouyang et al., 2022) or specified positive/negative examples (Wang et al., 2022).
SuperNI (Wang et al., 2022) adopted task definition + positive examples + negative examples for-
mat to facilitate the instruction understanding, which achieves significant improvement compared
with the zero-shot setting. However, Kung & Peng (2023) found that delusive task examples (i.e.,
have correct input-output formats but incorrect input-output mappings) could also achieve almost
the same performance as correct task examples. This conclusion reminds us of a well-known cogni-
tive bias in psychology, called illusion of competence (Kruger & Dunning, 1999): an illusion of
competence occurs when someone believes they have learned something, but they have not. For
example, a student understands the solution for one problem when the teacher explains. However,
he may fail to solve the same problem after a few days. We suspect models have the same illusion
of competence as humans that they tend to merely learn the format instead of thinking when the cor-
rectness of examples is explicitly presented. Motivated by this, we introduce TADIS (Think About


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Demonstrations Instead of merely Seeing), a novel method to steer models for thinking with clas-
sifying rather than just seeing. In this way, models are encouraged to learn the difference between
positive and negative examples but not only the surface format. The schematic of our proposed
method is illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, we first replace the correctness of examples with
only ordinal numbers (i.e., example 1 and example 2) and then the model is expected to predict
the correctness of provided examples. Ultimately the model uses previous thinking and actions as
conditions to elicit a better answer.
Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of TADIS in zero-shot and few-shot settings, outper-
forming baselines with 2.79 and 4.02 average ROUGLE-L on out-domain and in-domain datasets
respectively. When positive or negative examples are unavailable for datasets other than SuperNI,
we evaluate the performance with generated examples by Self-instruct (Wang et al., 2023). In this
case, we observe that TADIS still consistently surpasses traditional methods in zero-shot and few-
shot settings, which indicates the potential of TADIS as a better instruction tuning strategy even on
a large scale without any manual labor. Moreover, we also analyze the performance of TADIS with
different model sizes (770M and 3B). The results indicate that small models learn from the format
of provided examples, while large models can be steered for careful thinking.
Our contributions are summarized as follows

          • We propose a novel method called TADIS to steer models for thinking about demonstration
            examples instead of merely seeing. TADIS outperforms competitive baseline consistently
            across in-domain and out-domain datasets.
          • TADIS can be combined with other methods of generating instruction-tuning data to fur-
            ther improve the model’s instruction-following capabilities without any manual labor. The
            effectiveness of TADIS with generated examples shows that our method can be adopted on
            a large scale scenario. 1

2       R ELATED W ORK

2.1       I NSTRUCTION -T UNING

Instruction-tuning, a method fine-tuning large language models on multi-tasks with meta-instruction
ahead (Wei et al., 2022). The effectiveness of instruction tuning has been proved in many prior
works, which significantly improves the zero-shot generalization capability by a huge margin and
gradually improves on unseen tasks as the number of training tasks increases. (Chung et al., 2022;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Taori et al., 2023) Most existing work focuses on data gen-
eration, data mixing and data format of instruction tuning. Self-instruct (Wang et al., 2023), a
semi-automated process for instruction-tuning the pretrained LM using instructional signals from
the model itself. Evol-Instruct (Xu et al., 2023) creates large amounts of instruction data with vary-
ing levels of complexity, which starts with an initial set of instructions and then asks LLMs to
rewrite them step by step into more complex instructions. Mukherjee et al. (2023) develop Orca
model, which captures not only surface-level responses from LLMs but also complex reasoning sig-
nals. Specifically, they guided LLMs to respond to reasoning intensive FLAN instructions with a
series of predefined system prompts (e.g., “think step-by-step and justify your response”), spurring
LLMs (e.g., GPT4). Wang et al. (2022) introduce SuperNI, a benchmark that covers 76 distinct
task types of 1616 diverse NLP tasks, including but not limited to classification, extraction, infill-
ing, sequence tagging, text rewriting, and text composition. Each task contains a task definition
(a high-level description of the input and output of the task) and demonstration examples (some
input-output examples for the task. e.g., positive and negative examples.). Cao et al. (2023) propose
Instruct Mining, a linear rule for evaluating instruction-following data quality. Wu et al. (2023) pro-
pose a step-by-step instructions training method, which can help language models decompose the
tasks and provide specific procedures for completing the target tasks. Chen et al. (2023b) finetuned
the LLaMA on only 9k high-quality data filtered from the 52k Alpaca data by ChatGPT judging,
which significantly outperforms the original Alpaca. Yin et al. (2023) conducted a detailed ablation
analysis to understand which parts of a task definition are most important and found that output con-
tent is more important than input content, especially label information. However, these works don’t
    1
        Our code and models will be made public.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pay attention to demonstration examples in the instruction and even ignore the example information
directly. We regard this tactic as an information loss. Probably the most relevant work is Kung &
Peng (2023), they found that models trained with delusive task examples can achieve almost the
same performance as correct task examples, which indicates the model learns the input-output for-
mat instead of input-output mapping. This conclusion is counter-intuitive for humans. We suppose
that is because the model tends to merely see instead of thinking when the correctness of examples
is explicitly presented. Therefore, we propose TADIS method to steer the model for Deep-Thinking
about provided examples. Our experiments have proved our previous surmise (see Section 4.2).

2.2   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING

In-context learning (ICL), a prompt method without training, encourages the language models to
learn from a few input-output examples (Liu et al., 2022; Rubin et al., 2022; Min et al., 2022a).
Inspired by the promising performance of ICL, many studies have explored how to further improve
standard ICL. Min et al. (2022b) and Chen et al. (2022) introduce meta-learning to better adapt LMs
to ICL. Zhao et al. (2021) estimate models’ bias towards each answer and then develop contextual
calibration to adjust the model’s output probabilities which not only improves accuracy but also
reduces variance. Kim et al. (2022) propose SG-ICL that generates demonstration examples for
in-context learning from LM itself instead of manual labeling. Active Prompting (Diao et al., 2023)
selects the most uncertain questions as demonstration examples to further improve performance.
Min et al. (2022c) find that replacing gold labels with random labels only marginally hurts perfor-
mance, which indicates models learn the format rather than input label pairs. Yoo et al. (2022) revisit
previous findings of Min et al. (2022c) and introduce novel metrics to prove that the input-label cor-
respondence plays a more significant role in contextual demonstration than previously considered.
However, most of these methods focus on the inference stage and explicitly show the correctness
of the demonstration examples, which may result in mere seeing rather than learning. Our work
focuses on the training stage. Inspired by Yoo et al. (2022), we conjecture that facilitating the model
to learn the input-output mapping in the training stage is also important.

3     M ETHOD
The proposed TADIS method aims to encourage the model to generate answers based on the
thoughts about few-shot examples instead of the mere observation. Specifically, the model is spurred
to think about the correctness of the provided examples (i.e., positive or negative) first and then
elicited for answering with the thinking as conditions. The model is expected to better digest the
provided examples through a simpler classification task, which in turn helps for a better answer.
For each given task, we denote the task definition as ST . Following SuperNI, each task has a
training dataset D = {(X, Y )} and an example pool consisting of positive and negative examples
SE = {(X e , Y e , Le )}. For each input-output instance pair (X, Y ) in D, we randomly select k
                                         k
examples from the example pool as SE        = {(Xie , Yie , Lei ), i ∈ [1, k]}. The i-th example consists of
the input Xie , the output Yie and its correctness label Lei (i.e., positive or negative). Unlike SuperNI,
                                                                                                     k
we replace the correctness label of examples with ordinal numbers in the prompt and split SE            into
               k        k                    k                                  k         e  e
two parts ME and RE . Here, we call ME as masked examples and ME = {(Xi , Yi ), i ∈ [1, k]}.
Rek is the corresponding correctness thinking results which are created from the correctness labels
{Lei , i ∈ [1, k]} using a sentence template (as shown in Figure 1).
TADIS consists of two stages: Thinking and Answering.

Thinking During the thinking stage, the model will predict the correctness of each provided ex-
ample based on the task description. We use the next token prediction as the training objective to
facilitate the learning from provided examples. Formally, the loss can be represented as:
                                         X
                                                         k
                        Lthink = −               log(P (RE , AE |ST , X, MEk ; θ)).                     (1)
                                      (X,Y )∈D

Besides the correctness prediction, the model is also expected to generate the corresponding actions
AE after thinking (e.g., “I should learn from correct examples and avoid mistakes in the wrong


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Task A
    Definition: In this task, you need to output
    “Yes” if the given number is a prime number                                                       Thinking ……
    otherwise output “No” ……
    Example 1:
    Input: 7 ; Output: Yes
    Example 2:
    Input: 12 ; Output: Yes                                                            Example 1 is correct and example 2 is wrong.
                                                                                       I should learn from correct examples and
      Task B                                                                           avoid these wrong examples.
    Definition: This task is about reading the given
    passage and construct a question about the
    information present in the passage ……
    Example 1: … ; Example 2: …
                                                                                                      Answering ……
                           ……


      Task C                                                                                  Input: The French and Indian War
    Definition: In this task you are given a list of                           Input: 8       was the North American ……          Input: [-10, 7]
    numbers and you need to find the average of                                Output: No     Output: Who fought in the French   Output: [-1.5]
    each two consecutive values ……                                                            and Indian war?
    Example 1: … ; Example 2: …



Figure 1: The overview of TADIS. TADIS consists of two stages: Thinking and Answering. (1)
Thinking: Encouraging the model to judge the correctness of the examples to steer it for Deep-
Thinking. (2) Answering: Using the thinking as conditions to elicit the model for a better answer.
Two stages are executed sequentially rather than separately.


examples.”). The action generation encourages the model to take the corresponding actions for
better answers. We conduct further exploration and analysis in Section 4.3.
                                               k
Answering Based on the thinking result RE        and the corresponding action AE , the model contin-
ues to generate the answer Y for instance input X. Similar with the thinking stage, the training loss
of the next token prediction task is calculated as
                                       X
                     Lanswer = −             log(P (Y |ST , X, MEk , RE
                                                                      k
                                                                        , AE ; θ)).               (2)
                                                       (X,Y )∈D

The overall training loss is the sum of these two losses L = Lthink + Lanswer .
During inference, the model generates the answer after its thinking on the provided examples:
                                               X
           P (Y |ST , X, MEk ) =                            k
                                                        P (RE , AE |ST , X, MEk ) × P (Y |ST , X, MEk , RE
                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                           , AE ),                                 (3)
                                              k ,A
                                                        |          {z           } |              {z            }
                                             RE    E              Thinking                                 Answering
It is prohibitively expensive to compute the sums due to the exponential search space of the thinking.
In practice, we use the best thinking predicted by the model for approximation.

4      E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSES
4.1      E XPERIMENT S ETTING

Dataset We conduct experiments on the                                  Table 1: Statistics of our training, held-in, and
SuperNI-V2 (Wang et al., 2022), the largest                            held-out datasets.
open-source instruction dataset, including over
800+ English tasks with diverse task types. For                           Statistics             Training datasets        Held-In       Held-Out
each task, it contains Task Definition, Posi-
tive Examples, Negative Examples and Expla-                               # Total Tasks                  756                756             119
nations. We use the same split of the dataset                             # Total instances            45360               11340          11900
as that of SuperNI: training set has 756 di-                              # Avg examples                1.83                1.79           1.75
verse tasks and test set contains 119 unseen out-
domain tasks as held-out. Meanwhile, we also


                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Traditional Method                                                         EoT
                   SuperNI
                                                                           Definition:
                                                                    In this task you will be given a list of numbers.
             Definition:                                            You should remove any number that is not an
                                                                    integer (whole number). If every number is
      In this task you will be given a list of numbers.             not an whole number then an empty list ("[]")
      You should remove any number that is not an                   should be returned. Otherwise, answer with
      integer (whole number). If every number is                    the list of whole numbers separated by comma
      not an whole number then an empty list ("[]")                 inside brackets.
      should be returned. Otherwise, answer with
      the list of whole numbers separated by comma
      inside brackets.
                                                                          Example 1

                                                          T5         Input: [73.059, 7, 10.659, 18.459, 11]
                                                                     Output: [7, 11]
        Positive Example

      Input: [73.059, 7, 10.659, 18.459, 11]
      Output: [7, 11]                                                     Example 2

                                                                     Input: [2, 0, 3.667, 9, -0.527]
                                                                     Output: [3.667, -0.527]
       Negative Example

      Input: [2, 0, 3.667, 9, -0.527]                                    Thinking…
      Output: [3.667, -0.527]                                       Example 1 is correct and example 2 is wrong.
                                                                    I should learn from correct examples and
                                                                    avoid these wrong examples.


      Evaluation Instance                                             Evaluation Instance
      ⚫ Input: [-37, -37.948, 15]                                    ⚫ Input: [-37, -37.948, 15]

      ⚫ Output:[-37, -37.948, 15]
                                                                    ⚫ Output:[-37, 15]
                                                                                           ✓
Figure 2: An example of comparing TADIS and traditional methods from T5-xl-LM-Adapt.
Thinking before answering can elicit the model to the correct answer. However, the model cannot
follow the instruction without Deep-Thinking.


construct a held-in dataset that contains the same tasks as the training set but with different evalu-
ation instances to prevent leaking. As the performance saturates when the number of instances per
task increases (Wang et al., 2022), we randomly select 60 instances for each task in the training set
and 100 instances for each out-domain task in the held-out test set. For held-in dataset, we randomly
select 15 instances for each in-domain task to maintain a similar number to the held-out dataset. The
statistics of our training, held-in and held-out datasets are presented in Table 1.

Baseline and Metrics We utilize T5-LM-Adapt as our backbone model following Kung &
Peng (2023). Specifically, we explore TADIS on two different sizes of T5-LM-Adapt, i.e.,
T5-Large-lm-adapt (770M parameters) and T5-XL-lm-adapt (3B parameters). During
the inference phase, we follow Wang et al. (2022) to sample from model outputs via greedy decod-
ing (i.e., set temperature to 0) to obtain the most confident answers. We consider both zero-shot and
few-shot settings in the training and inference phases. For the zero-shot setting, we use Definition
+ evaluation instance as a sample. For the few-shot setting, we use Definition + Positive examples
+ Negative examples + evaluation instance as a sample. Both settings remain the same as that of
SuperNI and we also employ this traditional training format as our baseline. TADIS only has few-
shot setting in the training phase. Due to the diversity of tasks and the open-ended generation nature
of formulation, we adopt ROUGE-L metric for reporting aggregated performance results, which are
observed to correlate well with accuracy for classification tasks and human evaluation (Wang et al.,
2022).

4.2      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

To prove the effectiveness of TADIS, we compare the performance of TADIS with SuperNI (zero-
shot) and SuperNI (few-shot) methods on the held-in and held-out datasets, respectively. SuperNI
(zero-shot or few-shot) means the model is trained with zero-shot or few-shot settings. The training
set was kept constant for all three methods except the format. However, we restricted the maxi-


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: The performance (ROUGE-L) under zero-shot and few-shot settings for three methods on
hold-in and hold-out datasets. Avg RougeL: We calculate the average of ROUGE-L under zero-shot
and few-shot settings. Bold denotes the best result.

                               Testing Setting →                 Held-Out                             Held-In
        Model        #Params
                               Training Setting ↓   Zero-Shot   Few-Shot    Avg RougeL   Zero-Shot   Few-Shot   Avg RougeL

                               SuperNI(Zero-Shot)    38.016      40.59        39.30        46.22      42.59       44.40
 T5-Large-LM-Adapt    770M     SuperNI(Few-Shot)      33.30      45.08        39.19        43.59      52.96       48.27

                                    TADIS             33.59      46.67        40.13        44.67      53.31       48.99

                               SuperNI(Zero-Shot)     42.89      45.73        44.31        49.95      47.59       48.77
   T5-XL-LM-Adapt      3B      SuperNI(Few-Shot)      38.54      51.08        44.81        41.49      52.96       47.23

                                    TADIS             43.09      52.11        47.60        47.29      55.21       51.25


mum number of provided examples to two for both SuperNI (few-shot) and TADIS. The results are
represented in Table 2. TADIS consistently outperforms SuperNI (zero-shot) and SuperNI (few-
shot) methods on the held-in and held-out datasets. Moreover, the larger the model, the greater the
benefit is. Specifically, for a larger T5-XL-LM-Adapt (3B) model, the performance combined
with TADIS improves by 2.79 and 4.02 average ROUGEL-L in zero-shot and few-shot settings
on held-out and held-in datasets, respectively. The smaller model(T5-Large-LM-Adapt) only
demonstrated a marginal increase of 0.94 and 0.72 average ROUGEL-L improvement. We suppose
that is because larger models have stronger learning capabilities and can benefit more from TADIS
methods. It is also worth noting that TADIS can improve more on held-in than held-out datasets
(4.02 vs 2.79), which shows TADIS can also significantly benefit seen tasks. The model performs
better with TADIS on in-domain tasks since it has learned from the held-in dataset tasks in the
training phase. In the zero-shot inference setting, SuperNI (zero-shot) method achieves the high-
est performance. Nevertheless, the performance drops sharply in the few-shot setting. This occurs
because training and inference are harmoniously aligned, improving performance with consistent
formats. In conclusion, TADIS benefits the performance in both zero-shot and few-shot settings and
achieves the highest average ROUGE-L compared with baselines.

4.3   A NALYSES

Does TADIS steer models for Deep-Thinking or just format learning? To explore whether
TADIS steers the model for Deep-Thinking, we set up three different thinking labels in training:
Ground Truth, Random and Flip.

       • Ground-Truth: A standard TADIS that we train the model with true thinking labels.
       • Random: We randomly select thinking labels to replace true thinking labels.
       • Flip: We flip all thinking labels. For example, thinking: Example 1 is correct and ex-
         ample 2 is wrong, we flip it to Example 1 is wrong and example 2 is correct. And the
         corresponding actions also need to be flipped.

Table 3 shows the results. In addition to the standard TADIS inference setup that generates thinking
from the model (Generated), we also add these three types of thinking for comparison. We can
observe that the small model achieves almost the same performance on Ground-Truth, Random and
Flip training settings, which suggests TADIS steers model for format learning instead of thinking.
However, for the larger model, the performance consistency decreases when we replace true thinking
labels with random thinking labels. The phenomenon introduces an interesting conclusion: small
model learns the format of TADIS, but TADIS can steer larger model for real Deep-Thinking
and both model sizes benefit from TADIS method. We suppose that the Deep-Thinking may be an
emergent ability for a large model. Meanwhile, for the flip training format, the performance doesn’t
drastically drop as the random training format. We suspect that we actually show the model with
true thinking labels when we flip the labels, as only two thinking labels (i.e., positive and negative)
are used in this case. Furthermore, we notice that the performance doesn’t increase or decrease even
if giving the model ground-truth, flip or random thinking labels for both small and large models


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The Performance (ROUGE-L) of TADIS with different thinking labels in the training and
inference stages. We compare four different thinking labels for few-shot examples during inference,
namely, Generated thinking results from the model, Ground-Truth thinking results, Flip thinking
results and Random thinking results.

                                    Testing Setting →                                    Few-Shot
         Model          #Params                              Zero-Shot
                                    Training Setting ↓                   Generated   Ground-Truth   Flip    Random
                                  TADIS (Ground-Truth)         33.58       46.66        46.67       46.68    46.72
 T5-Large-LM-Adapt       770M       TADIS (Random)             34.23       46.17        46.10       46.02    46.11
                                      TADIS (Flip)             34.47       46.10        46.07       46.09    46.05
                                  TADIS (Ground-Truth)         43.09       52.11        52.17       52.14    52.07
   T5-XL-LM-Adapt         3B        TADIS (Random)             33.52       45.76        46.14       46.02    46.11
                                      TADIS (Flip)             38.95       51.25        51.31       51.29    51.30



in the inference stage, which indicates that TADIS steers the model for Deep-Thinking and format
learning in the training stage rather than the inference stage.

What’s the relationship between judgment accuracy and performance in the training
phase? To further validate that the example verification process could steer model for Deep-
Thinking, we calculate the correctness of judgment and ROUGE-L during the training phase with
T5-XL-LM-Adapt for five epochs. The results are shown in Figure 3. We observe that judgment
accuracy is extremely related to ROUGE-L through the slope. The Pearson correlation coefficient
achieves a high value of 0.98, suggesting judgment accuracy and ROUGE-L are significantly corre-
lated. Overall, the detailed statistics further demonstrate that forcing models to judge the correctness
of provided examples could steer them toward Deep-Thinking.

Can TADIS still benefit the performance
with generated examples? Considering the
scarcity of negative examples in real ap-
plication scenarios, we explored the per-
formance of TADIS with generated exam-
ples. Specifically, we use Self-instruct (Wang
et al., 2023), a framework for improving the
instruction-following capabilities of pretrained
language models by bootstrapping off their
own generations. We choose the ChatGPT
(gpt-3.5-turbo-0613) as our backbone
LLM to generate new positive and negative ex-
amples for each task. We randomly selected
eight pairs of positive and negative examples
from different tasks to form our few-shot pool.
For each generation, we construct the prompt
with task definition and few-shot to generate
new pairs of positive and negative examples.
To generate diverse examples, we randomly se- Figure 3: The linear regression between judgment
lect four (Chen et al., 2023a) pairs of positive accuracy and ROUGE-L. Acc: The correctness
and negative examples from the pool and shuf- of judgment. ROUGE-L: The performance of
fle their order. Meanwhile, we also set the tem- downstream tasks.
perature to 0.7 to further improve the diversity.
Due to the API cost, we only constructed 5040
training samples (84 different tasks with 60 training samples each). The entire template for generat-
ing new positive and negative examples has shown in the appendix (see Figure 6).
The performance with generated examples has been shown in Table 4. We find that TADIS still
benefits the performance in both zero-shot and few-shot settings with generated examples, which
improve 5.08 and 1.36 averaged ROUGE-L, respectively. However, the smaller model benefits more
than larger model, which seems to be contrary to our previous experimental results. We suspect this


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is because there are only 54% generated samples are valid as Self-instruct reports (Wang et al., 2023).
Therefore, the larger model (3B) only improves the average ROUGE-L by 1.36 as it is misled by
the partial wrong thinking labels. For the smaller model (770M), TADIS tends to induce the model
learning the thinking format to elicit a better answer.

Table 4: The ROUGE-L results with generated                                Table 5: The ROUGE-L results for different
examples by Self-instruct method (ChatGPT as                               stages in zero-shot and few-shot settings on
the backbone; (Wang et al., 2023)) in zero-shot                            held-out dataset. Separated: divide think-
and few-shot settings on held-out dataset.                                 ing and answering into two independent stages.
                                                                           Combined: thinking first, answering later.
              Testing Setting →
 Model Size                        Zero-Shot   Few-Shot   Avg RougeL
              Training Setting ↓                                            Model size    Stage      Zero-Shot   Few-Shot   Avg RougeL

              SuperNI(Few-Shot)      23.08      40.54       31.81
   770M                                                                                  Separated     40.69      29.11       34.90
                   TADIS             32.62      41.16       36.89             770M
                                                                                         Combined      33.58      46.66       40.12
              SuperNI(Few-Shot)      36.38      43.09       39.73
    3B                                                                                   Separated     42.82      43.40       43.11
                                                                               3B
                   TADIS             37.95      44.23       41.09                        Combined      43.09      52.11       47.60



Does the thinking and answering stages of TADIS can be separated? Our ultimate goal is to
make the model learn from examples and elicit a better answer. Therefore, we explored whether the
same performance could be achieved by separating the thinking and answering stages of TADIS.
Specifically, we separated a standard TADIS training sample into two sub-samples: evaluation in-
stance (i.e., zero-shot) and the task of judging the correctness of provided examples. (i.e., judge
whether these examples satisfy the requirements of task definition.) A concrete instance is shown
in the appendix (see Figure 4). It’s worth noting that we do not perform judgment tasks for each
example but combine multiple examples together for judgment. This strategy can avoid causing an
imbalance in the number of real tasks and judgment tasks, which could affect the performance of
downstream tasks.
The results are shown in Table 5. We observe consistent performance drops when the thinking and
answering stages are separated, which indicates the necessity of combining thinking and answering.
The performance decreases by 5.22 and 4.49 average ROUGE-L with 770M and 3B model sizes,
respectively. This is not surprising because it’s the same for humans that we also think and then
use the verification results to come up with better answers instead of separating them. Overall,
combining thinking and answering stages can further elicit models for better answers.

Does actions after thinking matter in
TADIS ? We performed ablation exper- Table 6: The performance without actions after think-
iments to explore the importance of ac- ing in TADIS. w/o TA: A standard SuperNI (few-shot)
tions after thinking. Specifically, we di- method without thinking and actions. w/o TR: We
rectly remove actions in standard TADIS directly remove the text: I should learn from correct
(i.e., “I should learn from correct exam- examples and avoid wrong examples
ples and avoid mistakes in the wrong ex-
amples”). Table 6 depicts the performance
with or without actions. We find that the     Method       Zero-Shot Few-Shot Avg RougeL
performance without actions will drop by      TADIS           43.09      52.11         47.60
1.61 and 0.82 ROUGE-L in zero-shot and          - w/o TR      41.48      51.29         46.38
few-shot settings, respectively, showing the
indispensable of actions after thinking. In                  (-1.61)    (-0.82)       (-1.22)
a nutshell, actions and thinking are equally    - w/o TA      38.50      51.08         44.81
pivotal in TADIS. Reminding the model of                     (-4.59)    (-1.03)       (-2.79)
what actions it should take after thinking
can elicit better answers. When both think-
ing and action are removed (w/o TA) and the correctness labels of the examples are specified in
the prompt, the model in Wang et al. (2022) has lower performance on zero-shot and few-shot set-
tings. Compared with TADIS, its ROUGE-L scores drop by 4.59 and 1.03 in zero-shot and few-shot
settings, respectively.


                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: The performance (ROUGE-L) with different numbers of demonstration examples in zero-
shot and few-shot settings. N pos and M neg: There are N positive examples and M negative
examples in each training sample at most.

                                       Testing Setting →
         Model          #Params                                Zero-Shot   Few-Shot    Avg RougeL
                                       Training Setting ↓
                                   SuperNI(1 pos and 1 neg)      33.30       45.08         39.19
                                   SuperNI(2 pos and 2 neg)      30.75       45.82         38.28
    T5-Large-LM-Adapt     770M
                                    TADIS (1 pos and 1 neg)      33.58       46.66         40.12
                                    TADIS (2 pos and 2 neg)      28.66       45.85         37.26
                                   SuperNI(1 pos and 1 neg)      38.54       51.08         44.81
                                   SuperNI(2 pos and 2 neg)      35.72       49.64         42.68
    T5-XL-LM-Adapt         3B
                                    TADIS (1 pos and 1 neg)      43.09       52.11         47.60
                                    TADIS (2 pos and 2 neg)      38.92       51.41         45.17


Do additional examples lead to further learning with TADIS ? Humans can improve their abil-
ity to complete downstream tasks by studying and learning from more demonstration examples.
Therefore, we construct experiments to explore whether more examples lead to better performance.
The results are shown in Table 7. The performance with different examples is extremely different
from what we expected. More examples consistently lead to performance degradation with SuperNI
and TADIS methods in zero-shot and few-shot settings. Actually, this conclusion is consistent with
in-context learning that multiple demonstration examples are not necessarily better than one demon-
stration example (Chen et al., 2023a). Specifically, the 770M and 3B models dropped by 2.9 and
2.4 respectively. We suppose there are two reasons: (1) For the smaller model, more examples lead
to more multiple types which increases the difficulty of learning format. (2) For the larger model,
a pair of positive and negative examples is enough for model to learn the difference between them,
and more examples will distract it. We will further explore the detailed reasons for this phenomenon
in the future.

5     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we propose TADIS, a method that can steer language models for Deep-Thinking about
shown examples to elicit a better answer. The model is expected to learn from the example verifi-
cation process, which encourages the model to have Deep-Thinking of examples instead of merely
seeing. Finally, using the thinking as conditions will elicit models for a better answer. Experimental
results on held-in and held-out datasets in both zero-shot and few-shot settings demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of TADIS. In our preliminary experiment, TADIS is observed to improve the instruction
tuning performance with examples created with Self-instruct method, which indicates a promising
approach for instruction tuning in more diverse applications. Due to the limitation of computing
resources, we do not experiment with larger models such as LLaMA(Touvron et al., 2023), we will
scale our experiments in the future.

6     L IMITATIONS
The proposed TADIS method requires both positive and negative examples which are not readily
available for many datasets. Although these examples can be created with Self-instruct method, the
generated examples have to be carefully filtered and selected as only 54% generated samples are
valid according to the observations in Wang et al. (2023).


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7       R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The supplementary materials include the training and test data sets used in our experiments (gen-
erated through the SuperNI official code 2 ) as well as the training code and scripts. We provide a
detailed template for TADIS, Self-instruct and training with separate two Stages in Appendix A.1.
Considering that reproducing results from scratch can be prohibitively expensive, we plan to publish
our experimental results to promote reproducibility.

R EFERENCES
Waseem AlShikh, Manhal Daaboul, Kirk Goddard, Brock Imel, Kiran Kamble, Parikshith Kulka-
 rni, and Melisa Russak. Becoming self-instruct: introducing early stopping criteria for minimal
 instruct tuning, 2023.

Yihan Cao, Yanbin Kang, and Lichao Sun. Instruction mining: High-quality instruction data selec-
  tion for large language models, 2023.

Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, Chen Zhu, and Tianyi Zhou. How many demonstrations do you need
   for in-context learning?, 2023a.

Lichang Chen, Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Kalpa Gunaratna, Vikas Yadav, Zheng Tang, Vijay
  Srinivasan, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, and Hongxia Jin. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with
  fewer data, 2023b.

Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Sheng Zha, George Karypis, and He He. Meta-learning via language
  model in-context tuning, 2022.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models, 2022.

Shizhe Diao, Pengcheng Wang, Yong Lin, and Tong Zhang. Active prompting with chain-of-thought
  for large language models, 2023.

Hyuhng Joon Kim, Hyunsoo Cho, Junyeob Kim, Taeuk Kim, Kang Min Yoo, and Sang goo Lee.
  Self-generated in-context learning: Leveraging auto-regressive language models as a demonstra-
  tion generator, 2022.

Justin Kruger and David Dunning. Unskilled and unaware of it: how difficulties in recognizing one’s
  own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. Journal of personality and social psychology,
  77(6):1121, 1999.

Po-Nien Kung and Nanyun Peng. Do models really learn to follow instructions? an empirical study
  of instruction tuning, 2023.

Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Zheng Tang, Xiang Ren, Vijay Srinivasan, and Hongxia Jin.
  Instruction-following evaluation through verbalizer manipulation, 2023.

Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for GPT-3? In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (Dee-
   LIO 2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning Archi-
   tectures, pp. 100–114, Dublin, Ireland and Online, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.deelio-1.10. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   deelio-1.10.
    2
        https://github.com/allenai/natural-instructions


                                                          10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. MetaICL: Learning to learn
  in context. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2791–2809, Seattle,
  United States, July 2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  naacl-main.201. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.201.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Metaicl: Learning to learn
  in context, 2022b.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work?,
  2022c.
Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawahar, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and
  Ahmed Awadallah. Orca: Progressive learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
  learning, 2022.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen
  Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
  Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Tali Bers, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization, 2022.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, Eshaan
  Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Gary Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson,
  Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Maitreya Patel, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Par-
  mar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri,
  Rushang Karia, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Savan Doshi, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy, Sumanta
  Patro, Tanay Dixit, Xudong Shen, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Daniel Khashabi. Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on
  1600+ nlp tasks, 2022.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions,
  2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners, 2022.
Yang Wu, Yanyan Zhao, Zhongyang Li, Bing Qin, and Kai Xiong. Improving cross-task generaliza-
  tion with step-by-step instructions, 2023.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin
  Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions, 2023.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fan Yin, Jesse Vig, Philippe Laban, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and Chien-Sheng Jason Wu. Did
  you read the instructions? rethinking the effectiveness of task definitions in instruction learning,
  2023.

Kang Min Yoo, Junyeob Kim, Hyuhng Joon Kim, Hyunsoo Cho, Hwiyeol Jo, Sang-Woo Lee, Sang
  goo Lee, and Taeuk Kim. Ground-truth labels matter: A deeper look into input-label demonstra-
  tions, 2022.

Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improv-
  ing few-shot performance of language models, 2021.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   D IFFERENT DATA F ORMAT

Data Template for TADIS. Our proposed TADIS method takes the task definition, examples and
instance input as the prompt. The model first generates the verification result and corresponding
action of the provided examples, then outputs the reply for the instance input.

    Task Definition: {{definition}}
    Example 1 -
    -    Input: {{exp.input}}
    -    Output: {{exp.output}}
    Example 2 -
    -    Input: {{exp.input}}
    -    Output: {{exp.output}}
    Evaluation Instance -
    -    Input: {{exp.input}}


    Thinking -
    -     thinking and actions: {{Example 1 is correct/wrong and example 2 is correct/wrong. I
    should learn from correct examples and avoid the mistakes in these wrong examples.}}

    Answering -
    -   Output: {{exp.output}}


                        Figure 4: The data template used for TADIS method.
Data Template Used for Training with Separate Two Stages. When the model is trained with
separate thinking and answering stages (see Does the thinking and answering stages of TADIS
can be separated? in Section 4.3), the model will only verify the correctness of provided examples
in the thinking subtask.

    Task Definition: {{definition}}
    Example 1 -
    -    Input: {{exp.input}}
    -    Output: {{exp.output}}
    Example 2 -
    -    Input: {{exp.input}}
    -    Output: {{exp.output}}
    Judge whether each example conforms to the task definition.
    Prediction: {{Example 1 is correct/wrong and example 2 is correct/wrong.}}



              Figure 5: The data template used for training with two separated stages.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Data Template for Generating Examples with Self-Instruct. When generating positive and neg-
ative examples with Self-instruct method, we randomly select four pairs of positive and negative
examples from the example pool as in-context learning examples. The ChatGPT will generate a
positive and negative example pair based on the prompt. We use the data template as follows:

    Few-Shot:
    Task Definition: {{definition}}
    Positive Example
    -      Input: {{exp.input}}
    -      Output: {{exp.output}}
    Negitave Example
    -      Input: {{exp.input}}
    -      Output: {{exp.output}}
    ......

    Generated Examples:
    Positive Example
    -     Input: {{gen.input}}
    -     Output: {{gen.output}}
    Negitave Example
    -     Input: {{gen.input}}
    -     Output: {{gen.output}}



Figure 6: The data template for creating positive and negative examples with Self-instruct method.
A.2 T RAINING D ETAILS
For both the T5-Large-LM-Adapt (770M) and T5-XL-LM-Adapt (3B) models, we finetuned
them for five epochs, with batch size as 64. We use Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999.
The linear learning rate scheduler starts from 2 × 10−4 , then decays to 0. We tried to use the
commonly used learning rate 2 × 10−5 , but found that the model did not converge well. Therefore,
we use a large learning rate Lr = 2 × 10−4 which is also same as that in Kung & Peng (2023).
All of experiments are run on 8 × 4090 GPUs with 24G memory. The models are trained with
Huggingface Transformers toolkit. The maximum input length is 1024 and the maximum
output length is 128. This reproduces the results in Wang et al. (2022).
For the inference of TADIS in the zero-shot setting, although no examples are provided, we ran-
domly add the thinking results about the imagined examples to align with the format used during
training. We apply position shuffling and multiple example sampling strategies to prevent the model
from directly memorizing examples instead of thinking about them. Specifically, we construct four
different types of input data: (1) Without examples: A training sample without any example. (2)
Only negative examples: A training sample with only negative examples.(3) Only positive exam-
ples: A training sample with only positive examples.(4) Mixing examples: A training sample with
both positive and negative examples.
During training, we sample examples to enable the overall input data to meet with the maximum in-
put length limit. Specifically, for each input data sample, we first add task definition and evaluation
instance. Then add example 1 and example 2 respectively. If the number of tokens is greater than
max length at any stage, we will stop. In this way, we could obtain multiple types of provided ex-
amples. The proportions of ‘without examples’, ‘only positive examples’, ‘only negative examples’
and ‘mixing examples’ are 2.9%, 6.3%, 0.5% and 90.2% respectively in our constructed training
data.


                                                  13
