Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT: C ONSISTENT M ULTI - SCENE
V IDEO G ENERATION VIA LLM-G UIDED P LANNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Although recent text-to-video (T2V) generation methods have seen significant ad-
         vancements, the majority of these works focus on producing short video clips of
         a single event with a single background (i.e., single-scene videos). Meanwhile,
         recent large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their capability in gen-
         erating layouts and programs to control downstream visual modules such as im-
         age generation models. This prompts an important question: can we leverage the
         knowledge embedded in these LLMs for temporally consistent long video gen-
         eration? In this paper, we propose V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT, a novel framework
         for consistent multi-scene video generation that uses the knowledge of LLMs for
         video content planning and grounded video generation. Specifically, given a single
         text prompt, we first ask our video planner LLM (GPT-4) to expand it into a ‘video
         plan’, which involves generating the scene descriptions, the entities with their re-
         spective layouts, the background for each scene, and consistency groupings of the
         entities and backgrounds. Next, guided by this output from the video planner,
         our video generator, named Layout2Vid, has explicit control over spatial layouts
         and can maintain temporal consistency of entities/backgrounds across multiple
         scenes, while being trained only with image-level annotations. Our experiments
         demonstrate that our proposed V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT framework substantially
         improves layout and movement control in both single- and multi-scene video gen-
         eration and can generate multi-scene videos with visual consistency across scenes,
         while achieving competitive performance with SOTAs in open-domain single-
         scene text-to-video generation. We also demonstrate that our framework can dy-
         namically control the strength for layout guidance and can also generate videos
         with user-provided images. We hope our framework can inspire future work on
         integrating the planning ability of LLMs into consistent long video generation.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-video (T2V) generation has achieved rapid progress following the success of text-to-image
(T2I) generation. Most works in T2V generation focus on producing short videos (e.g., 16 frames
at 2fps) from the given text prompts (Wang et al., 2023b; He et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022; Singer
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022). Recent works on long video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023; Yin
et al., 2023; Villegas et al., 2023; He et al., 2023) aim at generating long videos of a few minutes with
holistic visual consistency. Although these works could generate longer videos, the generated videos
often display the continuation or repetitive patterns of a single action (e.g., driving a car) instead of
transitions and dynamics of multiple changing actions/events (e.g., five steps about how to make
caraway cakes). Meanwhile, large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Chowdhery et al., 2022) have demonstrated their capability in generating
layouts and programs to control visual modules (Dídac et al., 2023; Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023),
especially image generation models (Cho et al., 2023b; Feng et al., 2023). This raises an interesting
question: Can we leverage the knowledge embedded in these LLMs for planning consistent multi-
scene video generation?
In this work, we introduce V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT, a novel framework for consistent multi-scene
video generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT decomposes the T2V generation
task into two stages: video planning and video generation. For the first video planning stage (see
Fig. 1 blue part), we employ an LLM to generate a video plan, which is an overall plot of the video


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      VideoDirectorGPT
                    Video       Scene Description                      Video       Spatial-Temporal Blocks
                   Planner                                           Generator     Layout                    Multi-Scene Video
   Prompt                    Entities (names + layouts)    Video
  A hungry cat
                  (GPT-4 )                                          (Layout2Vid)             Guided 2D
                                    Background              Plan                             Attention
is finding food                                                                    Scene
                               Consistency Grouping                                 Text


Figure 1: Overall illustration of our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT framework. In the first stage, we
employ GPT-4 as a video planner to craft a video plan, which provides a multi-component script
for videos with multiple scenes. In the second stage, we utilize Layout2Vid, a grounded video
generation module, to render multi-scene videos with layout and consistency control based on the
video plan generated in the first stage.

with multiple scenes, each consisting of a text description of the scene and entity names/layouts,
and a background. It also consists of consistency groupings of specific entities/backgrounds that re-
appear across scenes. For the second video generation stage (see Fig. 1 yellow part), we introduce
Layout2Vid, a novel grounded video generation module that generates multi-scene videos from the
video plan. Our framework provides the following strengths: (1) employing an LLM to write a
video plan that guides the generation of videos with multiple scenes from a single text prompt, (2)
layout control in video generation by only using image-level layout annotations, and (3) generation
of visually consistent entities/backgrounds across multiple scenes.
To be specific, in the first stage, video planning (Sec. 3.1), we employ an LLM (e.g., GPT-4 (Ope-
nAI, 2023)) as a video planner to generate a video plan, a multi-component script of videos with
multiple scenes to guide the downstream video synthesis process. Our video plan consists of four
components: (1) multi-scene descriptions, (2) entities (names and their 2D bounding boxes), (3)
background, and (4) consistency groupings (scene indices for each entity/background indicating
where they should remain visually consistent). We generate the video plan in two steps by prompt-
ing an LLM with different in-context examples. In the first step, we expand a single text prompt into
multi-step scene descriptions with an LLM, where each scene is described with a text description,
a list of entities, and a background (see Fig. 2 blue part for details). We also prompt the LLM to
generate additional information for each entity (e.g., color, attire, etc.), and group together entities
across frames and scenes, which will help guide consistency during the video generation stage. In
the second step, we expand the detailed layouts of each scene with an LLM by generating a list of
bounding boxes of the entities per frame, given the list of entities and scene description. This overall
‘video plan’ guides the downstream video generation module in the second stage (described next).
In the second stage, video generation (Sec. 3.2), we introduce Layout2Vid, a grounded video gen-
eration module to render videos based on the video plan generated by the LLM in the previous
stage (see yellow part of Fig. 2). For the grounded video generation module, we build upon Mod-
elScopeT2V (Wang et al., 2023b), an off-the-shelf text-to-video generation model, by freezing its
original parameters and adding spatial control of entities through a small set of trainable parameters
(13% of total parameters) in the gated-attention module (Li et al., 2023). This enables our Lay-
out2Vid to be trained solely with layout-annotated images, thus bypassing the need for expensive
training on annotated video datasets. To preserve the identity of entities appearing across different
frames and scenes, we use shared representations for the entities within the same consistency group.
We also propose to use a joint image+text embedding as entity grounding conditions which we find
more effective than the existing text-only approaches (Li et al., 2023) in entity identity preservation
(Appendix F). Overall, our Layout2Vid avoids expensive video-level training and also improves the
object layout and movement control and cross-scene temporal consistency.
We conduct experiments on both single-scene and multi-scene video generation. For single-scene
video generation, we evaluate layout control via VPEval Skill-based prompts (Cho et al., 2023b),
assess object dynamics through ActionBench-Direction prompts adapted from ActionBench-
SSV2 (Wang et al., 2023c), and examine open-domain video generation using the MSR-VTT
dataset (Xu et al., 2016). For multi-scene video generation, we experiment with two types of in-
put prompts: (1) a list of sentences describing events – ActivityNet Captions (Krishna et al., 2017)
and Coref-SV prompts based on Pororo-SV (Li et al., 2019b), and (2) a single sentence from which
models generate multi-scene videos – HiREST (Zala et al., 2023). Experiments show that our pro-
posed V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT demonstrates better layout skills (object, count, spatial, scale) and
object movement control (Sec. 5.1), capable of generating multi-scene videos with visual consis-


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Prompt                                      VideoDirectorGPT                                                               Scene 1             Scene 2    Scene 3

                  A hungry cat is                                          Video
                    finding food
                                       Video Planner                                           Video Generator
                                       (GPT-4 )                             Plan               (Layout2Vid)


                                      Scene Description                            Entities (names + layouts) with Consistency Grouping                                       Background
                                                              Frame 1: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.25, 0.25, 1.00, 0.70], ‘a plush beige bed’: [0.00, 0.50, 1.00, 1.00]}
Video Planner



                                    A cat is lying down on
                     Scene 1                                  Frame 2: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.25, 0.25, 1.00, 0.70], ‘a plush beige bed’: [0.00, 0.50, 1.00, 1.00]}       Bedroom
                                             a bed            ...

                                                              Frame 1: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.55, 0.25, 0.85, 0.55], ‘a plush beige bed’: [0.00, 0.60, 1.00, 1.00]}
                     Scene 2           Then she gets up       Frame 2: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.50, 0.30, 0.80, 0.60], ‘a plush beige bed’: [0.00, 0.60, 1.00, 1.00]}       Bedroom
                                                              ...

                                                              Frame 1: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.15, 0.20, 0.40, 0.45], ‘gourmet cat snack’: [0.50, 0.45, 0.80, 0.65]}
                                    She goes to the kitchen
                     Scene 3                                  Frame 2: {‘a fluffy Siamese cat’: [0.35, 0.30, 0.60, 0.55], ‘gourmet cat snack’: [0.50, 0.45, 0.80, 0.65]}       Kitchen
                                        and eats a snack      ...


                                      Scene Description        Layout + Consistency Grouping                                                                                    Video
                                                                                                           Layout2Vid                     Guided 2D Attention
                                    A cat is lying down on                     a fluffy Siamese cat
                                                                                                          Spatial-Temporal Blocks           Visual
Video Generator


                     Scene 1                 a bed                             Scene: [1, 2, 3]

                                                                               a plush beige bed                                       Layout           Self-Attn
                                                                               Scene: [1, 2]
                                                                                                              Spatial Conv

                     Scene 2           Then she gets up                        gourmet cat snack             Temporal Conv
                                                                               Scene: [3]                                                            Gated Self-Attn
                                                                               bedroom
                                                                                                              Spatial Attn
                                                                               Scene: [1, 2]                                           Scene           Cross-Attn
                                    She goes to the kitchen                                                  Temporal Attn              Text
                     Scene 3            and eats a snack                       kitchen
                                                                               Scene: [3]


Figure 2: Illustration of our two-stage framework for long, multi-scene video generation from
text. In the first stage, we employ the LLM as a video planner to craft a video plan, which pro-
vides an overarching plot for videos with multiple scenes, guiding the downstream video generation
process (Sec. 3.1). The video plan consists of scene-level text descriptions, a list of the entities
and background involved in each scene, frame-by-frame entity layouts (bounding boxes), and con-
sistency groupings for entities and backgrounds. In the second stage, we utilize Layout2Vid, a
grounded video generation module, to render videos based on the video plan generated in the first
stage. This module uses the same image and text embeddings to represent identical entities and
backgrounds from video plan, and allows for spatial control over entity layouts through the Guided
2D Attention in the spatial attention block (Sec. 3.2).

tency across different scenes (Sec. 5.2), and competitive with SOTAs on single-scene open-domain
text-to-video generation (Sec. 5.1). We also demonstrate that our framework can dynamically con-
trol the strength for layout guidance and generate videos with user-provided images (Sec. 5.3).
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
                  • We propose a new T2V generation framework V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT with two stages: video
                    content planning and grounded multi-scene video generation.
                  • We employ LLMs to generate a ‘video plan’ which consists of detailed scene descriptions,
                    entity layouts, and entity/background consistency groupings to guide downstream video gener-
                    ation (Sec. 3.1).
                  • We introduce Layout2Vid, a novel grounded video generation module, which brings together
                    image/text-based layout control ability and entity-level temporal consistency (Sec. 3.2). Our
                    Layout2Vid can be trained using only image-level layout annotations.
                  • We empirically demonstrate that our framework can accurately control object layouts and
                    movements in single-scene videos (Sec. 5.1) and can generate temporally consistent multi-
                    scene videos (Sec. 5.2). We also provide qualitative examples, ablation study of our design
                    choices (Appendix F), and human evaluations (Sec. 5.4).


2                   R ELATED W ORKS
Text-to-video generation. Training a text-to-video (T2V) generation model from scratch is compu-
tationally expensive. Recent work often leverages pre-trained text-to-image (T2I) generation models
such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) by fine-tuning them on text-video pairs (Wang et al.,
2023b; Blattmann et al., 2023). While this warm-start strategy enables high-resolution video gen-
eration, it comes with the limitation of only being able to generate short video clips, as T2I models
lack the ability to maintain consistency through long videos. On the other hand, recent works on
long video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; Villegas et al., 2023; He et al., 2023)


                                                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aim at generating long videos of a few minutes. However, the generated videos often display the
continuation or repetitive patterns of a single action instead of transitions and dynamics of multiple
changing actions/events. In contrast, our layout-guided T2V generation model, Layout2Vid, infuses
layout control and multi-scene temporal consistency into a pretrained T2V generation model via
data and parameter-efficient training, while preserving its original visual quality.
Bridging text-to-image generation with layouts. To achieve interpretable and controllable gener-
ation, a line of research decomposes the T2I generation task into two stages: text-to-layout genera-
tion, and layout-to-image generation. While early models train the layout generation module from
scratch (Hong et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019a; Liang et al., 2022), recent methods
employ pretrained LLMs to leverage their knowledge in generating image layouts from text (Cho
et al., 2023b; Feng et al., 2023; Qu et al., 2023). To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to utilize LLMs to generate structured video plans from text, enabling accurate and controllable long
video generation. See Appendix A for addtional related works.

3     V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT
3.1   V IDEO P LANNING : G ENERATING V IDEO P LANS WITH LLM S
Video Plan. As illustrated in the blue part of Fig. 2, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) acts as a planner, pro-
viding a detailed video plan to guide the video generation. Our video plan has four components:
(1) multi-scene descriptions: a sentence describing each scene, (2) entities: names and their 2D
bounding boxes, (3) background: text description of the location of each scene, and (4) consis-
tency groupings: scene indices for each entity/background indicating where they should remain
visually consistent. The video plan is generated in two steps by prompting GPT-4 independently.
See Appendix B for each step’s GPT-4 prompt details.
Video Planning Step 1: Generating multi-scene descriptions, entity names, and en-
tity/background consistency groupings. In the first step, we employ GPT-4 to expand a single
text prompt into a multi-scene video plan. Next, we group entities and backgrounds that appear
across different scenes using an exact match. For instance, if the ‘chef’ appears in scenes 1-4 and
‘oven’ only appears in scene 1, we form the entity consistency groupings as {chef:[1,2,3,4],
oven:[1]}. In the subsequent video generation stage, we use the shared representations for the
same entity/background consistency groups to ensure they maintain temporally consistent appear-
ances (see Sec. 3.2 for details).
Video Planning Step 2: Generating entity layouts for each scene. In the second step, we expand
the detailed layouts for each scene using GPT-4. We generate a list of bounding boxes for the entities
in each frame based on the entities and the scene description. For each scene, we produce layouts
for 8 frames, then linearly interpolate to gather information for denser frames (e.g., 16 frames).

3.2   V IDEO GENERATION : G ENERATING V IDEOS FROM V IDEO P LANS WITH L AYOUT 2V ID
Layout2Vid: Layout-guided T2V generation. We implement Layout2Vid by integrating layout
control capability into ModelScopeT2V (Wang et al., 2023b), a public T2V generation model based
on Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) (see Appendix C.1 for ModelScopeT2V details). The
diffusion UNet in ModelScopeT2V consists of a series of spatio-temporal blocks, each containing
four modules: spatial convolution, temporal convolution, spatial attention, and temporal attention.
Compared with ModelScopeT2V, our Layout2Vid enables layout-guided video generation with ex-
plicit spatial control over a list of entities represented by their bounding boxes, as well as visual and
text content. As illustrated in Fig. 3 (a), we build upon the 2D attention to create the Guided 2D At-
tention. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), the Guided 2D Attention takes two conditional inputs to modulate
the visual latent representation: (a) layout tokens, conditioned with gated self-attention (Li et al.,
2023), and (b) text tokens that describe the current scene, conditioned with cross-attention.
Temporally consistent entity grounding with image+text embeddings. While previous layout-
guided text-to-image generation models commonly used only the CLIP text embedding for layout
control (Li et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023), we use the CLIP image embedding in addition to the
CLIP text embedding for entity grounding. In our ablation studies (see Appendix F), we find that
using both the image and text embeddings for grounding is more effective than text-only or image-
only grounding. As depicted in Equation (1), the grounding token for the ith entity, hi , is a 2-layer


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           (a) Spatio-Temporal Block                              (b) Guided 2D Attention 🔥
                                                                                      Visual
        Spatial Conv    Temporal Conv       Spatial Att
                                          Temporal  Attn          Temporal Attn
                                            Normalization         Normalization   Layout       Self-Attn
        Normalization    Normalization
                                                Linear                Linear
         Activation       Activation
                                          Guided 2D Attention 🔥    1D Attention    Text    Gated Self-Attn
          2D Conv          1D Conv              Linear                Linear
                                                                                               Cross-Attn
            x N1             x N2                 x N3                 x N4



Figure 3: Overview of (a) spatio-temporal blocks within the diffusion UNet of our Layout2Vid and
(b) Guided 2D Attention in the spatial attention module. (a) The spatio-temporal block comprises
four modules: spatial convolution, temporal convolution, spatial attention, and temporal attention.
We adopt settings from ModelScopeT2V, where (N1, N2, N3, N4) are set to (2, 4, 2, 2). In (b)
Guided 2D Attention, we modulate the visual representation with layout tokens and text tokens. For
efficient training, only the parameters of the Guided 2D Attention (indicated by the fire symbol,
constituting 13% of total parameters) are trained using image-level annotations. The remaining
modules in the spatio-temporal block are kept frozen.


MLP which fuses CLIP image embeddings fimg (ei ), CLIP text embeddings ftext (ei ), and Fourier
features (Mildenhall et al., 2021) of the bounding box li = [x0 , y0 , x1 , y1 ]. We use learnable linear
projection layers, denoted as Pimg/text , on the visual/text features, which we found helpful for faster
convergence during training in our initial experiments.
                        hi = MLP(Pimg (fimg (ei )), Ptext (ftext (ei )), Fourier(li ))                        (1)
Our image embedding fimg (ei ) can be obtained from either text descriptions or user-provided ex-
emplar images. To obtain image embeddings from text (e.g., from the video plan), we employ
Karlo (Lee et al., 2022), a public implementation of unCLIP Prior (Ramesh et al., 2022), which
translates a CLIP text embedding into a CLIP image embedding. To obtain the image embedding
from image exemplars, we can simply encode the images with the CLIP image encoder.
Parameter and data-efficient training. During training, we only update the parameters of the
Guided 2D Attention (13% of total parameters) to inject layout guidance capabilities into the Mod-
elScopeT2V backbone while preserving its original video generation capabilities. Such a training
strategy allows us to efficiently train the model with only image-level layout annotations, while still
equipped with multi-scene temporal consistency via shared entity grounding tokens. Training and
inference details for our Layout2Vid are shown in Appendix C.2.

4   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Evaluated models. We primarily compare our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT with ModelScopeT2V, and
present comparisons with other T2V generation models (see Appendix D.1 for all baseline model
details) on the datasets for which their papers have provided results. ModelScopeT2V serves as the
closest baseline to our framework, given that our Layout2Vid utilizes its frozen weights and only
trains a small set of new parameters to add spatial control and temporal consistency across scenes.
Prompts for single-scene video generation. For single-scene video generation, we conduct
experiments with VPEval Skill-based prompts (Cho et al., 2023b), (which cover skills includ-
ing object, count, spatial relations, and relative scale) to evaluate layout control, ActionBench-
Direction prompts to assess object dynamics, and MSR-VTT captions to cover diverse open-domain
scenes (Xu et al., 2016). Specifically, we prepare ActionBench-Direction prompts by sampling video
captions from ActionBench-SSV2 (Wang et al., 2023c) and balancing the distribution of movement
directions. See Appendix D.2 for details.
Prompts for multi-scene video generation. For multi-scene video generation, we experiment with
two types of input prompts: (1) a list of sentences describing events – ActivityNet Captions (Krishna
et al., 2017) and Coref-SV prompts based on Pororo-SV (Li et al., 2019b), and (2) a single sentence
from which models generate multi-scene videos – HiREST (Zala et al., 2023). Coref-SV is a new
multi-scene text description dataset that we propose to evaluate the visual consistency of objects
across multi-scene videos. We create Coref-SV by augmenting the Pororo-SV dataset (Li et al.,


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2019b; Kim et al., 2017), which consists of multi-scene paragraphs from the “Pororo the Little
Penguin” animated series. To evaluate the temporal consistency of video generation models trained
on real-world videos, we replace its original animation characters (e.g., Pororo) with humans and
common animals and examine their appearance across different scenes. Recurring character names
are replaced with pronouns (she/he/it). See Appendix D.3 for prompt preparation details.
Automated evaluation metrics. Following previous works (Hong et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b;
Wang et al., 2023b), we use FID (Heusel et al., 2017) and FVD (Unterthiner et al., 2019) as video
quality metrics, and CLIPSIM (Wu et al., 2021) as the text-video alignment metric. Given that
CLIP fails to faithfully capture detailed semantics such as spatial relations, object counts, and ac-
tions in videos (Otani et al., 2023; Cho et al., 2023a;b; Hu et al., 2023), we further propose the use
of fine-grained evaluation metrics. For the evaluation of VPEval Skill-based prompts, we employ
VPEval accuracy based on running skill-specific evaluation programs (object, count, spatial, scale)
that execute relevant visual modules (Cho et al., 2023b). For ActionBench-Direction prompts, we
propose an object movement direction accuracy metric that takes both temporal information and
spatial layouts into consideration. To achieve this, we obtain the start/end locations of objects by
detecting them with GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2023) in the first/last video frames. We then eval-
uate whether the x-coordinates (for movements left or right) or y-coordinates (for movements up
or down) of the objects have changed correctly. For consistency evaluation in ActivityNet Cap-
tions and Coref-SV, we introduce a new metric to measure the consistency of the visual appearance
of a target object across different scenes. For this, we first detect the target object using Ground-
ingDINO from the center frame of each scene video. Then, we extract the CLIP (ViT-B/32) image
embedding from the crop of the detected bounding box. We calculate the multi-scene object con-
sistency metric by averaging the CLIP image embedding similarities across all adjacent scene pairs:
 1
   PN −1             img        img
N     n=1 cos(CLIPn , CLIPn+1 ), where N is the number of scenes, cos(·, ·) is cosine similarity,
and CLIPimg
          n is the CLIP image embedding of the target object in n-th scene.

Human evaluation. We conduct a human evaluation on the multi-scene videos generated by both
our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT and ModelScopeT2V on the Coref-SV dataset. Since we know the
target entity and its co-reference pronouns in the Coref-SV prompts, we can compare the temporal
consistency of the target entities across scenes. We evaluate the human preference between videos
from two models in each category of Quality, Text-Video Alignment, and Object Consistency. We
show 50 videos of each model to three crowd-workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk to rate and
then we calculate human preferences between the models. See Appendix E for more setup details.
Step-by-step error analysis. We also do an error analysis with an expert on each step of our single-
sentence to multi-scene video generation pipeline on the HiREST dataset. We analyze the generated
multi-scene text descriptions, layouts, and entity/background consistency groupings to evaluate our
video planning stage, and examine the final video to evaluate the video generation stage. We provide
the detailed error analysis setup in Appendix E.

5     R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

5.1   S INGLE -S CENE V IDEO G ENERATION
Layout control results (VPEval Skill-based prompts). Table 1 (left) displays the VPEval ac-
curacy on the VPEval Skill-based prompts. Our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT significantly outperforms
ModelScopeT2V on all layout control skills. These results suggest that layouts generated by our
LLM are highly accurate and greatly improve the control of object placements during video gener-
ation. Fig. 4 (1st row) shows a example where our LLM-generated video plan successfully guides
Layout2Vid to accurately place the objects. In contrast, ModelScopeT2V fails to generate a ‘pizza’.
Object movement results (ActionBench-Direction). Table 1 (right) shows the performance on
the ActionBench-Direction prompts which evaluate both temporal understanding and spatial layout
control. Our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT outperforms ModelScopeT2V in object movement direction
accuracy by a large margin, demonstrating that our LLM-generated layouts can improve the accu-
racy of object dynamics in video generation. Fig. 4 (2nd row) shows video generation examples,
where our LLM-generated video plan guides the Layout2Vid module to place in the correct start-
ing position and guide the ‘pear’ to the correct end position in the video, whereas the ‘pear’ in the
ModelScopeT2V video moves in a random wrong direction.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison of V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT with ModelScopeT2V on layout control (VPEval
Skill-based) and object movement (Actionbench-Direction) for single-scene video generation.

                                                          VPEval Skill-based                             ActionBench-Direction
         Method
                                       Object    Count     Spatial       Scale   Overall Acc. (%)     Movement Direction Acc. (%)
         ModelScopeT2V                   89.8    38.8        18.0        15.8           40.8                       30.5
         V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT (Ours)     97.1    77.4        61.1        47.0           70.6                       46.5


                                                         A pizza is to the left of an elephant
                                 ModelScopeT2V                                                   VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
                     Frame 1           Frame 8            Frame 16                   Frame 1             Frame 8           Frame 16


        VPEval


                                                           Pushing pear from right to left


      ActionBench
       -Direction


Figure 4: Generation examples on a VPEval Skill-based prompt and an ActionBench-Direction
prompt. Our video plan, with object layouts overlaid, successfully guides the Layout2Vid module to
place objects in the correct spatial relations for the VPEval Skill-based prompt and move the ‘pear’
in the correct direction for the ActionBench-Direction prompt, whereas ModelScopeT2V fails to
generate a ‘pizza’ in the VPEval Skill-based prompt example and the ‘pear’ moves in a random
wrong direction for the ActionBench-Direction prompt. See Appendix G for additional examples
and supplementary material for full videos.


Open-domain results (MSR-VTT). Ta- Table 2: Visual quality and text-video alignment met-
ble 2 shows the visual quality (FVD, FID) rics on MSR-VTT. ModelScopeT2V† : Our replica-
and text-video alignment (CLIPSIM) met- tion with 2990 randomly selected test prompts.
rics.Our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT maintains                                       Visual quality T-V alignment
                                             Method
similar performance as its closest base-                                    FVD (↓) FID (↓) CLIPSIM (↑)
line ModelScopeT2V (good improvement         Different arch / Training data
in FVD, and similar performance on FID       NUWA                              −       47.68    0.2439
and CLIPSIM), while additionally being       CogVideo (Chinese)                −       24.78    0.2614
                                             CogVideo (English)              1294      23.59    0.2631
equipped with layout control and multi-      MagicVideo                      1290         −        −
scene temporal consistency. In addition, our VideoLDM                          −          −     0.2929
                                             Make-A-Video                      −       13.17    0.3049
V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT achieves better or
                                             Same video backbone & Test prompts
comparable performance to models trained     ModelScopeT2V†                   683      12.32    0.2909
with larger video data (e.g., Make-A-Video)  V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT (Ours)      550      12.22    0.2860
or with higher resolution (e.g., VideoLDM).


5.2     M ULTI -S CENE V IDEO G ENERATION

Multiple sentences to multi-scene videos (ActivityNet Captions / Coref-SV). As shown in the left
two blocks of Table 3, our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT outperforms ModelScopeT2V in visual quality
(FVD/FID) and consistency on ActivityNet Captions and Coref-SV datasets. Notably, for Coref-SV,
our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT achieves higher object consistency than ModelScopeT2V even with GT
co-reference (where pronouns are replaced with their original noun counterparts, acting as oracle
information; e.g., “she picked up ...” becomes “cat picked up ...”), showcasing the strong object
identity preservation of our framework. Fig. 5 (left) shows a video generation example from Coref-
SV, where the LLM-generated video plan can guide the Layout2Vid module to generate the same
mouse across scenes consistently, whereas ModelScopeT2V generates a hand and a dog instead of
a mouse in later scenes. See Appendix G for an additional example.


                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Multi-scene video generation with multiple input sentences (ActivityNet Captions and
Coref-SV) and single sentence (HiREST prompts). GT co-reference: replacing co-reference pro-
nouns in Coref-SV with the original object names (e.g., “his friends” becomes “dog’s friends” if the
original object is ‘dog’).

                                                                                                                 ActivityNet Captions                                 Coref-SV                          HiREST
      Method
                                                                                              FVD (↓)               FID (↓)        Consistency (↑)                 Consistency (↑)            FVD (↓)               FID (↓)
      ModelScopeT2V                                                                               980               18.12                  46.0                           16.3                   1322                 23.79
      ModelScopeT2V (with GT co-reference; oracle)                                                 -                  -                     -                             37.9                     -                    -
      V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT (Ours)                                                                 805               16.50                  64.8                           42.8                   733                  18.54



                                                           Coref-SV                                                                                                            HiREST
                                                                                                                                                                      “How To” Make Caraway Cakes

                          ModelScopeT2V                                   VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)                                                ModelScopeT2V                                 VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
                   Frame 1                      Frame 16                 Frame 1                      Frame 16                             Frame 1                  Frame 16                                             Frame 16Frame 1


Scene 1                                                                                                                  Scene 1


                                  ...                                                  ...
          mouse is holding a book and makes a                   mouse is holding a book and makes a                                Make Caraway Cakes, step 1/10                     a woman in a green apron preheats a stainless steel oven
          happy face                                            happy face


Scene 3                                                                                                                  Scene 2


                                                                he is pulling petals off the flower                                                                                  a woman in a green apron creams together unsalted

                                  ...                                                  ...
          he is pulling petals off the flower
                                                                                                                                                         ...
                                                                                                                                   Make Caraway Cakes, step 2/10

                                                                                                                                                                                                              ...
                                                                                                                                                                                     butter and granulated sugar in a large glass bowl
                                                                                                                                                                                     using a hand mixer


Scene 7                                                                                                                  Scene 5


          he is smiling and talking while holding a flower      he is smiling and talking while holding a flower                   Make Caraway Cakes, step 5/10                     a woman in a green apron mixes the ingredients in the
          on his right paw                                      on his right paw
                                                                                                                                                        ...                                                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                                     glass mixing bowl until they form a smooth dough


Figure 5: Generation examples on Coref-SV (left) and HiREST (right). For both Coref-SV and
HiREST, our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT is able to generate detailed video plans and visually consistent
videos. In HiREST, the plan also expands the original text prompt to show the process. Conversely,
ModelScopeT2V generates a hand and a dog instead of a mouse for Coref-SV, and only generates
the final caraway cake (which is visually inconsistent). More examples are in Appendix G and see
supplementary for full videos.


Single sentence to multi-scene videos (HiREST). The right block of Table 3 shows our V IDEO D I -
RECTOR GPT achieves better visual quality scores (FVD/FID) than ModelScopeT2V on the HiREST
dataset. As shown in Fig. 5 (right), our LLM can generate a step-by-step video plan from a single
prompt and our Layout2Vid can generate consistent videos following the plan. Our V IDEO D IREC -
TOR GPT generates a step-by-step video showing how to make caraway cakes (a British seed cake).
ModelScopeT2V repeatedly generates the final caraway cake (which is visually inconsistent). We
include an additional example in Appendix G.

5.3       A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS
Generating videos with custom image exemplars. Our Layout2Vid can obtain CLIP image em-
beddings either from user-provided image exemplars or from entity text descriptions via the Karlo
Prior. In Fig. 6, we demonstrate that our Layout2Vid can flexibly take either text-only or image+text
descriptions as input to generate multi-scene videos with good entity consistency.
Dynamic layout strength control based on GPT-4. The number of denoising steps with layout
guidance, denoted as α (detailed in Appendix C.3), is a key hyper-parameter in our model. Instead
of using a static α value, we explore dynamically adjusting it during the video plan generation by
asking the LLM how much layout guidance needs to be enforced for each prompt. Table 4 shows
the result with static α values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3, as well as dynamic α values determined by GPT-
4 (called LLM-Dynamic-α). Interestingly, LLMs can help the video generation process achieve a
good balance in the quality-layout trade-off. Detailed explanation for Table 4 is given in Appendix F.


                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Ablation of the denoising steps with layout guidance (via Guided 2D attentions)
in open-domain (MSR-VTT) and object dynamics (ActionBench-Direction) prompts. α =
# steps with layout guidance
        # total steps        . Our Layout2Vid module uses 50 denoising steps in total.

        # Denoising steps with                                          MSR-VTT                                      ActionBench-Direction
        layout guidance                              FVD (↓)            FID (↓)       CLIPSIM (↑)                 Movement Direction Acc. (%)
        α = 0.1 (5 steps)                                550            12.22                 0.2860                                46.5
        α = 0.2 (10 steps)                               588            17.25                 0.2700                                59.8
        α = 0.3 (15 steps)                               593            17.17                 0.2702                                57.8
        LLM-Dynamic-α (5-15 steps)                       523            13.75                 0.2790                                56.8


                  Entity                                                           Generated Scenes
                Grounding            Scene 1: a <S> then gets up from        Scene 2: a <S> goes to the cream-colored           Scene 3: a <S> sits next to a
                                            a plush beige bed              kitchen and eats a can of gourmet cat snack.         large floor-to-ceiling window
                                        Frame 1            Frame 16                 Frame 1            Frame 16                  Frame 1             Frame 16


         Text
        Input      S = “white cat”


      Image+Text
         Input



                       S = “cat”


Figure 6: Video generation with text-only and image+text inputs. Users can provide either text-only
or image+text descriptions to place custom entities when generating videos with V IDEO D IREC -
TOR GPT. The identities of the entities are preserved across multiple scenes. Additional examples
are shown in Appendix G and see supplementary for full videos.


5.4    H UMAN E VALUATION
We conduct a human evaluation (de-
tailed in Sec. 4) on multi-scene videos                               Table 5: Human preference on generated multi-scene
generated by both V IDEO D IREC -                                     videos of Coref-SV in three evaluation categories.
TOR GPT and ModelScopeT2V on                                                                                              Human Preference (%) ↑
                                                                         Evaluation category
the Coref-SV dataset. Table 5 shows                                                                 V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT (Ours)            ModelScopeT2V        Tie
that V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT achieves a                                     Quality                                     54                             34          12
                                                                         Text-Video Alignment                        54                             28          18
higher preference than ModelScopeT2V                                     Object Consistency                          58                             30          12
in all categories (Quality, Text-Video
Alignment, and Object Consistency).
We also conduct an error analysis on our single-sentence to multi-scene video generation pipeline
on HiREST prompts and find that our LLM-guided planning steps score high accuracy, whereas the
biggest score drop happens in the layout-guided video generation. This suggests that our V IDEO D I -
RECTOR GPT could generate more accurate videos, once we have access to a stronger T2V backbone
than ModelScopeT2V. We present full error analysis results in Appendix E.


6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT, a novel framework for consistent multi-scene
video generation, leveraging the knowledge of LLMs for video content planning and grounded
video generation. In the first stage, we employ GPT-4 as a video planner to craft a video plan,
which provides a multi-component script for videos with multiple scenes. In the second stage, we
introduce Layout2Vid, a grounded video generation module, to generate videos with layout and
cross-scene consistency control. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed V IDEO D IREC -
TOR GPT framework substantially improves object layout and movement control and can generate
multi-scene videos with cross-scene visual consistency, while achieving competitive performance
with SOTAs on open-domain single-scene T2V generation.


                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7       E THICS S TATEMENT
While our framework can be beneficial for numerous applications (e.g., user-controlled/human-
in-the-loop video generation/manipulation and data augmentation), akin to other video generation
frameworks, it can also be utilized for potentially harmful purposes (e.g., creating false information
or misleading videos), and thus should be used with caution in the real-world applications (with
human supervision). Our video generation module (Layout2Vid) is based on the pretrained weights
of ModelScopeT2V. Therefore, we face similar limitations to their model, including deviations re-
lated to the distribution of training datasets, imperfect generation quality, and only understanding
the English corpus.

8       R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our model is built upon the publicly available code repository from GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023)1
and ModelScopeT2V (Wang et al., 2023b)2 . Please see Sec. 3/Appendix C for model architecture
details, Sec. 4/Appendix D.2/Appendix D.3 for dataset details, and Sec. 4/Appendix D.4 for metric
details. We will publicly release our code.

R EFERENCES
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  6299–6308, 2017.
Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. Dall-eval: Probing the reasoning skills and social
  biases of text-to-image generation models. In ICCV, 2023a.
Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. Visual programming for text-to-image generation and
  evaluation. In NeurIPS, 2023b.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022.
    1
   GLIGEN: https://github.com/gligen/GLIGEN
    2
   ModelScopeT2V: https://modelscope.cn/models/damo/text-to-video-synthesis/
summary,    https://github.com/ExponentialML/Text-To-Video-Finetuning/tree/
main


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Surís Dídac, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
  reasoning. In ICCV, 2023.
Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu,
 Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual planning and genera-
 tion with large language models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 102–118. Springer, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 14953–14962, 2023.
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion mod-
  els for high-fidelity video generation with arbitrary lengths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13221,
  2022.
Yingqing He, Menghan Xia, Haoxin Chen, Xiaodong Cun, Yuan Gong, Jinbo Xing, Yong Zhang,
  Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, Ying Shan, et al. Animate-a-story: Storytelling with retrieval-
  augmented video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06940, 2023.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Seunghoon Hong, Dingdong Yang, Jongwook Choi, and Honglak Lee. Inferring semantic layout for
  hierarchical text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2018.
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. In ICLR, 2022.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom em-
 beddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear, 2017.
Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A
  Smith. Tifa: Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question an-
  swering. In ICCV, 2023.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023.
Kyung-Min Kim, Min-Oh Heo, Seong-Ho Choi, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Deepstory: Video story qa
  by deep embedded memory networks. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI’17, pp. 2016–2022. AAAI Press, 2017. ISBN 9780999241103.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In ICLR, 2014.
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Dense-captioning
  events in videos. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Donghoon Lee, Jiseob Kim, Jisu Choi, Jongmin Kim, Minwoo Byeon, Woonhyuk Baek, and
  Saehoon Kim. Karlo-v1.0.alpha on coyo-100m and cc15m. https://github.com/
  kakaobrain/karlo, 2022.

Wenbo Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Lei Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Xiaodong He, Siwei Lyu, and Jian-
 feng Gao. Object-driven text-to-image synthesis via adversarial training. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12174–12182, 2019a.

Yitong Li, Martin Renqiang Min, Dinghan Shen, David Carlson, and Lawrence Carin. Video gener-
  ation from text. In AAAI, 2017.

Yitong Li, Zhe Gan, Yelong Shen, Jingjing Liu, Yu Cheng, Yuexin Wu, Lawrence Carin, David
  Carlson, and Jianfeng Gao. Storygan: A sequential conditional gan for story visualization. In
  CVPR, 2019b.

Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023.

Jiadong Liang, Wenjie Pei, and Feng Lu. Layout-bridging text-to-image synthesis. ArXiv,
   abs/2208.06162, 2022.    URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   251554565.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.

Adyasha Maharana, Darryl Hannan, and Mohit Bansal. Storydall-e: Adapting pretrained text-to-
  image transformers for story continuation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  70–87. Springer, 2022.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Mayu Otani, Riku Togashi, Yu Sawai, Ryosuke Ishigami, Yuta Nakashima, Esa Rahtu, Janne
 Heikkilä, and Shin’ichi Satoh. Toward verifiable and reproducible human evaluation for text-
 to-image generation. In CVPR, 2023.

Leigang Qu, Shengqiong Wu, Hao Fei, Liqiang Nie, and Tat-Seng Chua. Layoutllm-t2i: Eliciting
  layout guidance from llm for text-to-image generation. In ACM MM, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In MICCAI, 2015.

Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. In ICLR, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethink-
  ing the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.

Fuwen Tan, Song Feng, and Vicente Ordonez. Text2scene: Generating compositional scenes from
  textual descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6710–6719, 2019.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023b.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Fvd: A new metric for video generation. In ICLR Workshop, 2019.

Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description. In ICLR, 2023.

Fu-Yun Wang, Wenshuo Chen, Guanglu Song, Han-Jia Ye, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Gen-l-video:
  Multi-text to long video generation via temporal co-denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18264,
  2023a.

Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Mod-
   elscope text-to-video technical report, 2023b.

Zhenhailong Wang, Ansel Blume, Sha Li, Genglin Liu, Jaemin Cho, Zineng Tang, Mohit Bansal,
  and Heng Ji. Paxion: Patching action knowledge in video-language foundation models. In
  NeurIPS, 2023c.

Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and
  Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.14806, 2021.

Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, Yuejian
  Fang, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-infinity: Autoregressive over autoregressive generation for infinite
  visual synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2022a.

Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. Nüwa: Visual
  synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In European conference on computer
  vision, pp. 720–736. Springer, 2022b.

Jun Xu, Tao Mei, Ting Yao, and Yong Rui.            Msr-vtt:  A large video de-
  scription dataset for bridging video and language.       In CVPR, June 2016.
  URL             https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
  msr-vtt-a-large-video-description-dataset-for-bridging-video-and-language/.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengyuan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Chenfei Wu, Nan Duan, Zicheng
  Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. Reco: Region-controlled text-to-image generation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan
  Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Ming Gong, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng
  Liu, Houqiang Li, and Nan Duan. NUWA-XL: Diffusion over diffusion for eXtremely long
  video generation. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1309–1320, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.73. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.73.
Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, Satwik Kottur, Xilun Chen, Barlas Oguz, Yashar Mehdad, and Mo-
  hit Bansal. Hierarchical video-moment retrieval and step-captioning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23056–23065, 2023.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
A Additional Related Works                                                                         15

B Video Planning                                                                                   16

C Layout2Vid                                                                                       16
    C.1 Preliminaries: ModelScopeT2V for T2V generation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           16
    C.2 Training and Inference Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
    C.3 Layout-guided denoising steps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18

D Experiment Setup                                                                                 18
    D.1 Evaluated Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
    D.2 Prompts for Single-scene Video Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
    D.3 Prompts for Multi-scene Video Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
    D.4 Automated Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19

E Human Evaluation Details                                                                         20

F Ablation Studies                                                                                 21

G Additional Qualitative Examples                                                                  22

H Limitations                                                                                      22



A    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
Text-to-video generation. The text-to-video (T2V) generation task is to generate videos from text
descriptions. Early T2V generation models (Li et al., 2017; 2019b) used variational autoencoders
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2020), while multimodal language models (Hong et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022a; Villegas et al., 2023;
Maharana et al., 2022; Ge et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021) and denoising diffusion models (Ho et al.,
2022; Singer et al., 2023; Blattmann et al., 2023; Khachatryan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;
Yin et al., 2023) have become popular for recent works. Since training a T2V generation model
from scratch is computationally expensive, recent work often leverages pre-trained text-to-image
(T2I) generation models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) by finetuning them on
text-video pairs (Wang et al., 2023b; Blattmann et al., 2023). While this warm-start strategy enables
high-resolution video generation, it comes with the limitation of only being able to generate short
video clips, as T2I models lack the ability to maintain consistency through long videos. Recent
works on long video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; Villegas et al., 2023;
He et al., 2023) aim at generating long videos of a few minutes. However, the generated videos
often display the continuation or repetitive patterns of a single action (e.g., driving a car) instead
of transitions and dynamics of multiple changing actions/events (e.g., five steps about how to bake
a cake). In this work, we address this problem of multi-scene video generation with a two-stage
framework: using an LLM (e.g., GPT-4) to generate a structured video plan (consisting of stepwise
scene descriptions, entities and their layouts) and generating videos using Layout2Vid, a layout-
guided text-to-video generation model with consistency control. Our Layout2Vid infuses layout
control and multi-scene temporal consistency into a pretrained T2V generation model via data and
parameter-efficient training, while preserving its original visual quality.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B        V IDEO P LANNING
GPT-4 prompt templates. In this section, we provide the prompt templates we give to our video
planner (Sec. 3.1). The video plan is generated in two steps by prompting GPT-43 with different in-
context examples (we use 1 and 5 in-context examples for the first and second steps, respectively).
In the first step (see Fig. 7), we ask GPT-4 to expand a single text prompt into a multi-scene video
plan. Each scene comes with a text description, a list of entities, and a background. In the second
step (see Fig. 8), we generate a list of bounding boxes for the entities in each frame based on the
list of entities and the scene description. In line with VPGen (Cho et al., 2023b), we utilize the
[x0 , y0 , x1 , y1 ] format for bounding boxes, where each coordinate is normalized to fall within the
range [0,1]. For in-context examples, we present 0.05 as the minimum unit for the bounding box,
equivalent to a 20-bin quantization over the [0,1] range.

API cost. Using GPT-4 tokenizer, the average input/output token lengths of each step are 2K/1K
for the first step and 6K/1K for the second step. Using GPT-4, it takes 0.12 USD and 0.24 USD for
the inference of the first and second steps, respectively.

 Instructions:
 Given a single text prompt, you need to envision a multi-scene video by generating a sequence of stepwise prompts to describe the text prompt. For
 each step, you also need to generate the set of entities needed and describe the background scene where the video should occur. Related steps should
 maintain similar entities and background scenes. Before you write each stepwise description, you must follow these instructions:
 1. Each step prompt must contain only a single motion or action.
 2. Each step prompt must include all relevant objects and describe the environment scene.
 3. Make sure each step prompt must be easy described by a shot video cilp of 8 seconds at 2fps.
 Use the following format: [[step_1: [prompt, entities, background]; step_2: [prompt, entities, background]; … step_n: [prompt, entities, background]]

 In-context example:
 Input: Provide stepwise prompts for the text prompt: make butter biscuits
 Output:
 Step 1: [Prompt: A chief preheats the oven; Entities: chief, oven; Background: kitchen counter];
 Step 2: [Prompt: A chief creams together butter and sugar in a mixing bowl; Entities: chief, mixing bowl, butter, sugar, hand mixer; Background: kitchen]
 Step 3: [Prompt: A chief beats in eggs into the mixing bowl; Entities: chief, eggs, mixing bowl; Background: kitchen];
  …

 Input text: Provide stepwise prompts for the text prompt: [insert single text prompt here]

Figure 7: Prompt template for the 1st video planning step (scene descriptions and enti-
ties/background generation).


C        L AYOUT 2V ID
C.1       P RELIMINARIES : M ODEL S COPE T2V FOR T2V GENERATION .

We implement Layout2Vid by injecting layout control capability into ModelScopeT2V (Wang et al.,
2023b), a public text-to-video generation model based on Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022).
ModelScopeT2V consists of (1) a CLIP ViT-H/14 (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder, (2) an au-
toencoder, and (3) a diffusion UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). Given a T frame
video x ∈ RT ×3×H×W with video caption c and frame-wise layouts {e}Ti=1 , ModelScopeT2V
first uses an autoencoder to encode the video into a latent representation z = E(x). The diffusion
UNet performs denoising steps in the latent space to generate videos, conditioned on the CLIP text
encoder representation of video captions. The UNet comprises a series of spatio-temporal blocks,
each containing four modules: spatial convolution, temporal convolution, spatial attention, and tem-
poral attention. Since the original ModelScopeT2V does not offer control beyond the text input, we
build upon the 2D attention module in the spatial attention module to create ‘Guided 2D Attention’,
which allows for spatial control using bounding boxes.

C.2       T RAINING AND I NFERENCE D ETAILS

The highlight of our Layout2Vid training is that it was conducted solely on image-level data with
bounding box annotations. We trained the MLP layers for grounding tokens and the Guided 2D
Attention layer with the same bounding-box annotated data used in GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023), which
    3
        We employ the gpt-4-0613 version via OpenAI API.


                                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Instructions:
  Assuming the frame size is normalized to the range 0-1, you need to give a possible 8-frame layout with bounding boxes of the listed entities of a given
  scene description. Each object in the image is one rectangle or square box in the layout and size of boxes should be as large as possible. You need to
  generate layouts from the close up camera view of the event. The layout difference between two adjacent frames must be small, considering the small
  interval. You also need to generate a caption that best describes the image for each frame. After generating all frames, add reasoning to your design.
  Use format:
  Frame_1: [[object1, [left, top, right, bottom]], [object2, [left, top, right, bottom]], ..., [object_n, [left, top, right, bottom]]], caption:...
  Frame_2: [[object1, [left, top, right, bottom]], [object2, [left, top, right, bottom]], ..., [object_n, [left, top, right, bottom]]], caption:...
  …
  Frame_8: [[object1, [left, top, right, bottom]], [object2, [left, top, right, bottom]], ..., [object_n, [left, top, right, bottom]]], caption:...
  Reasoning:...

  In-context example:
  Input: Please generate bounding box coordinates for the following entities based on the scene description.
  Entities: ['table', 'cat', 'chair']. Scene description: A cat jumps from a chair to a table.
  Output:
  Frame_1: [["table", [0.1, 0.6, 0.9, 1.0]], ["cat", [0.4, 0.55, 0.6, 0.6]], ["chair", [0.05, 0.6, 0.4, 1.0]]], caption: A cat is standing on the table, preparing to jump.
  Frame_2: [["table", [0.1, 0.6, 0.9, 1.0]], ["cat", [0.45, 0.5, 0.65, 0.55]], ["chair", [0.05, 0.6, 0.4, 1.0]]], caption: The cat has just left the table and is in mid-air.
  …
  Reasoning: The cat\'s bounding box in Frame 1 is on the table, showing the cat in the take-off position. From Frame 2 to Frame 6, the cat is shown in various
  stages mid-flight, with the cat\'s bounding box moving closer to the chair with each frame. …

  Input text: Provide bounding box coordinates for the prompt: [insert entities and scene description here]


                Figure 8: Prompt template for the 2nd video planning step (layout generation).



                                      Training                                                                           Inference
               Caption:                                    Image:                                                           Entities:
      A dog and a cat are                                                                                           a fluffy Siamese cat
    near a chair in the yard                                                                                         a plush beige bed
                      Extract                                                                                       gourmet cat snack
                      Nouns
                                                                                                               UnCLIP                          CLIP Text
      A dog and a cat are                                                                                      Prior                           Encoder
                                                                 Detect Objects
    near a chair in the yard
                                                                                                                 Img Emb.               Text Emb.
                      CLIP Text
                      Encoder

            Text Emb.

                                  CLIP Img
            Img Emb.              Encoder
                                                                                                         Scene 1               Scene 2                Scene 3


Figure 9: Training and Inference procedure of Layout2Vid. A notable aspect of our model’s
training is that it was conducted only on image-level data with bounding box annotations. During
training, we extract entities (as noun phrases) from the video caption and apply object detectors to
pinpoint the bounding box locations of these entities. Then we obtain image embeddings for the
entities by encoding the image crop of the entities with CLIP image encoder. During inference,
we apply unCLIP Prior on the entities generated by the LLM to retrieve their corresponding CLIP
image embeddings. To preserve visual consistency, the same joint image-text embedding pair is
used across scenes to represent an identical object.



consists of 0.64M images. We train Layout2Vid for 50k steps, which takes only two days with
8 A6000 GPUs (each 48GB memory). All the remaining modules in the spatio-temporal block
Fig. 3 are frozen during the training phase. We illustrate the training and inference procedure of
Layout2Vid in Fig. 9.
During training, we first use spaCy (Honnibal & Montani, 2017) to extract all noun phrases from
the video caption, and use CLIP text encoder to get their text embeddings. Then we apply Ground-
ingDINO (Liu et al., 2023) to detect corresponding bounding box locations. To remove redundant
and duplicate bounding boxes, we only keep the bounding boxes that overlap less than 95% with
other boxes. Next, we crop the bounding box areas and resize the cropped images so that the longest
edge has size 224. We pad the cropped images with black colors to transform them into square
shapes. Finally, the CLIP ViT-L/14 image encoder converts cropped images to embeddings. We use


                                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the joint image-text embeddings for grounding token construction. Our training can be completed
in only 2 days on a server with 8 A6000 GPUs.
During inference, we use the Karlo implementation of unCLIP Prior to the entities to convert the
texts into their corresponding CLIP image embeddings, and CLIP text encoder to get their corre-
sponding text embeddings. We use CLIP ViT-L/14 as a backbone during training to be consistent
with Karlo. This helps us to preserve the visual consistency of the same object by using the same
image embedding across scenes.

C.3   L AYOUT- GUIDED DENOISING STEPS .

During video generation, we use two-stage denoising in Layout2Vid following (Li et al., 2023),
where we first use layout-guidance with Guided 2D attention for α ∗ N steps, and use the denoising
steps without Guided 2D attention for the remaining (1 − α) ∗ N steps, where N is the total number
of denoising steps, and α ∈ [0, 1] is the ratio of layout-guidance denoising steps. In our ablation
study (Appendix F), we find that a high α could increase layout control but lead to lower visual
quality, which is also consistent with the finding in Li et al. (2023). By default, we use α = 0.1 and
N = 50 denoising steps. We also explore using the LLM to determine the α value within the range
[0, 0.3] during the video plan generation (see Appendix F for details).


D     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We provide additional details on our experiment setups (from Sec. 4) below.

D.1   E VALUATED M ODELS

We compare our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT to 6 popular T2V generation models, NUWA (Wu et al.,
2022b), CogVideo (Hong et al., 2022), VideoLDM (Blattmann et al., 2023), MagicVideo (Zhou
et al., 2022), Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2023), and ModelScopeT2V (Wang et al., 2023b). Since
NUWA, VideoLDM, MagicVideo, Make-A-Video, and CogVideo (English) are not publicly avail-
able, we primarily compare our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT with ModelScopeT2V, and present com-
parisons with the other models on the datasets for which their papers have provided results. Mod-
elScopeT2V is the closest baseline to our framework among all these models, because our Lay-
out2Vid utilizes its frozen weights and only trains a small set of new parameters to add spatial
control and temporal consistency across multiple scenes.

D.2   P ROMPTS FOR S INGLE - SCENE V IDEO G ENERATION

For single-scene video generation, we conduct experiments with VPEval Skill-based prompts to
evaluate layout control (Cho et al., 2023b), ActionBench-Direction prompts to assess object dynam-
ics (Wang et al., 2023c), and MSR-VTT to cover diverse open-domain scenes (Xu et al., 2016).
VPEval Skill-based prompts evaluate different object-centric layout control skills in text-to-
image/video generation. We randomly sample 100 prompts for each of the four skills: Object
(generation of a single object), Count (generation of a specific number of objects), Spatial (gen-
eration of two objects with a spatial relation; e.g., left/right/above/below), and Scale (generation of
two objects with a relative scale relation; e.g., bigger/smaller/same).
ActionBench-Direction prompts evaluate the action dynamics (object movement directions) in
video language models. We prepare the prompts by sampling video captions from ActionBench-
SSV2 (Wang et al., 2023c) and balancing the distribution of movement directions. Concretely, we
select captions from the ActionBench-SSV2 validation split that include phrases like ‘right to left’
or ‘left to right’ (e.g., ‘pushing a glass from left to right’), which are common phrases describing
movement directions in the captions. Then we augment these prompts by switching the directions
to each of four directions: ‘left to right’, ‘right to left’, ‘top to bottom’, and ‘bottom to top’ to
create 100 prompts for each direction. We call the resulting 400 prompts as ActionBench-Direction
prompts. These prompts ensure a balanced distribution of movement directions while maintaining
diversity in objects.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MSR-VTT is an open-domain video captioning dataset, which allows us to check if our Layout2Vid
maintains the original visual quality and text-video alignment performance of the ModelScopeT2V
backbone after integration of the layout/movement control capabilities. The MSR-VTT test set
comprises 2,990 videos, each paired with 20 captions. Following VideoLDM (Blattmann et al.,
2023), we sample one caption from the 20 available captions for each video and use the 2,990
corresponding generated videos for evaluation.


D.3   P ROMPTS FOR M ULTI - SCENE V IDEO G ENERATION

For multi-scene video generation, we experiment with two types of input prompts: (1) a list of
sentences describing events – ActivityNet Captions (Krishna et al., 2017) and Coref-SV prompts
based on Pororo-SV (Li et al., 2019b) and (2) a single sentence from which models generate multi-
scene videos – HiREST (Zala et al., 2023).
ActivityNet Captions is a dense-captioning dataset designed for detecting and describing multi-
ple events in videos using natural language. For the multi-scene video generation task, we use
165 randomly sampled videos from the validation split and use the event captions as input for
ModelScopeT2V and our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT. When calculating object consistency (see Ap-
pendix D.4), we find the subject of the first event caption (via spaCy dependency parser (Honnibal
& Montani, 2017)) and check its appearance in multiple scenes.
Coref-SV is a new multi-scene text description dataset that we propose to evaluate the consistency
of object appearances across multi-scene videos. We prepare the Coref-SV prompts by augmenting
the Pororo-SV dataset (Li et al., 2019b; Kim et al., 2017), which consists of multi-scene paragraphs
from the “Pororo the Little Penguin” animated series. To evaluate the temporal consistency of
video generation models trained on real-world videos, we extend its original animation characters
(e.g., Pororo) to humans and common animals and examine their appearance across different scenes.
Concretely, we sample 10 episodes, each consisting of multiple scenes (6.2 scenes per episode on
average). Then, we replace the first appearance of a character with one of the predefined 10 real-
world entities (e.g., person/dog, etc.) and replace the remaining appearances of the character with
pronouns (e.g., he/she/it/etc.). In total, we obtain 100 episodes (=10 episodes × 10 entities) in
Coref-SV. In order to generate visually consistent entities, the multi-scene video generation models
would need to address the co-reference of these target entities across different scenes. We use
the final scene descriptions as input for both ModelScopeT2V and V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT. When
calculating object consistency (see Appendix D.4), we use the selected entity as the target object.
HiREST provides step annotations for instructional videos paired with diverse ‘How to’ prompts
(e.g., a video paired with ‘how to make butter biscuits’ prompt is broken down into a sequence of
short video clips of consecutive step-by-step instructions). For the multi-scene video generation
task, we employ 175 prompts from the test splits, where we only include the prompts with step
annotations, to ensure that it is possible to create multi-scene videos from the prompts. Note that
instead of providing a list of scene description sentences like in ActivityNet Captions/Coref-SV, we
only give the single high-level ‘How to’ prompt and let the models generate a multi-scene video
from it. In V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT, our LLM can automatically generate the multi-scene video plan
and video from the input prompt. In contrast, for the ModelScopeT2V baseline, we help the model
understand the different number of scenes to generate by pre-defining the number of scenes N ,
and independently generate N videos by appending the suffix “step n/N ” to the prompt for n-th
scene (e.g., “Cook Beet Greens, step 1/10”). To ensure that our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT videos and
ModelScopeT2V videos are equal in length, we use the same number of scenes generated by our
LLM during the planning stage for ModelScopeT2V.


D.4   AUTOMATED E VALUATION M ETRICS

Visual quality and text-video alignment. Following previous works (Hong et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2022b; Wang et al., 2023b), we use Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), with
InceptionV3 (Szegedy et al., 2016) as the backbone, and Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) (Unterthiner
et al., 2019), with I3D (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017) as the backbone, for video quality metrics.
Additionally, we use CLIPSIM (Wu et al., 2021) (with CLIP ViT-B/16 (Radford et al., 2021)) for
the text-video alignment metric. Given that CLIP fails to faithfully capture detailed semantics such


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as spatial relations, object counts, and actions in videos (Otani et al., 2023; Cho et al., 2023a;b; Hu
et al., 2023), we further propose the use of the following fine-grained evaluation metrics.

VPEval accuracy. For the evaluation of VPEval Skill-based prompts, we employ VPEval accu-
racy based on running skill-specific (object, count, spatial, scale) evaluation programs that execute
relevant visual modules (Cho et al., 2023b). For each video, we uniformly sample 4 frames and
average the frame-level VPEval accuracy to obtain the final score.

Object movement direction accuracy. Since the VPEval accuracy described above does not
cover temporal information, we propose a metric that takes into account temporal information as
well as spatial layouts for ActionBench-Direction prompts. To accomplish this, we assess whether
the target objects in the generated videos move in the direction described in the prompts. We obtain
the start/end locations of objects by detecting objects with GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2023) on
the first/last video frames. We then evaluate whether the x (for movements left or right) or y (for
movements up or down) coordinates of the objects have changed correctly and assign a binary score
of 0 or 1 based on this evaluation. For instance, given the prompt “pushing a glass from left to right”
and a generated video, we identify a ‘glass’ in both the first and last video frames. We assign a score
of 1 if the x-coordinate of the object increases by the last frame; otherwise, we assign a score of 0.

Multi-scene object consistency. We also introduce a new metric to measure the consistency of the
visual appearance of a target object across different scenes. For this, we first detect the target object
using GroundingDINO from the center frame of each scene video. Then, we extract the CLIP (ViT-
B/32) image embedding from the crop of the detected bounding box. We calculate the multi-scene
object consistency metric by averaging the CLIP image embedding similarities across all adjacent
                PN −1                      img
scene pairs: N1 n=1 cos(CLIPimg  n , CLIPn+1 ), where N is the number of scenes, cos(·, ·) is cosine
similarity, and CLIPimg
                    n is the CLIP image embedding of the target object in n-th scene.


E       H UMAN E VALUATION D ETAILS

We provide details of our human evaluation and error analysis described in Sec. 4. We also show
the error analysis results described in Sec. 5.4.

Human evaluation details. We conduct a human evaluation study on the multi-scene videos gen-
erated by both our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT and ModelScopeT2V on the Coref-SV dataset. Since
we know the target entity and its co-reference pronouns in the Coref-SV prompts, we can compare
the temporal consistency of the target entities across scenes. We evaluate the human preference
between videos from two models in each category of Quality, Text-Video Alignment, and Object
Consistency. Quality measures how well the video looks visually. Text-Video Alignment assesses
how accurately the video adheres to the input sentences. Object Consistency evaluates how well
the target object maintains its visual consistency across scenes. We show 50 videos to three crowd-
workers from AMT4 to rate each video and calculate human preferences for each video with average
ratings. To ensure high-quality annotations, we require they have an AMT Masters, have completed
over 1000 HITs, have a greater than 95% approval rating, and are from one of the United States,
Great Britain, Australia, or Canada (as our task is written in the English language). We pay workers
$0.06 to evaluate a video (roughly $12-14/hr).

Step-by-step error analysis details. We do an error analysis on each step of our single sentence
to multi-scene video generation pipeline for HiREST prompts. We analyze the generated multi-
scene text descriptions, layouts, and entity/background consistency groupings to evaluate our video
planning stage and the final video to evaluate the video generation stage. Multi-Scene Text Descrip-
tions Accuracy: we measure how well these descriptions depict the intended scene from the original
prompt (e.g., if the original prompt is “Make buttermilk biscuits” the descriptions should describe
the biscuit-making process and not the process for pancakes). Layout Accuracy: we measure how
well the generated layouts showcase a scene for the given multi-scene text description (e.g., the
bounding boxes of ingredients should go into a bowl, pan, etc. instead of randomly moving across
    4
        Amazon Mechanical Turk: https://www.mturk.com


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the scene). Entity/Background Consistency Groupings Accuracy: we measure how well the gen-
erated entities and backgrounds are grouped (e.g., entities/backgrounds that should look consistent
throughout the scenes should be grouped together). Final Video Accuracy: we measure how well
the generated video for each scene matches the multi-scene text description (e.g., if the multi-scene
text description is “preheating an oven”, the video should accurately reflect this). We ask an expert
annotator to rank the generations (multi-scene text description, layouts, etc.) on a Likert scale of 1-5
for 50 prompts/videos. Analyzing the errors at each step enables us to check which parts are reliable
and which parts need improvement. As a single prompt/video can contain many scenes, to simplify
the process for layout and final video evaluation of a prompt/video, we sub-sample three scene lay-
outs and corresponding scene videos and average their scores to obtain the “Layout Accuracy” and
“Final Video Accuracy.”

Step-by-step error analysis results. As shown in Table 6, our LLM-guided planning scores
high accuracy on all three components (up to 4.51), whereas the biggest score drop happens in
the layout-guided video generation (4.51 → 3.61). This suggests that our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT
could generate even more accurate videos, once we have access to a stronger T2V backbone than
ModelScopeT2V.

Table 6: Step-wise error analysis of V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT video generation pipeline on HiREST
prompts. We use a Likert scale (1-5) to rate the accuracy of the generated components at each step.

                              Stage 1: Video Planning (with GPT-4)                               Stage 2: Video Generation (with Layout2Vid)
 Multi-scene Text Descriptions (↑)   Layouts (↑)   Entity/Background Consistency Groupings (↑)                 Final Video (↑)
               4.92                     4.69                          4.52                                          3.61


F    A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we provide ablation studies on our design choices, including the number of layout-
guided denoising steps, different embeddings for layout groundings, and layout representation for-
mats.

Number of denoising steps with layout guidance. In Table 4, we show the ablation experiment
results of the number of denoising steps with layout guidance during video generation (Sec. 3.2) on
MSR-VTT and ActionBench-Direction prompts. For MSR-VTT, we use the same set of randomly
sampled test prompts as presented in Table 2. We find that increasing the α (= # steps with  layout guidance
                                                                                        # total steps        )
from 0.1 to 0.2 or 0.3 drops the visual quality (FVD/FID) and text-video alignment (CLIPSIM)
on MSR-VTT, while improves the movement direction accuracy in ActionBench-Direction. This
quality-layout trade-off is consistent with the finding in layout-guided text-to-image generation mod-
els like GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023), where they also found that high α leads to lower visual quality.
We also explore dynamically finding the α value for each example during the video plan generation
by asking the LLM how much layout guidance needs to be enforced for each prompt, instead of
using a static α value. As shown in the bottom row (‘LLM-Dynamic-α’) of Table 4, interestingly,
LLMs can help the video generation process to have a good balance of quality-layout trade-off.

Entity grounding embeddings. As discussed in Sec. 3.2, we compare using different embeddings
for entity grounding on 1000 randomly sampled MSR-VTT test prompts. As shown in Table 7, CLIP
image embedding is more effective than CLIP text embedding, and using the CLIP image-text joint
embedding yields the best results. Thus, we propose to use the image+text embeddings for the
default configuration.

Layout control: bounding box v.s. center point. In Table 8, we compare different layout rep-
resentation formats on 1000 randomly sampled MSR-VTT test prompts. We use image embedding
for entity grounding and α = 0.2 for layout control. Compared with no layout (‘w/o Layout input’)
or center point-based layouts (without object shape, size, or aspect ratio), the bounding box based
layout guidance gives better visual quality (FVD/FID) and text-video alignment (CLIPSIM).


                                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Ablation of entity grounding embeddings of our Layout2Vid on MSR-VTT and Coref-SV.

                                                     MSR-VTT                         Coref-SV
              Entity Grounding
                                          FVD (↓)    FID (↓)     CLIPSIM (↑)   Consistency (%)
              Image Emb.                   737       18.38         0.2834              42.6
              Text Emb.                    875       23.18         0.2534              36.9
              Image+Text Emb. (default)    606       14.60         0.2842              42.8

Table 8: Ablation of layout representation of our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT on MSR-VTT. We use
α = 0.2 and CLIP image embedding for entity grounding.

                       Layout representation     FVD (↓)       FID (↓)   CLIPSIM (↑)
                       w/o Layout input             639        15.28        0.2777
                       Center point                 816        18.65        0.2707
                       Bounding box (default)       606        14.60        0.2842



G    A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
VPEval Skill-based. Fig. 10 displays generated videos where our LLM-generated video plan suc-
cessfully guides the Layout2Vid module to accurately place objects in the correct spatial relations
and to generate the correct number of objects. In contrast, ModelScopeT2V fails to generate a
‘pizza’ in the first example and overproduces the number of frisbees in the second example.

ActionBench-direction. Fig. 11 shows video generation examples, where our LLM-generated
video plan can guide the Layout2Vid module to place the ‘stuffed animal’ and the ‘pear’ in their
correct starting positions and then move them toward the correct end positions, whereas the objects
in the ModelScopeT2V videos stay in the same location or move in random directions.

Coref-SV. We show another example of our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT compared to Mod-
elScopeT2V on a Coref-SV prompt in Fig. 12. Our video plan can guide the Layout2Vid module
to generate the same dog and maintain snow across scenes consistently, whereas ModelScopeT2V
generates different dogs in different scenes and loses the snow after the first scene.

HiREST. We show another example of our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT compared to ModelScopeT2V
on a HiREST prompt in Fig. 13. Our LLM can generate step-by-step video plan from a single prompt
and our Layout2Vid can generate consistent videos following the plan. Our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT
breaks down the process and generates a complete video showing how to make peach melba (a type
of dessert consisting of vanilla ice cream and peaches). ModelScopeT2V repeatedly generates the
final dessert (which is also inconsistent between scenes).

Generating videos with custom image exemplars. In Fig. 14, we demonstrate that our Lay-
out2Vid can flexibly take either text-only or image+text descriptions as input to generate multi-scene
videos with good entity consistency.

H    L IMITATIONS
While our framework can be beneficial for numerous applications (e.g., user-controlled/human-
in-the-loop video generation/manipulation and data augmentation), akin to other video generation
frameworks, it can also be utilized for potentially harmful purposes (e.g., creating false informa-
tion or misleading videos), and thus should be used with caution in real-world applications (with
human supervision). Also, generating a video plan using the strongest LLM APIs can be costly,
similar to other recent LLM-based frameworks. We hope that advances in quantization/distillation
and open-source models will continue to lower the inference cost of LLMs. Lastly, our video gen-
eration module (Layout2Vid) is based on the pretrained weights of ModelScopeT2V. Therefore, we
face similar limitations to their model, including deviations related to the distribution of training
datasets, imperfect generation quality, and only understanding the English corpus.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         A pizza is to the left of an elephant
                       ModelScopeT2V                                               VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
            Frame 1        Frame 8        Frame 16                   Frame 1               Frame 8           Frame 16


Example 1


                                                     four frisbees


Example 2


Figure 10: Video generation examples on VPEval Skill-based prompts for spatial and count skills.
Our video plan, with object layouts overlaid, successfully guides the Layout2Vid module to place
objects in the correct spatial relations and to depict the correct number of objects, whereas Mod-
elScopeT2V fails to generate a ‘pizza’ in the first example and overproduces the number of frisbees
in the second example. See supplementary material for full videos.


                                       Pushing stuffed animal from left to right
                       ModelScopeT2V                                               VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
            Frame 1        Frame 8        Frame 16                    Frame 1              Frame 8           Frame 16


Example 1


                                           Pushing pear from right to left


Example 2


Figure 11: Video generation examples on ActionBench-Direction prompts. Our video plan’s ob-
ject layouts (overlaid) can guide the Layout2Vid module to place and move the ‘stuffed animal’ and
‘pear’ in their correct respective directions, whereas the objects in the ModelScopeT2V videos stay
in the same location or move in random directions. See supplementary material for full videos.


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        ModelScopeT2V                                                VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
                    Frame 1                    Frame 8   Frame 16                    Frame 1                      Frame 8                    Frame 16


Scene 1


           it's snowing outside.                                            it's snowing outside.


Scene 2


                                                ...                                                                ...
           dog is singing and dancing.                                      dog is singing and dancing.


Scene 4


                                                ...                                                                ...
           its friends are applauding at it.                                its friends are applauding at it.


Figure 12: Video generation examples on a Coref-SV prompt. Our video plan’s object layouts
(overlaid) can guide the Layout2Vid module to generate the same brown dog and maintain snow
across scenes consistently, whereas ModelScopeT2V generates different dogs in different scenes
and loses the snow after the first scene. See supplementary material for the full video.


                                                           “How To” Make Peach Melba
                                        ModelScopeT2V                                               VideoDirectorGPT (Ours)
                   Frame 1                     Frame 8   Frame 16                   Frame 1                      Frame 8                    Frame 16


Scene 1


          Make Peach Melba, step 1/7            ...                                                               ...
                                                                            a young woman in a red apron washes fresh peaches under running water
                                                                            in the kitchen sink


Scene 4


          Make Peach Melba, step 4/7            ...                                                               ...
                                                                            A young woman in a red apron peels off the skin from the cooled peaches on a
                                                                            wooden cutting board


Scene 7


          Make Peach Melba, step 7/7                                        A young woman in a red apron arranges the peach halves on top of the vanilla
                                                                            ice cream in the clear glass dessert dish

Figure 13: Comparison of generated videos on a HiREST prompt. Our V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT
generates a detailed video plan that properly expands the original text prompt, ensures accurate ob-
ject bounding box locations (overlaid), and maintains consistency of the person across the scenes.
ModelScopeT2V only generates the final dessert which is not consistent across scenes. See supple-
mentary material for the full video.


                                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             Generated Scenes
            Entity
          Grounding               Scene 1: a <S> then gets up from     Scene 2: a <S> goes to the cream-colored     Scene 3: a <S> sits next to a
                                         a plush beige bed           kitchen and eats a can of gourmet cat snack.   large floor-to-ceiling window
                                     Frame 1            Frame 16              Frame 1            Frame 16            Frame 1             Frame 16


   Text
  Input      S = “white cat”


                  S = “cat”


Image+Text
   Input



                  S = “cat”


               S = “teddy bear”


Figure 14: Video generation examples with text-only and image+text inputs. Users can flexibly
provide either text-only or image+text descriptions to place custom entities when generating videos
with V IDEO D IRECTOR GPT. For both text and image+text based entity grounding examples, the
identities of the provided entities are well preserved across multiple scenes. See supplementary
material for full videos.


                                                                        25
