Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OMPRESSED C ONTEXT M EMORY F OR
O NLINE L ANGUAGE M ODEL I NTERACTION
 Jang-Hyun Kim1 2 , Junyoung Yeom1 2 , Sangdoo Yun3∗ , Hyun Oh Song1 2∗
 1
  Seoul National University, 2 Artificial Intelligence Institute (AIIS), 3 NAVER AI Lab
 {janghyun,yeomjy,hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr, sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com



                                                A BSTRACT

              This paper presents a context key/value compression method for Transformer lan-
              guage models in online scenarios, where the context continually expands. As the
              context lengthens, the attention process demands increasing memory and compu-
              tations, which in turn reduces the throughput of the language model. To address
              this challenge, we propose a compressed context memory system that continually
              compresses the accumulating attention key/value pairs into a compact memory
              space, facilitating language model inference in a limited memory space of com-
              puting environments. Our compression process involves integrating a lightweight
              conditional LoRA into the language model’s forward pass during inference, with-
              out the need for fine-tuning the model’s entire set of weights. We achieve efficient
              training by modeling the recursive compression process as a single parallelized
              forward computation. Through evaluations on conversation, personalization, and
              multi-task learning, we demonstrate that our approach achieves the performance
              level of a full context model with 5× smaller context memory size. We further
              demonstrate the applicability of our approach in a streaming setting with an un-
              limited context length, outperforming the sliding window approach. Codes are
              available at https://github.com/snu-mllab/context-memory.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Transformer language models have exhibited exceptional language processing capabilities, achiev-
ing remarkable results in various applications (Vaswani et al., 2017). In particular, the attention
mechanism, which encompasses the entire context window, enables the language models to respond
with a nuanced understanding of context. With this contextual understanding, services like ChatGPT
or Bard can generate responses customized to individual users through online interactions (OpenAI,
2023; Manyika, 2023). In this online scenario, the context used for language model inference accu-
mulates over time, raising an important challenge in efficiently handling this growing context.
A straightforward approach is to deal with previous contexts as a prompt, which leads to a continual
increase in inference time and memory usage due to the growing length of contexts. Alternately,
caching the attention hidden states of Transformer would be impractical (Dai et al., 2019), as the
caching capacity and attention costs increase with the accumulation of contexts. Recent studies pro-
pose compressing contextual information into concise sequences of token embeddings or attention
keys/values (denoted as KV) (Chevalier et al., 2023; Mu et al., 2023). However, those methods
primarily focus on fixed-context scenarios and are not designed for dynamically changing contexts.
Thus, they still face inefficiency and redundancy when dealing with accumulating contexts.
In this paper, we propose a novel language model framework incorporating a compressed context
memory system for efficient online inference (Figure 1). Our memory system is capable of dynamic
updates during online inference with minimal memory and computation overhead. To this end, we
optimize a lightweight conditional LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), enabling language models to construct a
compressed attention KV memory of contextual information through the forward computation pass.
On the other hand, dynamic memory updates require a recursive context compression procedure,
which leads to training inefficiencies. To address this challenge, we propose an efficient training
     ∗
         Corresponding authors


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            New context                     User                               New context                 User



         Append                           Input                                                           Input
                                                      Output              Compressed KV memory                      Output
                                                                          Update       Attention
                      Attention
      ···
    Context history                                                        Compression w/ LoRA
                                            Model                                                          Model (frozen)
Figure 1: Main concept of online inference systems. Left: Conventional online inference ap-
proach. Right: The proposed system with compressed context memory. The colored boxes represent
attention keys/values (or input tokens) required for Transformer inference. The new context refers
to the sequence comprising an input and a model output from the preceding interaction.

Table 1: Analysis of inference throughput on the MetaICL dataset (Min et al., 2022) at time step 16
with LLaMA-7B and FP16 precision (Touvron et al., 2023). We measure throughput using batch
processing on a single GPU. CCM-{concat,merge} refers to our proposed method.
                                                  A100 PCIe 80GB                               RTX 3090 24GB
                                  Full context     CCM-concat CCM-merge         Full context    CCM-concat CCM-merge
Throughput (sample/sec)               5.3             24.4         69.9            3.5             18.6           50.7
Maximum batch size                    60              300          950              10              50            150
Context KV length                    800              128           8              800             128             8
Performance (Accuracy %)             70.8             70.0         69.6            70.8            70.0           69.6



strategy that unrolls the recursive context compression procedure and processes the recursive proce-
dure in parallel. In the inference phase, language models utilize the compressed memory to generate
responses to subsequent input queries with reduced attention operations and memory.
Our approach offers several advantages compared to existing efficient context processing meth-
ods: 1) Unlike approaches that propose new attention structures such as the Linear Transformer
(Katharopoulos et al., 2020), our method simply involves the integration of lightweight adapters
to existing Transformer language models, leveraging the weights of pretrained models. 2) Unlike
fixed-context compression techniques such as Gisting or ICAE (Mu et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023),
our approach is able to dynamically compress newly added context with minimal computational
overhead. 3) In contrast to methods that recurrently compress context into token embeddings, such
as RMT or AutoCompressor (Bulatov et al., 2022; Chevalier et al., 2023), our approach focuses on
compressing attention keys/values, enabling a fully parallelized training process. Notably, our ap-
proach achieves a training speed that is 7× faster than the mentioned approaches (Table 18) and does
not require additional forward computations for the compressed token embeddings during inference.
Our online compression framework has a wide range of applications, including conversation, per-
sonalization, and multi-task learning. Notably, by compressing continuously provided dialogues,
user profiles, and task demonstrations, our approach enables the language model to perform online
inference with reduced memory usage and attention costs. To substantiate our claims, we evaluate
our system across diverse datasets, including DailyDialog, LaMP, and MetaICL (Li et al., 2017;
Salemi et al., 2023; Min et al., 2022). Through empirical analyses, we demonstrate that our method
excels in both efficiency and performance compared to established context compression baselines.
In particular, our method achieves equivalent performance with only 1/5 of the context memory
required when using the full context (Figure 6). This enhanced memory efficiency translates into
substantial improvements in language model throughput when using batch processing on memory-
constrained GPUs (Table 1). Finally, we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in a streaming
setting with an unlimited context length, outperforming the sliding window method (Figure 8).

2      P RELIMINARY

Target scenario and notation Let T denote a space of texts. We focus on the online inference
scenario, aiming to predict the output O(t) ∈ T based on the input I(t) ∈ T and the accu-
mulated context C(t) = [c(1), . . . , c(t)] for time step t ∈ [1, . . . , T ], where T ∈ N represents


                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 2: Illustrative instances of online inference scenarios.
    Application            Dataset                             Context C(t)      Input I(t)     Output O(t)
    Conversation           DailyDialog (Li et al., 2017)     Dialogue history    User query       Reply
    Personalization        LaMP (Salemi et al., 2023)         User profiles      User query   Recommendation
    Multi-task learning    MetaICL (Min et al., 2022)      Task demonstrations    Problem         Answer



the maximum number of time steps. Here, c(t) ∈ T denotes a newly integrated context at time
step t, which comprises the interaction results from the preceding time step t91, including I(t91),
O(t91), and any additional user feedback. In Table 2, we formulate diverse applications accord-
ing to our target scenario and notations, where each context C(t) contains accumulated information
for a specific identity (e.g., a task or a user). We represent the dataset with multiple identities as
D = {(Ci (t), Ii (t), Oi (t)) | i ∈ I, t ∈ [1, . . . , T ]}, where I denotes an index set of identities. We
randomly split I into a training set Itrain and a test set Itest for experiments.
Context compression Let us consider a pretrained language model fθ : T → R+ , which models
the probability distribution over the text space T . A typical approach for predicting output O(t)
involves using the full context C(t) as Ô(t) ∼ fθ (· | C(t), I(t)). However, this approach requires
increasing memory and computation costs over time for maintaining and processing the entire con-
text C(t). One can employ context compression techniques to mitigate this issue, compressing
contexts into a shorter sequence of attention key/value pairs or soft prompts (Mu et al., 2023; Ge
et al., 2023). Given the compression function gcomp , the inference with compressed contexts be-
comes Ô(t) ∼ fθ (· | gcomp (C(t)), I(t)), where |gcomp (C(t))| ≪ |C(t)|. It is worth noting that
existing context compression methods mainly focus on compressing a fixed context C̄ that is re-
peatedly used as a prompt (Mu et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023). The objective of the compression is
to generate outputs for a given input I that are similar to the outputs generated when using the full
context: fθ (· | gcomp (C̄), I) ≈ fθ (· | C̄, I).


3     M ETHODS

In this section, we introduce a novel approach named Compressed Context Memory (CCM), de-
signed for efficient online inference of language models. Our system compresses the given current
context and dynamically updates the context memory by incorporating the compression result. We
further propose a parallelized training strategy to facilitate efficient large-scale optimization.

3.1     C OMPRESSED C ONTEXT M EMORY

Here, we briefly describe the compression and inference processes at time step t. We denote the
compressed context memory at t as Mem(t) with an initial value of Mem(0) = ∅. When presented
with a context c(t), we condense the information within c(t) into the hidden feature h(t) by using
the compression function gcomp as
                                         h(t) = gcomp (Mem(t91), c(t)).                                       (1)
The compressed context memory Mem(t) is then updated via an update function gupdate as
                                       Mem(t) = gupdate (Mem(t91), h(t)).                                     (2)
Within a limited memory space, Mem(t) stores contextual information up to time t. By encompass-
ing only the input I(t) and memory Mem(t), we conduct memory-efficient inference as
                                           Ô(t) ∼ fθ (· | Mem(t), I(t)).                                     (3)
In the following, we elaborate on the compression and update processes.
Compression We compress context information into attention keys/values as in Compressive
Transformer (Rae et al., 2020) and Gisting (Mu et al., 2023). This compression approach can be
applied within each layer of the language model, providing better parallelization than the auto-
encoding approach (Ge et al., 2023). We introduce a specialized compression token ⟨COMP⟩ and

                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


train the language model to compress context information into the at-        Transformer layer
tention keys/values of the ⟨COMP⟩ token, similar to the Gisting ap-
proach.                                                                                  Attention

We assume a Transformer language model fθ has L layers with a hid-
den state dimension of d. To simplify notation, we set a compression                       ···
token length of 1. It is worth noting that the compression token can
                                                                              Mem(t91)                  h(t)
be extended to arbitrary lengths. Under these conditions, the total size
of the attention keys/values of ⟨COMP⟩ token is 2×L×d. The com-                            c(t)      ⟨COMP⟩
pression process is illustrated in Figure 2. At each time step t, we ap-
pend ⟨COMP⟩ token to the context c(t) and make the ⟨COMP⟩ token to          Figure 2: The illustration
have attention on the keys/values of c(t) and the previous memory state     of the compression process
Mem(t91). Utilizing the resulting attention keys/values of the ⟨COMP⟩       at time step t. Each col-
token, we obtain the compressed hidden feature h(t) ∈ R2×L×d in             ored box symbolizes atten-
Equation (1).                                                               tion hidden states.

Memory update We propose memory update functions gupdate that are differentiable and paral-
lelizable during training. In particular, we consider the simplest form of gupdate and verify the effec-
tiveness of our compression framework. Considering various application scenarios, we examine two
types of memory systems: 1) a scalable memory and 2) a fixed-size memory, similar to an RNN.

• For a scalable memory setting, we employ the concatenation function as gupdate . Then Mem(t) ∈
  Rt×2×L×d contains the attention key/value pairs associated with ⟨COMP⟩ tokens up to time step t.
  We denote our system with the concatenation function as CCM-concat.
• For a fixed-size memory system, we propose a merging function to update information in the
  memory. Specifically, we update memory by weighted average: Mem(t) ∈ R2×L×d as Mem(t) =
  (1−at )Mem(t91)+at h(t), where a1 = 1 and at ∈ [0, 1] for t ≥ 2. With this recurrence, Mem(t)
                       Pt       Qt
  becomes Mem(t) = j=1 aj k=j+1 (1 − ak ) h(j). In the main experiments, we evaluate an
  update method based on the arithmetic average of the compressed states with at = 1/t, i.e.,
               Pt
  Mem(t) = 1t j=1 h(j). We denote our method with the merging function as CCM-merge.

During training, we compute Mem(1), . . . , Mem(t) in parallel by averaging hidden features
h(1), . . . , h(t) simultaneously. In the online inference phase, we recurrently update the memory
by cumulative average using the prior memory Mem(t91) and current compression result h(t). In
Appendix Table 14, we examine another design choice for the merge function: the exponential mov-
ing average. It is also worth noting that CCM-concat can be interpreted as a process that dynamically
infers coefficients for hidden states h(t) through the attention mechanism.

Parallelized training The direct integration of the compression process of Equation (1) into the
training process poses a challenge as it requires recursive model executions over j = 1, . . . , t.
Such recursive executions prolong training time and amplify back-propagation errors through the
elongated computation graph (Gruslys et al., 2016). To overcome this challenge, we propose a fully
parallelizable training strategy, taking advantage of the Transformer structure.
For training data (C(t), I(t), O(t)) ∈ Dtrain , we insert ⟨COMP⟩ tokens into the accumulated context
C(t), forming the sequence [c(1), ⟨COMP⟩ · · · c(t), ⟨COMP⟩, I(t)]. We then establish memory update
and attention mechanisms, modeling recursive compression processes as parallelized forward com-
putations (Figure 3). In detail, within each layer of a Transformer fθ , we update Mem(j) for j ≤ t
using the attention keys/values of preceding ⟨COMP⟩ tokens, i.e., h(1), . . . , h(j), as in Figure 3 (a).
Following the memory update, we execute the compression procedures for j = 1, . . . , t in parallel
using the masked attention as in Figure 3 (b). As stated in Equation (3), we access the context in-
formation from previous time steps only through memory during online inference. Therefore, we
restrict c(j) to reference only Mem(j91) for j ≤ t and make I(t) exclusively have its attention on
Mem(t). Finally, we compute likelihood fθ (O(t) | Mem(t), I(t)) in Equation (3) using the output
probability obtained at the last token position of I(t). When the token length of O(t) exceeds 1, we
follow the conventional approach by conditioning on the target label O(t) and calculating the loss
for the next tokens (Radford et al., 2019). All these steps take place within a single forward pass of
fθ , and the loss gradients are backpropagated to all tokens across all time steps.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Attention keys/values at each layer                                            Source
                                                                                    Mem(·)
                                                                                 t92 t91 t   ⟨C⟩ c(t91) ⟨C⟩ c(t) ⟨C⟩ I(t)
   Mem(t92)              Mem(t91)          Mem(t)
                                                                         ⟨C⟩
 ···                                                                    c(t91)

                                               Update


                                                               Target
                                                                         ⟨C⟩

                                                                         c(t)
 ···            ···                 ···               ···                ⟨C⟩
       h(t92)             h(t91)            h(t)
                                                                         I(t)
 · · · ⟨C⟩      c(t91)     ⟨C⟩      c(t)    ⟨C⟩         I(t)
                    (a) Parallel memory update                                          (b) Attention mask

Figure 3: Illustration of the parallelized training process. In (a), each colored box symbolizes
attention keys/values of memory, compression tokens, and normal text tokens. In (b), gray indicates
that attention is blocked. In the figures, ⟨C⟩ stands for ⟨COMP⟩. At each layer, after the parallel
updates of compressed context memory, the attention operation occurs with the mask in (b). Note
the calculation of Mem(t) occurs after c(t) and its subsequent ⟨COMP⟩ token. Reordering the top
row of (b) to align with this temporal relation yields an autoregressive mask.

Algorithm 1 Training stage for compression
  Input: Language model fθ , training set Dtrain
  Initialize a conditional LoRA weight ∆θ
  Modify the forward pass of fθ to update the compressed context memory
  repeat
     Sample a mini-batch B ⊂ Dtrain and set B ′ = ∅
     for (Ci (t), Ii (t), Oi (t)) ∈ B do
        Prepare an input xi = [ci (1), ⟨COMP⟩, . . . , ci (t), ⟨COMP⟩, Ii (t)] and a target yi = Oi (t)
        B ′ = B ′ ∪ {(xi , yi )}
     end for
     Compute loss in eq. (4) on B ′ through a single forward pass using the masked attention
     Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. ∆θ
  until convergence
  Output: ∆θ



Conditional adapter Current compression methods typically rely on fine-tuning a language
model fθ to acquire compression capabilities (Mu et al., 2023). In this approach, the construction
of the memory hinges on the adjustment of the language model parameter θ, allowing us to parame-
terize the memory for context Ci (t) as Memi (t; θ). The objective function for learning compression
capability is then formulated as minθ Et,i∼Itrain [− log fθ (Oi (t) | Memi (t; θ), Ii (t))].
However, this conventional objective can potentially lead the language model to generate an-
swers for input Ii (t) without considering the memory Memi (t; θ). Such overfitting to the in-
put Ii (t) can diminish the importance of compressed context memory during training, which
leads to insufficient training of the compression capability. Specifically, when we measure
the loss without context, Et,i∼I [− log fθ (Oi (t) | Ii (t))], throughout the compression training
process with LLaMA-7B on MetaICL, the loss on training set decreases from 2.69 to 1.84,
whereas the loss on test set remains 2.59. This observation indicates the
presence of overfitting on inputs.
To address this issue, we introduce separate trainable parameters specif-   ⊗W ⊗ W +∆W ⊗ W
ically for compression. To this end, we propose a conditional variant of
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), which operates exclusively on ⟨COMP⟩ tokens.
This ensures that the trainable parameters allocated for compression solely
influence the model’s compression capabilities (Figure 4). Let W ∈ Rd×d c(t) ⟨COMP⟩ I(t)
denote a parameter of a feed-forward layer with a hidden dimension d, Figure 4: Feed for-
and let ∆W = A⊺ B ∈ Rd×d denote a corresponding LoRA weight with ward operations of our
A, B ∈ Rk×d and k ≪ d. For input token x and its corresponding hidden conditional LoRA.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      t · lc                     li           t · lc                     1              li         t91/1     lc              t/1              li
                      Infer                                   Compress       Infer                                Compress         Infer
      ···                                     ···
 c(1)          c(t)           I(t) O(t)    c(1)        c(t)        gcomp (C(t))      I(t) O(t)   Mem(t91) c(t)             Mem(t)          I(t) O(t)
         (a) Full context                         (b) Fixed context compression                       (c) Compressed context memory

Figure 5: Illustration of the compression and inference processes at time step t. The arrow
indicates the process of referencing the keys/values on the left to generate the keys/values on the
right. Here, lc means the expected length of key/value pairs of context c(·), and li denotes the total
length of input and output. We assume that each compression outcome has a length of 1. Notations
at the top of Mem(·) denote the length of key/value pairs corresponding to CCM-concat/-merge.

Table 3: Complexity analysis of approaches in online inference scenario at time step t. Figure 5
presents illustrative explanations for the compression/inference processes with respective notations.
    Type                Operation            Full context          Fixed-context compression           CCM-concat             CCM-merge
                        Compression                    -                          O(tlc )                  O(t + lc )               O(lc )
    Memory
                        Inference            O(tlc + li )                         O(li )                   O(t + li )               O(li )
    Attention           Compression                -                              O(tlc )                  O(t + lc )               O(lc )
    FLOPS               Inference           O(tlc li + li2 )                      O(li2 )                  O(tli + li2 )            O(li2 )



state xh ∈ Rd , we propose the following conditional forward computation:

                                                           x′h = W xh + m · ∆W xh ,

where m = 1(x = ⟨COMP⟩). We denote all trainable LoRA parameters of a model as ∆θ. The pa-
rameter ∆θ only affects the formation of compressed context memory, and our compression training
objective with conditional LoRA is
                               minimize Et,i∼Itrain [− log fθ (Oi (t) | Memi (t; θ + ∆θ), Ii (t))] .                                               (4)
                                      ∆θ

We summarize the training procedure of our approach in Algorithm 1.

3.2      C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS

We analyze the complexity of approaches in online inference scenarios in Table 3. In the table,
“full context” refers to the method using full context C(t) during inference, and “fixed-context
compression” refers to the method compressing C(t) as gcomp (C(t)) at each time step (Mu et al.,
2023). In Figure 5, we visualize these methods and introduce notations used in complexity analysis.
Regarding the full context method, the context length at time step t is tlc , resulting in inference
memory complexity of O(tlc + li ) and quadratic attention FLOPS of O(tlc li + li2 ). Fixed-context
compression methods offer reduced complexity for inference. However, they process the entire
context C(t) for compression, resulting in memory and FLOPS complexities of O(tlc ).
Our method, utilizing compressed context memory for both compression and inference, exhibits
reduced complexity. In the case of CCM-merge, compression complexity depends solely on the
length of context c(t) as O(lc ). For CCM-concat, the complexity becomes proportional to the time
step t due to growing memory size over time. Nonetheless, the compression complexity reduces
from O(tlc ) to O(t + lc ) when compared to fixed-context compression methods. While CCM-
concat exhibits higher complexity than CCM-merge, a language model using CCM-concat achieves
superior performance, offering a trade-off between performance and complexity (Figure 6).

4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present the empirical validation of our approach in online inference scenario. In
Section 4.2, we further substantiate our claims through an ablation study and additional analyses.
We provide a detailed training setup in Appendix D.

                                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      No context                          Full context        CCM-concat (ours)                               CCM-merge (ours)

                 (a) Accuracy over time step (T)                                               (b) Attention KV memory                                         (c) Context compression ratio
                 71                                                                                                                                          100
                    T16                                     T16                          600


                                                                                                                                  Context length ratio (%)
                                                                   Peak KV memory (MB)
                                           T16
                 69 T8                                 T8
                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                         500
Accuracy (%) ↑



                    T4                T8         T4
                                 T4
                 67                                                                      400                                                                  60
                       T2
                 65                                                                      300                                                                  40
                            T2             T2
                                                                                         200
                 63         T1                                                                                                                                20

                 52
                   ≈ T1916 T1                                                            100
                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                           0
                       20     21     22        23                                               1     2       4     8      16                                      1     2       4     8      16
                      Peak KV memory (ratio, log-scale)                                          Time step (# demonstration)                                        Time step (# demonstration)

Figure 6: Comparison to full context approach on MetaICL test tasks with LLaMA-7B. Peak KV
memory refers to the peak memory space occupied by attention keys/values during compression and
inference processes at each time step. We provide results for other datasets in Appendix, Figure 10.


Datasets and metrics We conduct evaluations using three datasets: MetaICL (Min et al., 2022),
LaMP (Salemi et al., 2023), and DailyDialog (Li et al., 2017). First, MetaICL is a dataset for
multi-task in-context learning, aiming at solving tasks unseen during training. We evaluate on the
high-to-low resources setting, consisting of 61 training tasks and 26 unseen test tasks. The evalua-
tion metric is accuracy for multiple-choice questions. Next, LaMP is a dataset for personalization,
utilizing user profiles to generate personalized recommendations. For evaluation, we measure the
accuracy of multi-choice recommendations on new users unseen during training. Lastly, we as-
sess performance in conversation scenarios using the DailyDialog dataset, comprising sequences
of everyday conversations. We evaluate models by measuring perplexity on actual dialogues. In
Appendix C, we provide more detailed information and statistics for each dataset.
Baselines We implement established fixed-context compression techniques with open-source
codes. Our primary focus is on evaluating the Compressive Transformer (Rae et al., 2020) and
Gisting (Mu et al., 2023), both designed to compress attention hidden states. To suit online in-
ference scenarios, we devise Gisting to compress contexts c(1), . . . , c(t) separately and evaluate
the method using the concatenated compression results for inference. We refer to this approach
as Gisting-online. For the recurrent compression approaches, RMT and AutoCompressor (Bulatov
et al., 2022; Chevalier et al., 2023), we conduct a separate comparison as publicly available trained
models are limited to the OPT architecture (Zhang et al., 2022). We also evaluate the performance
of language models using full context to quantify the performance degradation due to compression.

4.1                   C OMPRESSION PERFORMANCE

Comparison to full context method In Figure 6, we analyze the memory efficiency of our method
in an online inference scenario. Figure 6-a shows the performance obtained at each time step, along
with the peak memory required for attention keys/values during the compression and inference pro-
cesses illustrated in Figure 5. The results demonstrate the memory efficiency advantage of our
approach compared to the full context approach. Specifically, CCM-concat achieves comparable
performance by using half the key/value memory space, whereas CCM-merge attains equivalent
performance levels with approximately 1/8 of the key/value memory space. While CCM-concat
requires more memory, it outperforms the merge approach as time steps increase. Compared to
the No context method, which relies solely on inputs to generate outputs, our methods exhibit su-
perior performance with a negligible increment in context memory size. Remarkably, our method
demonstrates an 18% boost in performance compared to the no-context method at time step 16.
Comparison to compression baselines Figure 7 compares the test performance of compression
methods on various datasets. For a fair comparison, we set an identical compression factor for all
compression methods, except for CCM-merge, which has a higher compression factor. The figure
shows that our compressed context memory approach consistently outperforms established com-
pression baselines across all time steps, demonstrating performance that closely parallels the full
context approach. Regarding the Gisting approach, which is optimized for compressing a fixed


                                                                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           No context       Full context            Gisting-online                   Compressive           CCM-concat (ours)                       CCM-merge (ours)

                                (a) MetaICL                                                   (b) LaMP                                                    (c) DailyDialog

                 70                                                            85                                                            9.6
                                                                               83
                                                                                                                                             9.0
Accuracy (%) ↑


                                                              Accuracy (%) ↑
                 67
                                                                                                                                               ≈


                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                               81
                 64                                                                                                                          7.4
                                                                               79
                 61                                                            77                                                            6.8

                 58                                                            75                                                            6.2
                 52
                    ≈                                                           ≈
                                                                               69                                                            5.6
                          1     2       4     8      16                             1       2      4       8        16                             1        2       4      8      12
                           Time step (# demonstration)                                    Time step (# profile)                                        Time step (# dialogue turn)

Figure 7: Test performance of compression methods in online inference scenario with LLaMA-7B.
All compression methods have the identical compression factor around 8, except for CCM-merge,
which has a higher compression factor. We provide exact values in Appendix, Tables 23 to 25.


                    8.6                                                                                           Sink      CCM                         Context sliding window
                                                                               CCM-concat (ours)
                    8.2                                                        StreamingLLM
       Perplexity


                                                                                                                         Evict oldest                       Compress
                    7.8

                    7.4
                                                                                                                         Streaming until reaching the window limit
                    7.0
                          0       10k      20k      30k       40k                   50k       60k                 Figure 9: KV cache during streaming
                                                 Context length
                                                                                                                  with CCM-concat. The example above
Figure 8: Streaming evaluation on PG19 validation set                                                             assumes a CCM maximum size of 4 and
using sliding window with LLaMA-7B.                                                                               a sliding window maximum size of 8.


context in a single iteration, there is no performance improvement as the time step increases. It is
worth noting that there is a key distinction among the datasets considered. Regarding MetaICL, the
task demonstrations ci (1), . . . , ci (t) are mutually complementary, sharing information related to the
ith task. Similarly, LaMP’s user profiles share information about specific users. On these datasets,
both merge and concatenation approaches yield similar performance, indicating insignificant com-
pression loss during the merge operation. On the other hand, in the dialogue dataset, the contexts
ci (1), . . . , ci (t) conveyed through the ith conversation have distinct information. In this case, the
concatenation approach, which compresses context information into distinct memory spaces, out-
performs the merge approach as shown in Figure 7-c. This observation indicates that as diverse
information is introduced over time, the loss of information in the merge approach increases.
Unified compression adapter To demonstrate the generalization ability of our method in more
general scenarios, we train a single compression model and evaluate its performance across various
tasks. Specifically, we leverage MetaICL training tasks and a conversation dataset, SODA (Kim
et al., 2023), as our training data, and then evaluate on multiple test tasks: MetaICL unseen test
tasks, LaMP, and DailyDialog. In Appendix E, Table 10, we provide evaluation results of the single
compression model. We note that the compression performance decreases slightly compared to
a compression adapter trained specifically for each application (Figure 7). For example, on the
MetaICL test tasks, the compression accuracy gap increases from 0.8% to 1.3%. However, Table 10
shows that our method obtains the best compression ability across all evaluation sets, demonstrating
our approach’s generalization ability on data and scenarios unseen during training.
Streaming with sliding window We incorporate CCM into the sliding window approach with
attention sink (Xiao et al., 2023). During streaming, tokens are processed one by one while adhering
to the limited KV cache memory size. When the KV cache limit is reached, we compress the oldest
tokens in the context window to update the compressed memory (Figure 9). In the case of CCM-
concat, we manage the compressed memory size by emitting the oldest compressed key/value pair.
Following Xiao et al. (2023), we reassign sequential position IDs starting from 0 within the KV


                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 5: An example result using our method with LLaMA-7B on a DailyDialog test sample.
 Context:
 A: What’s the problem, Nada? You look down in the dumps. ⟨COMP⟩
 B: I don’t know. My life is a big mess. Everything is so complicated. ⟨COMP⟩
 A: Come on, nothing can be that bad. ⟨COMP⟩
 B: But promise me, you’ll keep it a secret. ⟨COMP⟩
 A: Ok, I promise. So what’s troubling you so much? ⟨COMP⟩
 B: I’ve fallen in love with my boss. ⟨COMP⟩
 A: Really? Is he married? ⟨COMP⟩
 ⇒ Total 103 tokens. Context compression ratios are 7/103 (CCM-concat) and 1/103 (CCM-merge).
 Input: No, of course not. He is still single.
 Output generated w/o context: I’m sorry, I’m not sure what you mean.
 Output generated by CCM-concat: So what’s the problem?
 Output generated by CCM-merge: What’s his problem?
 Ground truth output: Then what’s your problem?


cache in every streaming step. In Figure 8, we compare our approach to StreamingLLM (Xiao
et al., 2023), which only stores the most recent keys/values in the sliding window. To ensure a fair
comparison, we modify the baseline method to have an identical KV cache size as our approach at
every streaming step. We use the Pretrain+MetaICL+SODA 500k model in Table 11, and conduct
evaluation on the PG19 validation set (Rae et al., 2020). Specifically, we set the maximum KV size
to 160 and the CCM size to 8, while compressing 64 tokens to a size of 2 at each compression step.
The results in Figure 8 demonstrate the effectiveness of our compression method in the streaming
setting, outperforming the StreamingLLM approach.

4.2   A NALYSIS

In this section, we provide quantitative and qualitative analyses of our method. In Appendix E,
we provide supplementary experimental results on training data sources, compression FLOPS,
compression token length, larger model scales, and comparison to other baselines, including
AutoCompressor and MemoryBank (Chevalier et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023).

Effect of conditional LoRA In Equation (4), we Table 4: Test accuracy (%) of default
compare the compression performance of our condi- LoRA and our conditional LoRA with
tional LoRA with the default unconditional LoRA. Ta- LLaMA-7B on MetaICL at time step 16.
ble 4 shows evaluation results obtained using the iden-
tical training recipe. The table confirms the consis-   Method     Default Conditional (ours)
tent superiority of our conditional LoRA over the de-   CCM-concat  69.4     70.0 (+0.6)
fault unconditional LoRA across all methods, including  CCM-merge   66.3     69.6 (+3.3)
Gisting. In Appendix Table 21, we provide results on    Gisting     64.6     66.9 (+2.3)
LaMP and DailyDialog, demonstrating that our condi-
tional LoRA consistently improves the performance.

Qualitative results Table 5 illustrates the results of applying our approach to DailyDialog, using a
⟨COMP⟩ token length of 1. The table shows that our methods continue a seamless conversation within
the given context, while CCM-concat generates a response that better suits the overall context.


5     C ONCLUSION

We present a novel compressed context memory system that dynamically compresses contextual
information, thereby enhancing the online inference efficiency of language models. To ensure effi-
cient training, we develop a parallelized training strategy and introduce a conditional adapter. Our
approach achieves reduced memory and attention FLOPS complexities compared to previous fixed-
context compression methods. We validate the practical applicability of our approach through a
comprehensive evaluation on multi-task learning, personalization, and conversation applications.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by SNU-NAVER Hyperscale AI Center, Institute of Information & Com-
munications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIT) [No. 2020-0-00882, (SW STAR LAB) Development of deployable learning intelligence
via self-sustainable and trustworthy machine learning and NO. 2021-0-01343, Artificial Intelli-
gence Graduate School Program (Seoul National University)], and Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(RS-2023-00274280). Hyun Oh Song and Sangdoo Yun are the corresponding authors.

R EFERENCES
Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast
  weights to attend to the recent past. NeurIPS, 2016.
Aydar Bulatov, Yury Kuratov, and Mikhail Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer. NeurIPS, 2022.
Alexis Chevalier, Alexander Wettig, Anirudh Ajith, and Danqi Chen. Adapting language models to
  compress contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14788, 2023.
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Together Computer. Redpajama: an open dataset for training large language models. https:
  //github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data, 2023.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. ACL, 2019.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Tao Ge, Jing Hu, Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, and Furu Wei. In-context autoencoder for context
  compression in a large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06945, 2023.
Audrunas Gruslys, Rémi Munos, Ivo Danihelka, Marc Lanctot, and Alex Graves. Memory-efficient
  backpropagation through time. NeurIPS, 2016.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 2022.
DeLesley Hutchins, Imanol Schlag, Yuhuai Wu, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Block-
  recurrent transformers. NeurIPS, 2022.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. ICML, 2020.
Hyunwoo Kim, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, et al. Soda: Million-scale dialogue distillation
  with social commonsense contextualization. EMNLP, 2023.
Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. Dailydialog: A manually
  labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. IJCNLP, 2017.
James Manyika. An overview of bard: an early experiment with generative ai. Technical report,
  Technical report, Google AI, 2023.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Metaicl: Learning to learn
  in context. NAACL, 2022.
Amirkeivan Mohtashami and Martin Jaggi. Landmark attention: Random-access infinite context
 length for transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16300, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jesse Mu, Xiang Lisa Li, and Noah Goodman. Learning to compress prompts with gist tokens.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08467, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Jason Phang, Yi Mao, Pengcheng He, and Weizhu Chen. Hypertuning: Toward adapting large
  language models without back-propagation. ICML, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-
  ers. OpenAI blog, 2019.
Jack W Rae, Anna Potapenko, Siddhant M Jayakumar, and Timothy P Lillicrap. Compressive
  transformers for long-range sequence modelling. ICLR, 2020.
Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. Lamp: When large
  language models meet personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11406, 2023.
Charlie Snell, Dan Klein, and Ruiqi Zhong.      Learning by distilling context.   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.15189, 2022.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle. Infor-
  mation Theory Workshop, 2015.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Szymon Tworkowski, Konrad Staniszewski, Mikołaj Pacek, Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, and
  Piotr Miłoś. Focused transformer: Contrastive training for context scaling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03170, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 30, 2017.
Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-
 menting language models with long-term memory. NeurIPS, 2023.
Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. Memory networks. ICLR, 2015.
David Wingate, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Taylor Sorensen. Prompt compression and contrastive
  conditioning for controllability and toxicity reduction in language models. EMNLP, 2022.
Yuhuai Wu, Markus N Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy. Memorizing transformers.
  ICLR, 2022.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming
  language models with attention sinks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, et al. Big bird: Transformers for longer
 sequences. NeurIPS, 2020.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, et al. Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world llm
  conversation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11998, 2023.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large lan-
 guage models with long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10250, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    R ELATED W ORKS

Context compression Seminal works, such as Memory Networks, have introduced novel models
and computational approaches to efficiently store contextual information within limited space, en-
hancing the inference efficiency of language models (Weston et al., 2015; Ba et al., 2016). Recently,
there have been efforts to compress frequently used prompts, aiming to enhance the inference ef-
ficiency of large-scale language models. Wingate et al. (2022) advocate condensing prompts into
concise soft prompts. Hyper-Tuning (Phang et al., 2023) attempts to convert prompts into model
adapters, while Snell et al. (2022) propose distilling prompt information into the model parame-
ters. AutoCompressor (Chevalier et al., 2023) and ICAE (Ge et al., 2023) propose auto-encoding
approaches for compressing contexts into soft embeddings. Gisting (Mu et al., 2023) introduces
learnable tokens designed to compress context information within attention hidden states. These
previous methods focus on compressing fixed context to enhance reusability. In this study, we intro-
duce a task involving context compression during online inference and propose an effective approach
for handling dynamically changing contexts.

Long context Transformer In terms of efficient context processing, our approach relates to the
long context Transformer. Notably, Dai et al. (2019) aims to increase the context length through at-
tention hidden state caching, and Rae et al. (2020) proposes a strategy to compress attention hidden
states. Efforts have also focused on reducing the complexity of attention operations (Child et al.,
2019; Zaheer et al., 2020). These methods, which propose new attention mechanisms, require train-
ing large models from scratch, making it challenging to leverage existing pretrained models. The
following works propose recurrent memory-augmented approaches (Bulatov et al., 2022; Hutchins
et al., 2022), while Wu et al. (2022) propose k-nearest retrieval of attention key/value pairs to man-
age long contexts. These retrieval-based approaches, including MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2023)
and LongMem (Wang et al., 2023), primarily focus on the token-level retrieval process, with less
emphasis on memory compression. However, LLM’s keys and values demand a significant amount
of storage, reaching several hundred megabytes even for a context length of 1024. Such high storage
requirements can become problematic in scenarios such as user-level personalization and conversa-
tion systems. Recently, notable attempts have been made to extend the context length of LLaMA
(Mohtashami & Jaggi, 2023; Tworkowski et al., 2023). While these studies concentrate on handling
fixed contexts, our approach aims to dynamically compress expanding contextual information within
a compact memory space.


B    D ISCUSSIONS

Application-specific compression When focusing on specific applications, the size of compress-
ible contextual information becomes larger than when considering general scenarios (Tishby & Za-
slavsky, 2015). This indicates that application-specific compression modules can achieve higher
compression efficiency compared to their more general counterparts. Similar to fine-tuning foun-
dation models for specific applications in various industries, an application-specific compression
module can be employed to achieve superior compression capability. It is noteworthy that our
method is application-agnostic, meaning it can be applied effectively to a wide range of scenar-
ios in a data-driven manner. Obtaining a compression module without requiring application-specific
knowledge or manual adjustments holds practical value. Furthermore, as demonstrated in the gen-
eralization test presented in Table 10, our approach shows generalization capabilities across various
applications and can be flexibly adapted to different scenarios.

Limitations and future works While our model is capable of generalizing to new tasks or user
contexts at test time, training a broadly applicable model for arbitrary applications remains an impor-
tant future direction. Moreover, despite surpassing existing compression baselines in performance,
our approach still declines in performance compared to when utilizing the full context. Developing
compression techniques that can ensure a higher level of information preservation remains a crucial
direction for future research.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    DATASET DETAILS

Table 6 illustrates training data formats. While all datasets adhere to the same format, the content
within each context and input varies. In Table 7, we provide statistics for each dataset. In the case
of MetaICL, we employ the high-to-low-resource setting consisting of a total of 61 training tasks
and 26 test tasks, which is the most representative setting (Min et al., 2022). The token length
of demonstrations varies depending on the dataset type. We filter out demonstrations exceeding a
token length of 256 in both the training and evaluation sets. Taking into account the GPU memory
constraints, we set the maximum token length for the entire context to 1024. For LaMP, we conduct
evaluations in the personalized categorization setting (Salemi et al., 2023). The dataset exhibits
relatively lower token length variations than MetaICL. Regarding DailyDialog, as more than 90%
of the test samples have dialogue turns of 12 or fewer, we set the maximum time step to 12.

                              Table 6: Illustrative format of each dataset sample.
 Dataset          Context Ci (t) with ⟨COMP⟩ token                                            Input Ii (t)
 MetaICL          Demonstration 1 for task i ⟨COMP⟩ · · · Demonstration t for task i ⟨COMP⟩   A problem for task i
 LaMP             Profile 1 for user i ⟨COMP⟩ · · · Profile t for user i ⟨COMP⟩               A query for user i
 DailyDialog      Turn 1 from dialog i ⟨COMP⟩ · · · Turn t from dialog i ⟨COMP⟩               Turn t+1 from dialog i


                                 Table 7: Descriptions for datasets considered.
                                                                         MetaICL      LaMP      DailyDialog
           Average token length of context c(·) at each time step              50        50                   15
           Maximum token length of context c(·) at each time step             256       100                  128
           Maximum time step T                                                 16        16                   12



D    E XPERIMENT SETUP

Training setup We begin by fine-tuning LLaMA pretrained models (Touvron et al., 2023) on each
training dataset. The performance of these models with full contexts establishes the upper-bound
performance of our experiment. We then perform LoRA fine-tuning on these models to learn com-
pression capabilities. To ensure a fair comparison, we employ identical LoRA configurations and
training protocols across all methods considered. All experiments undergo training with a fixed
number of data, ranging from 10k to 250k, depending on the datasets. Individual training runs take
3 to 24 hours on a single NVIDIA A100 with 80GB memory. To account for limited GPU memory,
we set the maximum token length of each training sample to 1024. Regarding Gisting, utilizing
our conditional adapter enhances performance (Table 4). Based on this observation, we report the
improved performance achieved by applying our conditional adapter in the main experiment. To
confirm the effectiveness of compression, we adjust the length of ⟨COMP⟩ tokens to attain a suffi-
ciently large compression factor of approximately 8 for each dataset. For specific training recipes
and hyperparameters, please refer to Appendix D.

Training protocol and hyperparameter Our approach first fine-tunes the pretrained LLaMA
models on each training dataset, following the training recipe in Table 8 and the LORA configuration
in Table 9. The resulting LORA adapters are then merged with the pre-existing model weights. Us-
ing this fine-tuned model as a foundation, we proceed to train the compression capability. To ensure
a fair comparison, we optimize both compression baselines and our methods using the same train-
ing recipe in Table 8 and LORA configuration in Table 9. We jointly optimize the embeddings for
⟨COMP⟩ tokens, where ⟨COMP⟩ tokens at different time steps share the same embedding. All training
processes are conducted on a single A100 PCIe 80GB GPU and take 3 to 24 hours, depending on
the dataset.

Evaluation method For MetaICL and LaMP, we measure the accuracy for multi-choice questions
by comparing the average log-likelihood on tokens of each answer choice, following the official
evaluation codes provided by MetaICL (Min et al., 2022).


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table 8: Training recipes of our experiments for LLaMA models.
                                                        MetaICL          LaMP       DailyDialog
                         Training steps                       2000          300               1000
                         Batch size                             128         128                 128
                         # training samples                   256k          38k               128k
                         Learning rate                         3e-4        3e-4                3e-4
                         Learning rate scheduling            Cosine      Cosine              Cosine
                         Mixed precision                      FP16        FP16                FP16
                         ⟨COMP⟩ token length                      8           4                   2

 Table 9: LoRA configurations for LLaMA models. We use this configuration for all experiments.
                                 Argument                                       Setting
                                 Target modules         q proj,k proj,v proj,o proj
                                 Rank                                             8
                                 Alpha                                           16
                                 Dropout                                       0.05


E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

E.1     M AIN ANALYSIS

Unified compression adapter We train a single compression adapter with LLaMA-7B on the
mixture of the MetaICL training tasks and the SODA conversation dataset. We follow the training
recipe in Table 8, while we train a model for 4k steps. We train the Gisting and Compressive
Transformer baselines using the same dataset and training protocol. We use the ⟨COMP⟩ token length
of 2 for CCM-concat and 8 for CCM-merge. Finally, we test the model on the MetaICL unseen test
tasks, LaMP, and DailyDialog at the corresponding maximum time step.
Table 10 demonstrates the generalization ability of our approach on datasets and scenarios unseen
during training. Specifically, CCM-concat maintains the best compression performance by a large
margin compared to baseline methods. We observe that CCM-merge has increased performance
degradation by compression compared to the scenario-specific settings (e.g., the LaMP accuracy
degradation by compression increased from 1.2% to 5.1%). However, the other compression base-
lines have a larger performance gap by compression, demonstrating our approach achieves the best
generalization performance among the baselines.

Table 10: Evaluation of a single model trained on MetaICL and SODA training datasets. Memory
refers to the peak memory required for attention keys/values during inference.
 Test dataset   Metric           No context   Full context    Gisting-online   Compressive    CCM-concat   CCM-merge
                Accuracy (%)        53.6         70.0             59.9            65.0           68.7        67.8
 MetaICL
                Memory (MB)          50          630               82              82             82          66
                Accuracy (%)        37.0         76.4             67.6            58.4           75.2        71.4
 LaMP
                Memory (MB)          50          755               82              82             82          66
                Perplexity         11.51         7.02             9.04            9.19           7.61        8.22
 DailyDialog
                Memory (MB)         32           252               54              54             54          38



Effect of training data sources To analyze the impact of data used for compression adapter
training, we compare the performance of CCM-concat trained with various data sources. Table 11
presents evaluation results using RedPajama-V2 (Computer, 2023) and LmSys-Chat (Zheng et al.,
2023) as the base training data. The table shows that the evaluation performance improves when us-
ing training data from similar sources. Particularly, when adding a new data source, the performance
in the added data source significantly improves with a marginal performance decrease in the existing
data sources. We believe that different data sources have different compressible information spaces,
indicating the importance of constructing training data tailored to the application scenario. Lastly, it


                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is worth noting that increasing the amount of training data enhances overall performance (last row
in Table 11), underscoring the significance of both the quantity and quality of the training data.

Table 11: Compression performance gap across different data sources used to train compression
adapter. We measure the perplexity gap compared to the full context method at the maximum time
step (accuracy for MetaICL). We use CCM-concat with ⟨COMP⟩ token length of 2 on LLaMA-7B.
                                                                                        Evaluation dataset
 Training dataset                               # training data    Pretrain           SODA DailyDialog        MetaICL
 Pretrain (= RedPajama + LmSys-Chat)            500k                   -0.55          -0.22        -0.74        -4.9%
 Pretrain + MetaICL                             500k                   -0.59          -0.26        -0.82        -1.2%
 Pretrain + MetaICL + SODA                      500k                   -0.61          -0.10        -0.54        -1.3%
 Pretrain + MetaICL + SODA                      750k                   -0.57          -0.09        -0.53       -1.1%


FLOPS analysis Regarding FLOPS, our approach has two notable effects:
       • Reduction in attention FLOPS due to the shortened context.
       • Computation overhead incurred by the compression process.
The reduction in attention FLOPS becomes more pronounced as the number of processed tokens
during inference increases. In Table 12, we compute the minimum length of tokens required to be
processed during inference, where the benefits from the shortened context outweigh the compression
overhead. Our analysis is based on a context token length of 50, according to the dataset statistics
in Table 7. With ⟨COMP⟩ token length of 1, our approach reduces the total computation FLOPS
when the length of the processed token during inference surpasses 504. We summarize the results
on larger ⟨COMP⟩ token lengths in Table 12.

Table 12: Compression FLOPS overhead analysis on MetaICL with LLaMa-7B. Threshold refers
to the minimum token length required during inference for the reduction in attention FLOPS to
outweigh the compression overhead. We assume that the token length of context c(t) is 50, according
to the MetaICL and LaMP datasets’ statistics (Table 7).
                                                                       ⟨COMP⟩ token length
                                                                   1       2       4       8
                      Context compression factor                  ×50     ×25           ×13      ×6
                      Threshold (inference token length)          504     1029          2148    4706


In-depth performance analysis We measure the generation performance of our compression ap-
proach using the RougeL metric in Table 13. The results verify that our methods deliver the most
accurate generation performance compared to other baselines. However, in the case of RougeL,
there is a pronounced decrease in performance compared to the full context method, whereas, in the
case of accuracy, the performance drop is less than 1%. Upon closer examination of the generated
outputs with compressed context, we identify instances where synonyms are generated (e.g., “Dif-
ferent” and “Dissimilar” in the medical questions pair task) or variations in letter casing are present
(e.g., “Hate” and “hate” in the tweet eval hate task). These observations suggest a semantic equiv-
alence between the original and generated results, albeit differences in expression. These findings
suggest that our approach performs particularly well in situations where prioritizing preferences or
nuances outweighs the need for exact phrasing.

  Table 13: Evaluation of RougeL and accuracy metrics with LLaMA-7B on MetaICL test tasks.
                    No context   Full context     Gisting-online        Compressive           CCM-concat     CCM-merge
 RougeL                12.3         61.4                37.9                   47.9              54.7          48.3
 Accuracy (%)          51.7         70.8                57.7                   67.8              70.0          69.6


Design choice of merge function In the main experiments, we evaluate an update method based
on the arithmetic average of the compressed states up to the present time, i.e., at = 1/t. An-
other natural design choice is an exponential moving average (EMA), where at is set to a constant


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


value. This strategy weighs higher importance on recent information compared to the arithmetic
average. Table 14 provides a comparison between the arithmetic average and EMA with at = 0.5,
on DailyDialog with LLaMA-7B. The results indicate that both methods yield similar performance.
When forming the compression state h(t), our method involves referencing the previous memory
Mem(t91) (Figure 2). We believe this enables the preservation of overall context, even with expo-
nentially decreasing coefficients for past states by EMA.

                  Table 14: Comparison of merge function design choices with LLaMA-7B on DailyDialog.
                                           Method \Time step                           1          2        4       8                        12
                                           EMA                                       7.49        7.06   6.79     6.49                   6.38
                                           Arithmetic average                        7.47        7.06   6.87     6.54                   6.34


Additional memory-performance graphs In Figure 10, we present graphs illustrating the rela-
tionship between attention KV memory and performance across increasing time steps for MetaICL,
LaMP, and DailyDialog. The figure comprehensively compares all methods introduced in our main
text, including a fixed-context compression method such as Gisting. From the figure, we verify that
our methods exhibit the best memory-performance efficiency. Specifically, our methods achieve
superior performance while requiring minimal attention KV memory when compared to existing
compression baselines.

                          Full context     Gisting         Gisting-online                    Compressive         CCM-concat (ours)                       CCM-merge (ours)

                             (a) MetaICL                                                   (b) LaMP                                               (c) DailyDialog
                 72                                                        86                                                         8.0

                 69                                                                                                                   7.4
                                                                           83
Accuracy (%) ↑


                                                          Accuracy (%) ↑


                                                                                                                       Perplexity ↓


                 66
                                                                                                                                      6.8
                                                                           80
                 63
                                                                                                                                      6.2
                                                                           77
                 60
                                                                                                                                      5.6
                 57                                                        74
                      50    100   200     400     800                           50    100  200    400     800                               30      60      120      240
                      Peak KV memory (MB, log-scale)                            Peak KV memory (MB, log-scale)                              Peak KV memory (MB, log-scale)


Figure 10: Test performance of methods with LLaMA-7B over increasing time steps in an online
inference scenario. The x-axis refers to the peak memory space occupied by attention keys/values
during compression and inference processes at each time step. Here, the time steps span from 1 to
16, except for DailyDialog, which covers a range of 1 to 12.


E.2                   MODEL AND COMPRESSION TOKEN LENGTH

Different model architecture We evaluate our method with an encoder-decoder structured model,
Flan-T5-Large (Chung et al., 2022). Since there exists an overlap between the training set of Flan-
T5 and the MetaICL dataset (Min et al., 2022), we conduct an evaluation using the LaMP dataset.
Table 15 presents the evaluation results at time step 16. While both Gisting and Compressive Trans-
former exhibit a significant drop in accuracy compared to the full context method, our methods
achieve the best performance while requiring less key/value memory on the Flan-T5 architecture.

Table 15: Test accuracy and peak key/value memory size with Flan-T5-Large on LaMP at time step
16. We evaluate performance across five different random seeds for user profile order.
                                    No context       Full context                   Gisting-online      Compressive                         CCM-concat      CCM-merge
    Accuracy (%)                    71.1 ± 0.0       81.8 ± 0.3                       78.4 ± 0.3           79.7 ± 0.4                       81.9 ± 0.2       82.1 ± 0.3
    Memory (MB)                         20              152                               32                   32                               32               21



                                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Length of compression token In Table 16, we analyze the performance of our method across
varying compression token lengths. In general, increasing the token length leads to a slight im-
provement in performance. For MetaICL, we observe a 1% accuracy gain, while the DailyDialog
experiment shows a 1% reduction in perplexity as token length increases. However, when comparing
our approach to the no-context method, the performance differences attributed to the compression
token length are not significant. For example, our method outperforms the no-context approach
by approximately 18% in the MetaICL experiment. In our main experiment, we set the compres-
sion token length according to the average context length of the target dataset, ensuring consistent
compression rates across datasets. We provide detailed configuration values in Table 8.

Table 16: Analysis of ⟨COMP⟩ token length with LLaMA-7B at the maximum time step (Table 7).
Here, concat refers to CCM-concat, and merge denotes CCM-merge.
(a) MetaICL (Accuracy %). No con- (b) LaMP (Accuracy %). No con- (c) DailyDialog (Perplexity). No
text: 51.6% \ Full context: 70.8%. text: 69.5% \ Full context: 85.1%. context: 10.3 \ Full context: 5.85.

              ⟨COMP⟩ token length                                ⟨COMP⟩ token length                       ⟨COMP⟩ token length
             1    2       4      8                                1      2       4                          1      2       4
 concat    69.5    69.3      70.0      70.0         concat       84.3   83.9       84.7          concat    6.51    6.37     6.26
 merge     68.5    68.1      68.3      69.6         merge        83.4   84.2       83.9          merge     6.67    6.62     6.63


Larger model scale In Table 17, we provide evaluation results with LLaMA-13B on MetaICL.
Consistent with 7B models, our method exhibits the best performance among the compression base-
lines while requiring smaller peak attention KV memory.

Table 17: LLaMA-13B test accuracy and peak attention KV memory on MetaICL at time step 16.
                   No context        Full context     Gisting     Gisting-online    Compressive      CCM-concat        CCM-merge
 Accuracy (%)         51.4              72.1            66.7            62.5              66.1             70.7           68.6
 Memory (MB)           78               984             919             278               278              278            103



E.3     COMPARISON TO BASELINES

Comparison to recurrent compression methods We conduct a comparative analysis with RMT
and AutoCompressor that recurrently compress contexts into token embeddings (Bulatov et al.,
2022; Chevalier et al., 2023). These approaches fine-tune OPT pretrained models (Zhang et al.,
2022) on the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020) to learn compression capabilities. For evaluation, we
utilize the fine-tuned models available on the official GitHub repository1 . We conduct separate ex-
periments on each baseline because the released RMT and AutoCompressor models show different
performances without compression (AutoCompressor in Table 18 and RMT in Appendix Table 22).
For a fair comparison, we also provide fine-tuned results of the baseline models on MetaICL training
tasks using identical training steps to ours, denoted as AutoCompressor-finetune and RMT-finetune.
As shown in the tables, our compression methods demonstrate superior performance and efficiency.
Specifically, RMT and AutoCompressor necessitate recursive model computation at each training
step, incurring significant computation time. As shown in Table 18, AutoCompressor requires ap-
proximately 7× longer training time per sample than our approach. Meanwhile, our methods
exhibit superior performance while using less key/value memory, demonstrating its effectiveness.

Table 18: Comparison with AutoCompressor OPT-2.7B on MetaICL test tasks at time step 16. We
measure the training time using identical samples on an A100 GPU. We evaluate performance across
five different random seeds for demonstration order.
                                    No context   Full context      AutoComp.    AutoComp.-finetune        CCM-concat   CCM-merge
 Accuracy (%)                       41.4 ± 0.0      54.2 ± 0.5     48.1 ± 0.5        50.9 ± 0.4           53.5 ± 0.5    52.3 ± 0.3
 Peak KV memory (MB)                    31             394             156              156                  111            41
 Training time per sample (ms)           -               -            1330              1330                 195           195


   1
       https://github.com/princeton-nlp/AutoCompressors


                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparison to fixed-context compression In Table 19, we present evaluation results of Gisting
with the fixed-context compression setting described in Figure 5-b. While having the same inference
complexity as CCM-merge, the fixed-context setting incurs significant memory demands during
compression. On the other hand, our approach maintains minimal memory requirements for both
stages, having a low peak memory usage. Moreover, our method improves the performance by 3%p
compared to Gisting, validating the effectiveness of our training strategy in online scenarios.

Table 19: Comparison to a fixed-context compression method (Gisting) with LLaMA-7B on
MetaICL test tasks at time step 16.
                                       Full context        Gisting     CCM-concat     CCM-merge
           Accuracy (%)                70.8 ± 0.1      66.9 ± 0.2       70.0 ± 0.2     69.6 ± 0.1
           Peak KV memory (MB)            630             588              178             66


Comparison to text summarization MemoryBank proposes reducing context size through text
summarization during language model interaction (Zhong et al., 2023). However, this approach
comes with additional computational costs for summarization and the overhead of processing the
summarized text for subsequent inference. In contrast, our approach allows for more efficient in-
ference without the aforementioned overhead by caching key/value pairs of compression tokens.
Following MemoryBank, we conduct experimental comparisons with LLaMA-7B on DailyDialog.
Specifically, we use the summarization prompt from MemoryBank to compress context through
OpenAI gpt-3.5-turbo API (ChatGPT) and then evaluate models with summarized contexts. Ta-
ble 20 shows the test perplexity of methods. The results confirms that our approach achieves supe-
rior performance with smaller context memory size, demonstrating the effectivness of our key/value
compression approach.

Table 20: Comparison to a text summarization method with LLaMA-7B on the DailyDialog test set.
                             No context      Full context      MemoryBank      CCM-concat      CCM-merge
 Perplexity                     10.6            5.59                 7.06            5.98           6.34
 Compressed context length       0              222                   60              24              2


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 21: Evaluation results of default LoRA and our conditional LoRA with LLaMA-7B.
             (a) LaMP (Accuracy %)                           (b) DailyDialog (Perplexity)
                     Default      Conditional (ours)                                   Default     Conditional (ours)
   CCM-concat         83.9                 84.7                      CCM-concat          6.01                5.96
   CCM-merge          82.6                 83.9                      CCM-merge           6.42                6.33


Table 22: Comparison with RMT OPT-2.7B on MetaICL at time step 16. We measure the train-
ing time using identical samples on an A100 GPU. We evaluate performance across five different
random seeds for demonstration order.
                                  No context      Full context      RMT        RMT-finetune     CCM-concat     CCM-merge
 Accuracy (%)                     42.1 ± 0.0      54.5 ± 0.4     44.4 ± 0.4     50.0 ± 0.3      52.3 ± 0.4      52.2 ± 0.3
 Peak KV memory (MB)                  31             394             63             63             111              41
 Training time per sample (ms)         -               -            1330           1330            195             195


Table 23: Test accuracy (%) on MetaICL with LLaMA-7B. The test set is identical across time steps.
 Time step     No context        Full context      Gisting-online      Compressive       CCM-concat          CCM-merge
 1                 51.7             62.8                 61.7                 59.6              63.0                62.7
 2                 51.7             64.4                 62.6                 60.7              64.4                65.5
 4                 51.7             68.7                 62.7                 66.7              67.8                68.5
 8                 51.7             69.9                 59.7                 67.6              68.9                69.3
 16                51.7             70.8                 57.7                 67.8              70.0                69.6


Table 24: Test accuracy (%) on LaMP with LLaMA-7B. The test set is identical across time steps.
 Time step     No context        Full context      Gisting-online      Compressive       CCM-concat          CCM-merge
 1                 69.5             79.1                 78.5                 75.0              78.6                79.1
 2                 69.5             80.6                 77.3                 77.2              79.5                80.4
 4                 69.5             81.8                 78.5                 79.1              82.3                82.2
 8                 69.5             83.1                 79.6                 81.6              84.0                83.5
 16                69.5             85.1                 78.7                 82.8              84.7                83.9


                       Table 25: Test perplexity on DailyDialog with LLaMA-7B.
 Time step     No context        Full context      Gisting-online      Compressive       CCM-concat          CCM-merge
 1                 8.93             6.97                 7.42                 7.60              7.38                7.47
 2                 9.06             6.62                 7.47                 7.14              6.97                7.04
 4                 9.33             6.30                 7.47                 6.91              6.64                6.85
 8                 9.85             5.84                 7.68                 6.52              6.17                6.53
 12                9.67             5.56                 7.44                 6.38              5.91                6.27


                                                               19
