Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AGENT-C ENTRIC S TATE D ISCOVERY                                             FOR        F INITE -
M EMORY POMDP S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Discovering an informative, or agent-centric, state representation that encodes
         only the relevant information while discarding the irrelevant is a key challenge
         towards scaling reinforcement learning algorithms and efficiently applying them
         to downstream tasks. Prior works studied this problem in high-dimensional
         Markovian environments, when the current observation may be a complex object
         but is sufficient to decode the informative state. In this work, we consider
         the problem of discovering the agent-centric state in the more challenging
         high-dimensional non-Markovian setting, when the state can be decoded from a
         sequence of past observations. We establish that generalized inverse models can
         be adapted for learning agent-centric state representation for this task. Our results
         include asymptotic theory as well as negative results for alternative intuitive
         algorithms, such as encoding with only a forward-running sequence model. We
         complement these findings with a thorough empirical study on the agent-centric
         state discovery abilities of the different alternatives we put forward. Particularly
         notable is our analysis of past actions, where we show that these can be a
         double-edged sword: making the algorithms more successful when used correctly
         and causing dramatic failure when used incorrectly.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) and its associated tasks of planning and exploration are dramatically
easier in a small Markovian state space than in a high-dimensional, Partially Observed Markov
Decision Process (POMDP). For example, controlling a car from a set of coordinates and velocities
is much easier than controlling a car from first-person camera images. This gap explains why many
of the successes of RL have come in domains where this minimal Markovian state space is given or
is simple to learn. At the same time, this gap suggests an opportunity:

 Can we devise an unsupervised learning algorithm for automatically discovering the informative
             Markovian state space from a rich non-Markovian observation space?

Having such capability has many merits. It can allow faster adaptation for downstream tasks, it
simplifies the debugging of the learned representation, and it enables the use of large corpuses
of unsupervised datasets in an efficient manner. Learning to extract effective information in
complex control systems can be notoriously difficult in general. Indeed, in recent years, much
effort has been devoted to tackling this problem in high-dimensional and Markovian systems in
the RL community Li et al. (2006); Nachum et al. (2018); Misra et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2020);
Efroni et al. (2022d); Wang et al. (2022b). However, in many real-world control and decision
problems, the immediate observation does not contain the complete relevant information required
for optimal behavior, and the environment may be non-Markovian. Hence, in practice, an algorithm
designer often faces a double challenge: learning in the presence of both non-Markovian and
high-dimensional data. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has focused on developing
techniques for state space discovery in such a setting.
In this work, we take a first step towards a solution for the general problem by considering a special
and prevalent class of non-Markovian environments. We consider the class of POMDPs with
finite-memory, which we refer to as FM-POMDPs, and design techniques to recover the informative
state in a high-dimensional setting. Intuitively, for an FM-POMDP, the state can be decoded from
a finite sequence of past observations and is often encountered in control and decision problems


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(e.g., to decode the velocity or acceleration of an object, a few previous observations are required).
Due to the significance of such a system, many past works have put forward techniques for solving
and learning in decision problems with memory, both in practice and theory (Bakker, 2001; Graves
et al., 2016; Pritzel et al., 2017; Efroni et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022)). Yet, none
explicitly focused on state discovery.
Provably capturing relevant agent states while discarding distractors in Markovian environments
has become a widely studied problem in both reinforcement learning theory (Efroni et al., 2022d;a;
Wang et al., 2022c) and experimentation (Islam et al., 2023; Lamb et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b).
These works have demonstrated the ability to discover an agent-centric state, which captures all
information that is relevant to the control of the agent while discarding exogenous noise, the infor-
mation that is present in the observations but unrelated to the control of the agent. The multi-step
inverse kinematics algorithm, studied in these prior works, consists of predicting the first action
that an agent takes between an initial observation and an observation after random k steps into the
future; predicting an action that caused a future observation from current state. Inverse kinematics
has become a popular approach as it is relatively easy to implement and has theoretical guarantees
for filtering exogenous noise. At the same time, direct implementation of this approach fails for the
FM-POMDP setting because the current observation may be insufficient to encode the state.
We first show that naive approaches to generalize multi-step inverse kinematics can fail, both theo-
retically and empirically in the FM-POMDP setting. For instance, if a sequence is encoded using an
RNN (or any other directed sequence model) and the hidden states are used to predict actions, we
show that there is an “action recorder” problem where the model can learn shortcuts to represent-
ing the true state. Under assumptions of past and future decodability, we generalize inverse models
to the high-dimensional FM-POMDP setting and establish, empirically and theoretically, that it re-
covers the latent state. Our results show that our variant of the multi-step inverse model can indeed
succeed in the FM-POMDP setting. This considers the information of sequences of observations and
actions, from both the past and the future, where we can use a forward-backward sequence model
to learn agent-centric representations. Experimentally, we validate precise recovery of the state on
acceleration-control, information masking, first-person perspective control, and delayed signal prob-
lems. Finally, we also demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed objectives in visual offline RL
tasks in presence of exogenous information, where we mask out randomly stacked frames and add
random masking of patches to learn representations in a partially observable offline RL setting.



2    BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES

Proposed Setting.        We consider a finite-memory POMDP in which the state is assumed to
be decodable from a short history of observations (Efroni et al., 2022b). Further, as in many
applications in practice, we assume the observations are in high-dimension. This may give rise to
the presence of exogenous noise with non-trivial time correlation. This setting can be modelled
as an Exogenous Block MDP (Efroni et al., 2022d; Lamb et al., 2022), a rich observation setting
in which the observations consists of an agent-centric and exogenous part of the state. This
definition assumes that exogenous noise has no interaction with the agent-centric state, which is
stricter than the exogenous MDP definition introduced by Dietterich et al. (2018). Our proposed
setting combines these to consider an Agent-Centric FM-POMDP in which we assume that the
agent-centric state is decodable from a short history of observations.
Agent-Centric FM-POMDP. We consider a finite-memory episodic Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (FM-POMDP), which can be specified by M = (S, Ξ, O, A, H, P, O, r). Here
S is the unobservable agent-centric state space, Ξ is the unobservable exogenous state space (for
convenience, Z = S × Ξ), O is the observation space, A is the action space, and H is the horizon.
                                                                               ′
P = {Ph }H h=1 is a collection of unknown transition probabilities with P(z | z, a) equal to the
                                  ′
probability of transitioning to z after taking action a in state z. O = {Oh }H  h=1 are the unknown
emissions with Oh (o | s, ξ) equal to probability that the environment emits observation o when in
agent-centric state s and exogenous state ξ at the hth step. The block assumption holds if the support
of the emission distributions of any two states are disjoint, supp(q(· | z1 )) ∩ supp(q(·|z2 )) =
∅ when z1 ̸= z2 ., where supp(q(· | z)) = {o ∈ O | q(o | z) > 0} for any state z. We assume our
action space is finite and our agent-centric state space is also finite.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The agent-centric FM-POMDP is concerned with the structure of the state space Z. More
concretely, the state space Z = S × Ξ consists of an agent-centric state s ∈ S and ξ ∈ Ξ, such that
z = (s, ξ). The state dynamics are assumed to factorize as P(s′ , ξ ′ |s, ξ, a) = P(s′ |s, a)P(ξ ′ |ξ). We
do not consider the episodic setting, but only assume access to a single trajectory. The agent interacts
with the environment, generating an observation and action sequence, (z1 , o1 , a1 , z2 , o2 , a2 , · · · )
where z1 ∼ µ(·). The latent dynamics follow zt+1 ∼ T (z ′ | zt , at ) and observations are generated
from the latent state at the same time step: ot ∼ q(· | zt ). The agent does not observe the latent
states (z1 , z2 , · · · ), instead it receives only the observations (o1 , o2 , · · · ). We use Õm to denote
the set of augmented observations of length m given by Õm = (O × A)m × O. Moreover, we
will introduce the notation that õt = (ot , at−1 ), which can be seen as the observation augmented
with the previous action. Lastly, the agent chooses actions using a policy which can most generally
depend on the entire t-step history of observations and previous actions π : Õt → ∆(A), so that
at ∼ π(·|õ1 , ..., õt−1 , õt ).
We assume that the agent-centric dynamics are deterministic and that the diameter of the control-
endogenous part of the state space is bounded. In other words, there is an optimal policy to reach
any state from any other state in a finite number of steps: the length of the shortest path between
any s1 ∈ S to any s2 ∈ S is bounded by D. These assumptions are required for establishing the
theoretical guarantees in Lamb et al. (2022), we built upon in this work.
Past and Future Decodability Assumptions. We now present the key structural assumption of
this paper. We assume that a prefix of length m of the history suffices to decode the latent state and
also that a suffix of length n of the future suffices to decode the latent state.
Additionally, we will introduce some extra notation for conditioning on either the past or future
segments of a sequence. Let õP(h,m) = õmax{1,h−m}:h be the past observations and let õF(h,n) =
õmin{1,h+n}:H refer to the future observations.
Assumption 1 (m-step past decodability). There exists an unknown decoder ϕf⋆,s : Õm → S such
that for every reachable trajectory τ = s1:H , we have sh = ϕf⋆,s (õP(h,m) ).
Assumption 2 (n-step future decodability). There exists an unknown decoder ϕb⋆,s : Õn → S such
that for every reachable trajectory τ = s1:H , we have sh = ϕb⋆,s (õF(h,n) ).

We note that the decodability assumption on the observation and previous action sequence ĩ is more
general than an analogous decodability assumption on the observations alone o. Indeed, in practical
applications it may be the case that prior actions are required to decode the current state, and hence
we work with this more general assumption. In fact, in the experimental section we will show that,
empirically, adding actions improves our algorithm’s performance.

3    P ROPOSED O BJECTIVES
In this section, we describe in detail a set of possible inverse kinematic based objectives for
the FM-POMDP setting. One is All History (AH), which involves using the entire sequence of
observations to predict actions. Another is Forward Jump (FJ), in which a partial history of the
sequence is used from both the past and a number of steps in the future. Finally, Masked Inverse
Kinematics uses a partial history of the sequence from the past and a partial future of the sequence a
number of steps in the future. For all of these objectives, we will consider a variant which augments
each observation in the input sequence with the previous action. These objectives are visualized in
Figure 1 and summarized in Table 1.
Our high-level strategy will be to study which of these objectives are sufficient to obtain a reduction
to the analysis in Lamb et al. (2022), which guarantees recovery of the true minimal agent-centric
state. To do this, we will first study the Bayes-optimal solution of each objective in terms of the
true agent-centric state (section 3.1). Following this, we will study which of these Bayes-optimal
solutions are sufficient to complete the reduction in section 3.2.
3.1 T HE BAYES O PTIMAL C LASSIFIER OF C ANDIDATE O BJECTIVES
We start by analyzing the Bayes optimal solution of few inverse kinematics objectives, namely,
objectives that aim to predict an action from a sequence of observations. These closed form solu-
tions will later motivate the design of the loss objectives, and guide us towards choosing the proper


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: We examine several objectives for generalizing inverse kinematics to FM-POMDPs.
MIK+A uses past-decodability and future-decodability with a gap of k masked steps, FJ+A uses
past-decodability with a gap of k steps, while AH uses past-decodability over the entire sequence.


way of implementing inverse kinematics for the FM-POMDP setting. These results are proved in
Appendix A.2, A.3, A.4.
Proposed Masked-Inverse Kinematics (MIK+A). Masked inverse kinematics with actions
(MIK+A) achieves the correct Bayes-optimal classifier for the multi-step inverse model, with de-
pendence on only the agent-centric part of the state, i.e., st and st+k . Let st = ϕfs (õP(t,m) ), st+k =
ϕbs (õF(t+k,n) ), ξt = ϕξ (õ1:t ), ξt+k = ϕξ (õ1:t+k ), zt = (st , ξt ). Let k ∼ U (1, D) . The following
result is proved in the appendix for any agent-centric policy π:
                       ∀k ≥ 1,      Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õF(t+k,n) ) = Pπ (at |st , st+k )               (1)

The MIK objective is essentially the same, except that there is no conditioning on past actions:
Pπ (at |oP(t,m) , oF(t+k,n) ), and would have the same Bayes-optimal classifier result if we relaxed the
past and future decodability assumptions to not require actions.
All History (AH) Objective. When we condition our encoder on the entire history, the Bayes-
optimal multi-step inverse model reduces to a one-step inverse model. Intuitively, the optimal model
could simulate an internal one-step inverse model and store these predicted actions in an internal
buffer, and then retrieve them as necessary to predict the true actions. The one-step inverse model
fails to learn the full agent-centric state, with counterexamples given by Efroni et al. (2022d); Lamb
et al. (2022). Let st = ϕs (o1:t ), st+k = ϕs (o1:(t+k) ), ξt = ϕξ (o1:t ), ξt+k = ϕξ (o1:t+k ), zt =
(st , ξt ). Let k ∼ U (1, D). In Appendix A.3, we prove the following:
                          ∀k ≥ 1,      Pπ (at |o1:t , o1:(t+k) ) = Pπ (at |st , st+1 )

All History with actions (AH+A) Objective. If the observations are augmented with the last action,
then these actions can simply be stored to a buffer and retrieved to solve the multi-step inverse
modeling problem. Thus the Bayes optimal multi-step inverse model in this setting can have no
dependence on the state. In the appendix we prove the following but note that it’s a straightforward
consequence of this objective conditioning on the action at which is being predicted:
                                  ∀k ≥ 1,      Pπ (at |õ1:t , õ1:(t+k) ) = 1

Forward-Jump Inverse Kinematics (FJ) Objective. By an almost identical proof as the above,
this algorithm achieves the correct Bayes optimal classifier.
              ∀k,    k > m,      k ≥ 1,     Pπ (at |oP(t,m) , oP(t+k,m) ) = Pπ (at |st , st+k ).        (2)
              ∀k,    k ≤ m,      k ≥ 1,     Pπ (at |oP(t,m) , oP(t+k,m) ) = Pπ (at |st , st+1 ).        (3)

Forward-Jump Inverse Kinematics with Actions (FJ+A) Objective Likewise, when conditioning
on actions we have:
              ∀k,    k > m,      k ≥ 1,     Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õP(t+k,m) ) = Pπ (at |st , st+k ).      (4)
              ∀k,    k ≤ m,      k ≥ 1,     Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õP(t+k,m) ) = 1.                        (5)


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   D ISCOVERING THE C OMPLETE AGENT-C ENTRIC S TATE

In previous section we described several inverse kinematic terms that may be useful for discovering
the agent-centric state representation of an FM-POMDP. We now claim that among this set of inverse
kinematics terms, the MIK+A is the most favorable one: the main result from Lamb et al. (2022)
(Theorem 5.1) implies that MIK+A recovers the agent-centric state representation. Further, we
elaborate on the failure of the other inverse kinematic objectives.
MIK+A Discovers the Full Agent-Centric State. Given successful recovery of the Bayes optimal
classifier for the multi-step inverse model, with dependence on only st and st+k , we can reuse
the theory from (Lamb et al., 2022), with slight modifications, as given in the appendix. The most
important modification is that we roll-out for m+n+D steps, to ensure that we have enough steps to
decode st and st+k , where D is the diameter of the agent-centric state. With the above, the reduction
to Theorem 5.1 of Lamb et al. (2022) is natural. There, the authors showed that, under proper
assumptions, if an encoder ϕ can represent inverse kinematic terms of the form Pπ (at |st , st+k ) for
all k ∈ [D] then ϕ is the mapping from observations to the agent-centric state.
Failure of All History (AH) for Discovering Agent-Centric State Representation. We showed
that the AH objective can be satisfied by only solving the one-step inverse objective p(at |st , st+1 ). It
was shown in (Rakelly et al., 2021; Lamb et al., 2022; Efroni et al., 2022d) that the one-step inverse
objective learns an undercomplete representation. Intuitively, it may incorrectly merge states which
have locally similar dynamics but are actually far apart in the environment.
Failure of Forward-Jump (FJ and FJ+A) for Discovering Agent-Centric State Representation.
Since the Forward-Jump objectives only rely on past-decodability, it does not have correct Bayes
optimal classifiers for all k ≤ m. Namely, it does not recover the inverse model with k in this
regime. This prevents us from applying the result of Lamb et al. (2022), since it requires the set of
all inverse models k ∈ [D], wheres FJ only has access to k ∈ {1, m, m + 1, .., D} but not for k in
intermediate values.
Nevertheless, this give rise on an intriguing question: is there a counterexample that shows FJ or
FJ+A does not work? We establish a counterexample in which the k = 1 examples are insufficient
to distinguish all of the states and where the k > 3 examples are useless. We will then construct an
observation space for an FM-POMDP with m = 3, which will then cause both the FJ and FJ+A
objectives to fail.
Consider the following agent-centric
state with two components s =
(sA , sB ). sA receives four values
{0, 1, 2, 3} and follows the dynam-
ics sA         A
      t+1 = (st + at ) mod 4, which
is a simple cycle with a period of 4,
controlled by the action a ∈ {0, 1}.
sB = at−1 simply records the pre-
vious action. We have an exogenous Figure 2: The Forward Jump objective fails in a counterex-
periodic signal ct+1 = (ct + 1) mod ample where the observation can only be seen once every m
4. This FM-POMDP’s agent-centric steps, preventing the use of k ≤ m inverse kinematics exam-
state has a diameter of D = 3, and ples, whereas the inverse examples with k > m provide no
the true state can be recovered with signal for separating the states.
k from 1 to 3. However, all multi-
step inverse problems, under the random policy, with k > 3 has the same probability of 0.5 for both
actions. Concretely, for any plan to reach a goal with k > 3 steps, multiplying the actions by -1 will
still yield an equally optimal plan with respect to sA , while only the last action taken has an effect
on sB , so the distribution over the first action will be uniform (MDP shown in appendix figure 8).
Now, let’s turn to the construction of the observation space of this FM-POMDP. We will use the
counter ct to control when the state can be seen in the observation, so if ct = 0, we have ot = st ,
whereas if ct ̸= 0, we have ot = −1 (blank observation). It is apparent that if ct ̸= 0, that we can’t
decode the state from the current observation. However, with a history of m = 3 past observations,
we can decode the state by finding st when it is present in the observation (i.e. when ot ̸= −1), and
then simulate the last m steps using the previous actions recorded in the observations. A simplified
version of this construction (showing only sA and with m = 2) is shown in Figure 2.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                         Complete        Assumes        Assumes        Discards
                                                Correct Bayes
    Methods   Objective                                                  Agent-Centric   Past           Future         Exogenous
                                                Optimal Classifier
                                                                         State           Decodability   Decodability   Noise
    AH           Pπ (at |o1:t , o1:(t+k) )              ✗                      ✗              ✓              ✗             ✓
    AH+A         Pπ (at |õ1:t , õ1:(t+k) )            ✗                      ✗              ✓              ✗             ✓
    FJ        Pπ (at |oP(t,m) , oP(t+k,m) )             ✓                      ✗              ✓              ✗             ✓
    FJ+A      Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õP(t+k,m) )           ✓                      ✗              ✓              ✗             ✓
    MIK       Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õF(t+k,n) )           ✓                      ✗              ✓              ✓             ✓
    MIK+A     Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õF(t+k,n) )           ✓                      ✓              ✓              ✓             ✓

Table 1: A summary of the baseline inverse kinematics approaches which we study. Our final
proposed method Masked Inverse Kinematics with actions (MIK+A) has a significant advantages
over the alternatives: it can provably recover the agent centric state representation.
To reiterate the claim of the proof, we constructed a FM-POMDP where it is necessary to use k = 2
and k = 3 multi-step model examples to separate out the states correctly. Yet the state can only be
perfectly decoded with m = 3 steps of history. Thus, the FJ and FJ+A objectives fail to learn the
correct representation in this FM-POMDP.

4      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We experimentally validate whether the set of inverse
kinematic based objectives can recover the agent-centric
state in the FM-POMDP setting. To do this, we first evalu-
ate the objectives in a partially observable navigation envi-
ronment (section 4.1) and then study whether these objec-
tives can learn useful representations, in presence of par-
                                                                Figure 3: Visualization of the four
tially observable offline datasets (section 4.2).
                                                                navigation environments. From left to
                                                                right: no curtain, one curtain, three cur-
4.1 D ISCOVERING S TATE FROM                                    tains, and first-person environments.
PARTIALLY-O BSERVED NAVIGATION E NVIRONMENTS All include some degree of partial
Experiment Setup We first consider the navigation observability.
environments in Figure 3, with other figures and details in
Appendix figures 9 and 10, and introduce partial observability in these tasks. Details on experimen-
tal setup are provided in appendix D.1. In this problem, m-step past decodability is achieved with
m=1. The n-step future decodability assumption subtly violated in cases where the agent collides
into a wall and loses all of its velocity. The agent’s velocity before hitting the wall is then not
decodable from any number of future observations. We also consider an optional Self-Prediction
(SP) objective ||sg(st+k ) − f (st , k), where sg refers to stopping gradients. This auxiliary objective,
inspired by Guo et al. (2022); Tang et al. (2023) can help to improve the quality of representations.
Experiment Results In the acceleration-control experi-
ments (Figure 4, Table 2), we consistently found that                             No        Three
MIK+A has the best performance, which is aligned with             Objective
                                                                               Curtain     Curtains
theory. The theory also suggests that AH+A has no state          No History      47.6        52.7
dependence, and we indeed see that it has the worst per-             AH           9.9        13.2
formance, when the maximum k is small. Another strik-              AH+A          18.8        18.9
                                                                     FJ          10.0        15.3
ing result is that AH with any maximum k is theoretically
                                                                    FJ+A          5.8        7.2
equivalent to AH with maximum k of 1, and these two                 MIK          10.1        14.7
methods indeed have very similar errors experimentally.           MIK+A           6.1        7.4
Further evidence comes from investigating the action pre-
diction losses (Table 5), where we see that AH+A has Table 2: State Estimation Errors (%) on
nearly zero error while AH has a very low loss, supporting various tasks with exogenous noise.
our claim that these objectives fail because they reduce the bayes optimal predictor to an overly sim-
ple learning objective. Another finding is that FJ+A and MIK+A are fairly similar, which suggests
that the theoretical counterexample for FJ+A may not imply poor performance. Extra experiment
results of adding next-state prediction or exogenous noise are provided in appendix D.1.

4.2     V ISUAL O FFLINE RL WITH PARTIAL O BSERVABILITY

We validate the proposed objectives in challenging pixel-based visual offline RL tasks, using the
vd4rl benchmark dataset Lu et al. (2022). For our experiments, we follow the same setup as Islam


                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                100                     No-Curtain Task                                                      100                      One-Curtain Task


    State Prediction Accuracy


                                                                                                 State Prediction Accuracy
                                90                                                                                           90

                                80                                                                                           80

                                70                                                                                           70
                                                                                 No History                                                                                                No History
                                60                                               AH                                          60                                                            AH
                                                                                 AH + A                                                                                                    AH + A
                                                                                 FJ                                                                                                        FJ
                                                                                 FJ + A                                                                                                    FJ + A
                                50                                               MIK                                         50                                                            MIK
                                                                                 MIK + A                                                                                                   MIK + A

                                      SP          No SP           K=1     K=15                                                         SP         No SP           K=1               K=15


                             100                   Three-Curtain Task                                                     100                         First Person Task
 State Prediction Accuracy


                                                                                              State Prediction Accuracy
                                90                                                                                           90

                                80                                                                                           80

                                70                                                                                           70
                                                                             No History                                                                                                 No History
                                60                                           AH                                              60                                                         AH
                                                                             AH + A                                                                                                     AH + A
                                                                             FJ                                                                                                         FJ
                                                                             FJ + A                                                                                                     FJ + A
                                50                                           MIK                                             50                                                         MIK
                                                                             MIK + A                                                                                                    MIK + A

                                      SP         No SP            K=1     K=15                                                         SP        No SP            K=1               K=15

Figure 4: We compare state estimation performance (higher is better) across our various proposed
methods. We compare action-conditioned and action-free variants while also considering a self-
prediction auxiliary loss and the maximum prediction span K. We omit FJ and FJ+A in the maxi-
mum K = 1 case because of equivalence to AH and AH+A with a shorter history.

                                                                                                                RNN Encoder
                                                                                                                  Output


                                                                                                                                            MIK + A       Freeze
                                                                                                                                                      Representation
                                                                                                                                   +


                                                                                                                                                                       Offline RL Algorithm
                                       OFFLINE VISUAL
                                          DATASET

                                                                                                                  Backward RNN
                                                                                                                    for Future
                                                                                                                    Sequences


Figure 5: Illustration of the visual offline RL experiment setup, in presence of partial observ-
ability. We use a forward and backward sequence model (RNN encoder) to handle past and future
observation sequences, to achieve latent state discovery in FM-POMDPs.

et al. (2023), where we pre-train the representations from the visual observations and then perform
fine-tuning on the fixed representations using the TD3+BC offline RL algorithm. In our experi-
ments, we compare results using several variations of our proposed objectives, along with several
other baselines. We mainly compare with five other baselines, namely ACRO (Islam et al., 2023),
DRIML (Mazoure et al., 2020), HOMER (Misra et al., 2020), CURL (Laskin et al., 2020) and
1-step inverse action prediction (Pathak et al., 2017a).
Experiment Setup : We consider an offline RL setting with partial observations, as illustrated in
figure 5. To do this, we use the existing vd4rl benchmark dataset Lu et al. (2022), and to turn it
into a POMDP setting, we apply masking or patching on the observation space randomly. In other
words, for each batch of samples from the offline dataset, we randomly patch each observation with
a masking of size 16 × 16 to make the observations partially observable to the model. In addition
to that, since existing Lu et al. (2022) setup uses pixel-based observations and uses a framestacking
of 3, to make the setting even more challenging, we randomly zero out 2 out of 3 stacked frames.
We do this so that the model can only see both the stacked frames and each frame partially; with the
goal to see if our proposed objectives using a forward and backward running sequence model can be
more robust with the learnt representations.
Experiment Results : Our experimental results show that in presence of partial observability, most
of the existing baselines as in Islam et al. (2023) can fail considerably, for different domains and


                                                                                                                             7
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    datasets. In contrast, when we consider the history information and also additionally take into ac-
    count the action information, then performance of the proposed models can improve significantly.
    Note that all our experiments here only consider the pixel-based datasets from Lu et al. (2022) with
    only adding partial observability, without considering any exogenous noise in the datasets as in the
    setups in Islam et al. (2023). Figure 6 shows that in presence of partial observability, all the consid-
    ered baselines can fail considerably and performance degrades significantly compared to what was
    reported in the fully observed setting. In comparison, the proposed objectives can be more robust
    in partial observability, and notably our key objective (MIK+A) can perform significantly compared
    to other model ablations. Experimental results show that MIK + A can perform significantly better
    comopared to baselines, in almost all of the tasks. Figure 7 shows results for an even more difficult
    experiment setup with randomly zeroing stacked frames. Experimental results show that MIK + A
    can still perform relatively better compared to other baselines, in this difficult setting, since the for-
    ward and backward sequence models capturing the past and future observations can better capture
    sufficient information from the partial observations to fully recover the agent-centric state.

                               cheetah_run_medium_expert                                                                    cheetah_run_medium                                                         walker_walk_medium_expert                                                      walker_walk_medium
                     450                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    450
                                                                                                                                                                                             800
                                                                                                    450
                     400                                                                                                                                                                     700
                                                             AH                                     400                                               AH                                                                             AH                                     400                                 AH
Cumulative Returns


                                                                               Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                        Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Returns
                     350                                     AH + A                                                                                   AH + A                                 600                                     AH + A                                                                     AH + A
                                                                                                    350
                                                             MIK + A                                                                                  MIK + A                                500                                     MIK + A                                350                                 MIK + A
                     300
                                                             CURL                                   300                                               CURL                                                                           CURL                                                                       CURL
                                                                                                                                                                                             400
                     250                                     ACRO                                                                                     ACRO                                                                           ACRO                                                                       ACRO
                                                                                                    250                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                             DRIML                                                                                    DRIML                                  300                                     DRIML                                                                      DRIML
                     200                                     HOMER                                  200                                               HOMER                                                                          HOMER                                                                      HOMER
                                                                                                                                                                                             200
                     150
                                                             1-Step Inverse                         150
                                                                                                                                                      1-Step Inverse                                                                 1-Step Inverse                         250                                 1-Step Inverse
                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                           4     5      6                7      8         9                                            4   5     6                7      8         9                               4     5      6                7      8         9                               4   5    6                7      8         9
                                            Iterations                   1e3                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                               Iterations                   1e3                                           Iterations                   1e3



    Figure 6: Visual offline datasets from Lu et al. (2022) with patching (16 × 16) to make the ob-
    servations partially observable. We compare several of the proposed objectives discussed earlier,
    along with few baselines, using the representation learning setup in Islam et al. (2023). Experimental
    results are compared across 3 different domains (Cheetah-Run, Walker-Walk and Humanoid-Walk)
    and 2 different datasets (Expert and Medium-Expert), across 5 different random seeds.
                               cheetah_run_medium_expert                                                                   humanoid_walk_medium                                                        walker_walk_medium_expert                                                      walker_walk_medium
                                                                                                                   6                                                                         120                                                                            225
                     175
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                     150                                                                                           5                                                                         100
                                                             AH                                                                                       AH                                                                             AH                                                                         AH
Cumulative Returns


                                                                                              Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                        Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Returns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            175
                     125
                                                             AH + A                                                4
                                                                                                                                                      AH + A                                                                         AH + A                                 150                                 AH + A
                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                     100                                     MIK + A                                                                                  MIK + A                                                                        MIK + A                                                                    MIK + A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            125
                      75
                                                             CURL                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                      CURL                                                                           CURL                                                                       CURL
                                                                                                                                                                                              60                                                                            100
                                                             ACRO                                                                                     ACRO                                                                           ACRO                                                                       ACRO
                      50                                     DRIML                                                                                    DRIML                                                                          DRIML                                   75                                 DRIML
                                                                                                                   2
                                                             HOMER                                                                                    HOMER                                   40                                     HOMER                                                                      HOMER
                      25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                             1-Step Inverse                                        1
                                                                                                                                                      1-Step Inverse                                                                 1-Step Inverse                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1-Step Inverse
                       0                                                                                                                                                                      20
                           4     5      6                7      8         9                                            4   5     6                7      8         9                               4     5      6                7      8         9                               4   5    6                7      8         9
                                            Iterations                   1e3                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                               Iterations                   1e3                                           Iterations                   1e3



    Figure 7: A more challenging setting where in addition to the patching of observations, we further
    apply randomly zeroing of frame-stacking. We apply framestacking for visual observations, where
    to make the task more difficult and partially observable, we randomly zero out 2 out of 3 frames, on
    top of the masked observations.

     5                         R ELATED W ORK
    Our work builds up on two closely related line of work : (a) on short-term memory POMDPs and
    (b) learning agent-centric latent states. We describe closely related work on partially observable
    settings, both theoretical and empirical, and discuss why existing works fail to fully recover the
    agent-centric latent state in a partially observed setting.
    Theoretical Research on FM-POMDPs. Efroni et al. (2022b); Liu et al. (2022); Zhan et al.
    (2022); Wang et al. (2022a) studied finite-sample guarantees under closely related m-step past and
    n-step future decodability assumptions. Nevertheless, their algorithms are currently impossible to
    scale and implement with standard oracles (such as log-likelihood minimization) since it requires
    an optimistic optimization over a set of functions .Further, unlike our reward-free setting, their
    algorithm is dependent on having a reward signal, whereas our work focuses on reward-free
    representation learning. Lastly, these works did not considered the high-dimensional problem in the
    presence of exogenous and time correlated noise.
    Empirical Research on POMDPs. Partial observability is a central challenge in practical reinforce-
    ment learning settings and, as such, it has been the focus of a large body of empirical work. Seminal
    large scale empirical deep RL research has considered serious partial observability, such as the Ope-
    nAI Five program for Dota 2 (OpenAI et al., 2019) and the DeepMind AlphaStar system (Mathieu
    et al., 2023). Much of this work has used a recurrent neural network or other sequence model to
    handle a state with history. While much of this work is focused on directly learning a policy or
    value function (Hausknecht & Stone, 2017), these approaches will fail when reward is absent. Other


                                                                                                                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


work has learned a recurrent forward model to predict observations as well (Igl et al., 2018; Hafner
et al., 2019b; 2020), yet this will fail when exogenous noise is dominant. To our knowledge, none of
these DeepRL POMDP works have considered our proposed setting of learning agent-centric state
with inverse kinematics. Ni et al. (2022) showed an extensive empirical benchmark where recur-
rent online RL is used for POMDPs. This differs from our work principally in that it’s empirical
and focused on reward-signal, whereas our approach is reward-free and the motivation for our loss
objectives is a consequence of asymptotic theory we develop.
Research on Agent-Centric States and Inverse Kinematics. The primary line of theoretical
research on inverse kinematics and agent-centric states is exclusively concerned with the MDP
setting (Lamb et al., 2022; Efroni et al., 2022a;c;d; Islam et al., 2023; Mhammedi et al., 2023;
Hutter & Hansen, 2022). In particular, much of this work has focused on analysis showing that the
agent-centric state can be provably recovered under some assumptions. The PPE method (Efroni
et al., 2022d) introduced multi-step inverse kinematics in the deterministic dynamics, episodic
setting with fixed start states. Lamb et al. (2022) extended this to the non-episodic setting, while
Efroni et al. (2022a) handles a stochastic dynamics setting. Tomar et al. (2023); Islam et al. (2023)
considered multi-step inverse models for offline-RL, while only considering the fully-observed
setting. While Brandfonbrener et al. (2023) used pre-trained multi-step and one-step inverse models
for online RL, still in the fully-observed setting. Pathak et al. (2017b); Shelhamer et al. (2017);
Badia et al. (2020); Schmeckpeper et al. (2020); Rakelly et al. (2021) all use one-step inverse
objective in fully-observed setting to improve empirical performance. Bharadhwaj et al. (2022)
InfoPower used a one-step inverse objective along with an RNN to encode the history. Wang et al.
(2022c) showed discovery of agent-centric state using causal independence tests and was restricted
to the fully-observed setting. Wang et al. (2022b) studied learning a recurrent forward model with a
factorization of the state space into agent-centric and exogenous components. This method naturally
handles POMDPs, but requires learning both the agent-centric and exogenous states to satisfy the
future observation prediction objective, so differs significantly from our algorithmic approach, that
allows to directly avoid learning information on the exogenous noise.
Work related to both POMDPs and Multi-step Inverse Kinematics. To our knowledge, ours
is the first work to explicitly consider inverse kinematics for learning agent-centric states in the
POMDP setting. Our counter-examples to AH and AH+A objectives, where the model can fail to
learn the state by memorizing actions, is reminiscent of the causal confusion for imitation learning
work (De Haan et al., 2019) . Baker et al. (2022) considers a one-step inverse model using a
transformer encoder, to learn an action-labeling model. While this is equivalent to our All History
(AH) approach, the focus of that work was not on learning representations. Sun et al. (2023);
Goyal et al. (2022) consider a sequence learning setup where a bidirectional sequence model masks
observations and actions in the input and predicts the masked actions. While these approaches
seem consistent with our theoretical analysis, they use a bidirectional model and therefore learn an
entangled model of ϕfs and ϕbs in their internal representations, where the correct usage for planning
and exploration is unclear. This makes their setting different from our focus on learning an explicit
state representation and their work doesn’t provide a theoretical analysis,
6   C ONCLUSION
Partially observable settings in RL are often difficult to work with, theoretically without strong
assumptions, and empirically with a implementable algorithm, despite the generality of non-
Markovian observations that can arise naturally in practice. To recover the agent-centric full latent
state that can be considered as an information state, is quite difficult in the FM-POMDP setting.
Several works using multi-step inverse kinematics has recently been proposed for latent state
discovery, in the theoretical and empirical RL communities. However, despite the popularity, how
to apply multi-step inverse kinematics in the FM-POMDP setting has not been previously studied.
Our work shows that it’s possible to succeed in discovering agent-centric states in FM-POMDPs
while many intuitive algorithms fail. We made the assumptions of past-decodability (Efroni et al.,
2022b) while introducing a new future-decodability assumption. In this work, we demonstrated
several examples showing that the full agent-centric state can be recovered from partially observ-
able, offline pre-collected data for acceleration and control. Additionally, we showed that MIK+A,
taking the action information from past and future into account, can be effective for learning a latent
representation that can improve performance empirically on a challenging partially observable
offline RL task. A natural topic for future work is developing an online algorithm which discovers
a policy that achieves these decodability properties rather than assuming them.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 507–517. PMLR, 2020.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokhov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11795, 2022.
Bram Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 14, 2001.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Dumitru Erhan, and Sergey Levine. Informa-
  tion prioritization through empowerment in visual model-based RL. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  DfUjyyRW90.
David Brandfonbrener, Ofir Nachum, and Joan Bruna. Inverse dynamics pretraining learns good
  representations for multitask imitation, 2023.
Yuwen Cheng, Lili Wu, and Shu Yang. Enhancing treatment effect estimation: A model robust
  approach integrating randomized experiments and external controls using the double penalty in-
  tegration estimator. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 381–390. PMLR, 2023.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
  gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Thomas G. Dietterich, George Trimponias, and Zhitang Chen. Discovering and removing exoge-
  nous state variables and rewards for reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1806.01584, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01584.
Yonathan Efroni, Dylan J Foster, Dipendra Misra, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford.
  Sample-efficient reinforcement learning in the presence of exogenous information. (Accepted
  for publication at) Conference on Learning Theory, 2022a.
Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5832–
  5850. PMLR, 2022b.
Yonathan Efroni, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Sparsity in partially
  controllable linear systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5851–5860.
  PMLR, 2022c.
Yonathan Efroni, Dipendra Misra, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford.
  Provably filtering exogenous distractors using multistep inverse dynamics. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022d. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=RQLLzMCefQu.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 2170–2179. PMLR, 2019.
Anirudh Goyal, Abram L. Friesen, Andrea Banino, Theophane Weber, Nan Rosemary Ke,
  Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Peter C. Humphreys, Ksenia
  Konyushkova, Laurent Sifre, Michal Valko, Simon Osindero, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess,
  and Charles Blundell. Retrieval-augmented reinforcement learning, 2022.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka Grabska-
  Barwińska, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago Ramalho, John Agapiou,
  et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature, 538
  (7626):471–476, 2016.

Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Shantanu Thakoor, Miruna Pı̂slar, Bernardo Avila Pires, Florent Altché,
  Corentin Tallec, Alaa Saade, Daniele Calandriello, Jean-Bastien Grill, Yunhao Tang, et al. Byol-
  explore: Exploration by bootstrapped prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08332, 2022.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019a.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 09–15 Jun
  2019b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hafner19a.html.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination, 2020.

Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps,
 2017.

Marcus Hutter and Steven Hansen. Uniqueness and complexity of inverse mdp models, 2022.

Maximilian Igl, Luisa Zintgraf, Tuan Anh Le, Frank Wood, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep variational
 reinforcement learning for pomdps, 2018.

Riashat Islam, Manan Tomar, Alex Lamb, Yonathan Efroni, Hongyu Zang, Aniket Rajiv Didolkar,
  Dipendra Misra, Xin Li, Harm Van Seijen, Remi Tachet Des Combes, et al. Principled offline rl
  in the presence of rich exogenous information. 2023.

Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. The cifar-10 dataset. online: http://www. cs.
  toronto. edu/kriz/cifar. html, 55(5), 2014.

Alex Lamb, Riashat Islam, Yonathan Efroni, Aniket Didolkar, Dipendra Misra, Dylan Foster, Lekan
  Molu, Rajan Chari, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Guaranteed discovery of control-
  endogenous latent states with multi-step inverse models, 2022.

Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5639–
 5650. PMLR, 2020.

Lihong Li, Thomas J Walsh, and Michael L Littman. Towards a unified theory of state abstraction
  for mdps. In AI&M, 2006.

Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5175–5220. PMLR, 2022.

Cong Lu, Philip J. Ball, Tim G. J. Rudner, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael A. Osborne, and Yee Whye
  Teh. Challenges and opportunities in offline reinforcement learning from visual observations.
  CoRR, abs/2206.04779, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.04779. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2206.04779.

Michaël Mathieu, Sherjil Ozair, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Caglar Gulcehre, Shangtong Zhang, Ray
 Jiang, Tom Le Paine, Richard Powell, Konrad Żołna, Julian Schrittwieser, David Choi, Petko
 Georgiev, Daniel Toyama, Aja Huang, Roman Ring, Igor Babuschkin, Timo Ewalds, Mahyar
 Bordbar, Sarah Henderson, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Aäron van den Oord, Wojciech Mar-
 ian Czarnecki, Nando de Freitas, and Oriol Vinyals. Alphastar unplugged: Large-scale offline
 reinforcement learning, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bogdan Mazoure, Remi Tachet des Combes, Thang Doan, Philip Bachman, and R. Devon Hjelm.
  Deep reinforcement and infomax learning. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Had-
  sell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS
  2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2020/hash/26588e932c7ccfa1df309280702fe1b5-Abstract.html.

Zakaria Mhammedi, Dylan J. Foster, and Alexander Rakhlin. Representation learning with multi-
  step inverse kinematics: An efficient and optimal approach to rich-observation rl, 2023.

Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state ab-
  straction and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 6961–6971. PMLR, 2020.

Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning
  for hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01257, 2018.

Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free rl can be a
  strong baseline for many pomdps, 2022.

OpenAI, :, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Debiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique P. d. O. Pinto, Jonathan
  Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie
  Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning, 2019.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the
  34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11
  August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2778–2787. PMLR,
  2017a. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/pathak17a.html.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017b.

Alexander Pritzel, Benigno Uria, Sriram Srinivasan, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Oriol Vinyals,
  Demis Hassabis, Daan Wierstra, and Charles Blundell. Neural episodic control. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 2827–2836. PMLR, 2017.

Kate Rakelly, Abhishek Gupta, Carlos Florensa, and Sergey Levine. Which mutual-information
  representation learning objectives are sufficient for control?, 2021.

Karl Schmeckpeper, Annie Xie, Oleh Rybkin, Stephen Tian, Kostas Daniilidis, Sergey Levine, and
  Chelsea Finn. Learning predictive models from observation and interaction. In European Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, pp. 708–725. Springer, 2020.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.

Evan Shelhamer, Parsa Mahmoudieh, Max Argus, and Trevor Darrell. Loss is its own reward: Self-
  supervision for reinforcement learning, 2017.

Jayakumar Subramanian, Amit Sinha, Raihan Seraj, and Aditya Mahajan. Approximate information
  state for approximate planning and reinforcement learning in partially observed systems. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):483–565, 2022.

Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish Kapoor.
  Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yunhao Tang, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Bernardo Avila Pires, Yash Chan-
  dak, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Charline Le Lan, Clare Lyle,
  András György, Shantanu Thakoor, Will Dabney, Bilal Piot, Daniele Calandriello, and Michal
  Valko. Understanding self-predictive learning for reinforcement learning. In Andreas Krause,
  Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 33632–33656. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/tang23d.html.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:24261–
   24272, 2021.
Manan Tomar, Riashat Islam, Sergey Levine, and Philip Bachman. Ignorance is bliss: Robust control
 via information gating, 2023.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Embed to control partially observed sys-
  tems: Representation learning with provable sample efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13476,
  2022a.
Tongzhou Wang, Simon S Du, Antonio Torralba, Phillip Isola, Amy Zhang, and Yuandong
  Tian. Denoised mdps: Learning world models better than the world itself. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.15477, 2022b.
Zizhao Wang, Xuesu Xiao, Zifan Xu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Causal dynamics learning for
  task-independent state abstraction, 2022c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.13452.
Lili Wu and Shu Yang. Integrative r-learner of heterogeneous treatment effects combining ex-
  perimental and observational studies. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp.
  904–926. PMLR, 2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022.
Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
 invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.10742, 2020.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
In the appendix, we include proofs and counterexamples for our theoretical results, and environment
details and additional results for the experimental setup.

A     T HEORY D ETAILS
A.1   S TRUCTURAL L EMMA

We now describe a structural result of the agent-centric FM-POMDP model, closely following the
proof in Efroni et al. (2022d). We say that π is an agent-centric policy if it is not a function of
the exogenous noise. Formally, for any history of action-augmented observations o1 and o2 , if
ϕf⋆,s (o1 ) = ϕf⋆,s (o2 ) then π(· | o1 ) = π(· | ϕf⋆,s (o2 )). Let Pπ (s′ | s, h) be the probability to
observe the control-endogenous latent state s = ϕf⋆,s (õP(h,m) ), h time steps after observing step t,
s′ = ϕb⋆,s (õP(t+h,m) ) and following policy π, starting with action a. Note that the claim will also
hold if s or s′ use either the forward or the backward encoder. Let the exogenous state be defined
similarly as ξ = ϕ⋆ξ (õ1:t ) and ξ ′ = ϕ⋆ξ (õ1:t+h ). The following result shows that, when executing
an endogenous policy, the future h time step distribution of the observation process conditioning on
any o has a decoupling property.
Lemma 1 (Decoupling property for endogenous policies Efroni et al. (2022d)). Let µ be the initial
distribution. Assume that the agent-centric and exogenous part is decoupled for the initial distri-
bution, µ(s, ξ) = µ(s)µ(ξ), and that π is an endogenous policy. Then, for any t ≥ 1 it holds that
Pπ (o′ | o, a, h) = q(o′ | s′ , ξ ′ )Pπ (s′ | s, a, h)P(ξ ′ | ξ, h).

This lemma is a key result for analyzing the Bayes optimal solution of the different inverse kinematic
objectives described in this work. We assume that the policy only depends on the state so that it rules
out the known hard problems with unobserved confounders. Some recent work in causal inference
literature mitigate the unobserved confounding issue by integrating the offline and online datasets
(Wu & Yang, 2022; Cheng et al., 2023).


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   P ROOF THAT THE MIK+A OBJECTIVE HAS THE RIGHT BAYES OPTIMAL CLASSIFIER

We analyze the Bayes optimal classifier of the MIK+A objective, by first applying Bayes theorem
on the action at and the future observation sequence starting from t+k. We then use the decodability
assumption to introduce the latent variable zt+k and then apply the Markov assumption on the latent
space on step t + k. We then cancel the probability over future observations because it has no action
dependence and also cancel the exogenous-noise part of the latent state.
We use the following notation for all t:


                                              st = ϕfs (õP(t,m) )
                                         st+k = ϕbs (õF(t+k,n) )
                                                  ξt = ϕξ (õ1:t )
                                             ξt+k = ϕξ (õ1:t+k )
                                                  zt = (st , ξt ).


We have that for all k > t:

                                               Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |õm(t) , at )π(at |õP(t,m) )
            Pπ (at |õP(t,m) , õF(t+k,n) ) = P                              ′      ′
                                              a′ Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |õP(t,m) , a )π(a |õP(t,m) )
                                          Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |zt , at )π(at |zt )
                                        =P                          ′     ′
                                          a′ Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |zt , a )π(a |zt )
                                          Pπ (õF(t+k,n) , zt+k |zt , at )π(at |zt )
                                        =P                                 ′     ′
                                          a′ Pπ (õF(t+k,n) , zt+k |zt , a )π(a |zt )
                                          Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |zt+k )Pπ (zt+k |zt , at )π(at |zt )
                                        =P                                         ′     ′
                                           a′ Pπ (õF(t+k,n) |zt+k )p(zt+k |zt , a )π(a |zt )
                                            Pπ (zt+k |zt , at )π(at |zt )
                                        =P                      ′     ′
                                             a′ Pπ (zt+k |zt , a )π(a |zt )
                                            Pπ (st+k |st , at )P(ξt+k |ξt )π(at |st )
                                        =P                      ′                 ′
                                             a′ Pπ (st+k |st , a )P(ξt+k |ξt )π(a |st )
                                            Pπ (st+k |st , at )π(at |st )
                                        =P                      ′     ′
                                             a′ Pπ (st+k |st , a )π(a |st )
                                        = Pπ (at |st , st+k ).


The first relation holds by Bayes rule. The third relation holds since zt+k is a deterministic function
of õF(t+k,n) under the future decodability assumption. The forth relation holds by Bayes rule, along
with the assumption that the future observations following t + k are conditionally independent with
(zt , at ) given zt+k (since we assume π on time step t only depends on st , since it’s an agent-centric
policy). The sixth relation holds by the decoupling lemma, Lemma 1.


A.3   P ROOF THAT A LL -H ISTORY (AH) REDUCES TO ONE - STEP INVERSE MODEL

We analyze the Bayes-optimal classifier of the AH objective. We first apply Bayes theorem between
the observation sequence and the predicted action at . We then use the past-decodability assumption
to introduce latent variables zt and zt+1 . We apply the chain rule of probability and then markov
independence of the observations given the latent states. The observations conditioned on the latents
then cancel, and then the exogenous noise dynamics also cancel, leaving the one-step inverse model
over the latent states.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use the following notation for all t.
                                                     st = ϕfs (o1:t )
                                             st+k = ϕfs (o1:(t+k) )
                                                    ξt = ϕξ (o1:t )
                                               ξt+k = ϕξ (o1:t+k )
                                                     zt = (st , ξt )


The following relations hold.
P(at |o1:t , o1:t+k ) = P(at |o1:t+k )
                          P(o1:t+k |at )P(at )
                      =P                  ′     ′
                          a′ P(o1:t+k |a )P(a )
                          P(o1:t , o(t+1):t+k , zt , zt+1 |at )P(at )
                      =P                                        ′     ′
                          a′ P(o1:t , o(t+1):t+k , zt , zt+1 |a )P(a )
                      P(o1:t |at )P(zt |o1:t , at )P(zt+1 |o1:t , zt , at )P(o(t+1):t+k |o1:t , zt , zt+1 , at )P(at )
                    =P             ′                ′                      ′                                    ′      ′
                      a′ P(o1:t |a )P(zt |o1:t , a )P(zt+1 |o1:t , zt , a )P(o(t+1):t+k |o1:t , zt , zt+1 , a )P(a )
                      P(o1:t |at )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , at )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )P(at )
                    =P             ′                           ′                          ′
                      a′ P(o1:t |a )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , a )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )P(a )
                      P(o1:t )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , at )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )π(at |o1:t )
                    =P                                      ′                         ′
                      a′ P(o1:t )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , a )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )π(a |o1:t )
                      P(o1:t )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , at )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )π(at |st )
                    =P                                      ′                         ′
                      a′ P(o1:t )P(zt |o1:t )P(zt+1 |zt , a )P(o(t+1):t+k |zt+1 )π(a |st )
                        P(zt+1 |zt , at )π(at |st )
                    =P                     ′    ′
                         a′ P(zt+1 |zt , a )π(a |st )
                        P(st+1 |st , at )P(ξt+1 |ξt )π(at |st )
                    =P                     ′                ′
                         a′ P(st+1 |st , a )P(ξt+1 |ξt )π(a |st )
                        P(st+1 |st , at )π(at |st )
                    =P                     ′    ′
                         a′ P(st+1 |st , a )π(a |st )
                    = Pπ (at |st , st+1 ).
The second relation holds by Bayes rule. The third relation holds by since zt and zt+1 are deter-
ministic functions of the observation sequence by the decodability assumptions. The sixth relation
holds by using:
                                  P(o1:t | at )P(at ) = P(o1:t )π(at | o1:t )
due to Bayes rule. The seventh relation holds by the fact we assume π is agent centric. The ninth
relation holds by the decoupling lemma, Lemma 1.

A.4    P ROOF THAT A LL -H ISTORY WITH ACTIONS (AH+A) HAS NO S TATE D EPENDENCE

The Bayes-optimal classifier for the AH+A objective can be perfectly satisfied without using the
state, by simply memorizing the sequence of actions and retrieving them. Note that in practice, this
is easiest to achieve when the maximum K value is small.
The following relations holds for all k > t since there is an explicit conditioning in the probability
distribution.
                    P(at |x1:t , a1:t , x1:t+k , a1:t+k ) = P(at |a1:t+k ) = P(at |at ) = 1.
This implies the AH+A Bayes solution erases the information on the agent-centric state, since the
action can be directly predicted.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    F ORWARD J UMP C OUNTEREXAMPLE

Figure 8 contains a counter-example for the forward-jump (FJ) objective, for why FJ fails to capture
the agent-centric state in partial observability.


Figure 8: The full underlying MDP of the counterexample for the Forward Jump objective. Each of
the eight states shows (sA , sB ), with the coloring used to reflect sB and the action which can reach
it. The special property of this MDP is that its multi-step inverse model examples with k ≥ 4 are
uninformative while its k = 1 examples are insufficient. This creates a counterexample for methods
solely relying on past-decodability, because the length of history required to decode the state may
overlap and prevent access to the k = 2 and k = 3 inverse kinematics examples.


With a small computer program we generated the inverse kinematics examples for this MDP from
k = 1 to k = 10. First, we generated the 16368 inverse kinematic examples and verified that
examples with 4 ≤ k ≤ 10 have a uniform distribution for the first action.
All of the inverse kinematics examples up to k = 6 are included in a text file in the supplementary
materials. A subset where the initial state is either (0, −1) or (0, 1) is shown below to give a flavor
of the structure, in which k = 4 has uniform probability over the first action whereas k = 2 has
more useful inverse kinematic examples:
k = 2 examples:
(0, -1)→ (0, −1) via a:(1, -1)
(0, −1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, 1)
(0, −1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, -1)
(0, −1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, 1)
(0, 1) → (0, −1) via a:(1, -1)
(0, 1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, 1)
(0, 1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, -1)
(0, 1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, 1)

k = 4 examples:
(0, -1)→ (0, −1) via a:(-1, -1, -1, -1)
(0, −1) → (0, −1) via a:(-1, 1, 1, -1)
(0, −1) → (0, −1) via a:(1, -1, 1, -1)
(0, −1) → (0, −1) via a:(1, 1, -1, -1)
(0, −1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, -1, 1, 1)


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(0, −1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, 1, -1, 1)
(0, −1) → (0, 1) via a:(1, -1, -1, 1)
(0, −1) → (0, 1) via a:(1, 1, 1, 1)
(0, −1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, -1, 1, -1)
(0, −1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, 1, -1, -1)
(0, −1) → (2, −1) via a:(1, -1, -1, -1)
(0, −1) → (2, −1) via a:(1, 1, 1, -1)
(0, −1) → (2, 1) via a:(-1, -1, -1, 1)
(0, −1) → (2, 1) via a:(-1, 1, 1, 1)
(0, −1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, -1, 1, 1)
(0, −1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, 1, -1, 1)
(0, 1) → (0, −1) via a:(-1, -1, -1, -1)
(0, 1) → (0, −1) via a:(-1, 1, 1, -1)
(0, 1) → (0, −1) via a:(1, -1, 1, -1)
(0, 1) → (0, −1) via a:(1, 1, -1, -1)
(0, 1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, -1, 1, 1)
(0, 1) → (0, 1) via a:(-1, 1, -1, 1)
(0, 1) → (0, 1) via a:(1, -1, -1, 1)
(0, 1) → (0, 1) via a:(1, 1, 1, 1)
(0, 1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, -1, 1, -1)
(0, 1) → (2, −1) via a:(-1, 1, -1, -1)
(0, 1) → (2, −1) via a:(1, -1, -1, -1)
(0, 1) → (2, −1) via a:(1, 1, 1, -1)
(0, 1) → (2, 1) via a:(-1, -1, -1, 1)
(0, 1) → (2, 1) via a:(-1, 1, 1, 1)
(0, 1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, -1, 1, 1)
(0, 1) → (2, 1) via a:(1, 1, -1, 1)


C     P ROOF THAT MIK+A R ECOVERS THE FULL AGENT-C ENTRIC S TATE
The result in (Lamb et al., 2022) showed that given all examples of the multi-step inverse model
from 1 to the diameter of the MDP, achieves the full agent-centric state in a deterministic MDP. Our
claim is a reduction to this proof.

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
D.1     P OINTMASS E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

D.1.1    T OP V IEW
The navigation environments were based on maze2d-umaze from D4RL Fu et al. (2020). The state of
the navigation is four-dimensional, including the pointmass’ position x, y and velocities vx , vy . The
action space is acceleration in each dimension, ax , ay . For our observation, we disable rendering of
the goal in the environment, render images from a camera at the top of the maze, and down-scale
them to 100x100. For the curtain experiments, the environment was modified to include both one
and three visual occlusions. Environments are visualized in Figure 3.
The data is collected using the built-in planner with Gaussian noise added to the actions. Rather
than sampling goals from the fixed set of goals in D4RL, we allow goals to be sampled uniformly at
random inside of the maze. The data is collected with no resets, and goals are re-sampled when the
pointmass is sufficiently close to the target position.
The original environment is partially observable because it cannot capture the velocity of the point-
mass in a single frame. In addition to lacking velocity, the curtain environments also contain regions
where the pointmass is partially or fully occluded, and thus the position of the pointmass is not
observed. With three curtains, there is additional uncertainty in the position of the pointmass with
a single frame, as the pointmass could be under any of the three different curtains. A trajectory can
be seen in Figure 10.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Observations from the first person view environment. Unlike the top view, the global
position of the pointmass cannot always be directly inferred from a single observation. Additionally,
the maze has many different states with similar looking observations.


D.1.2   F IRST P ERSON V IEW
In addition to the original D4RL environment, we create a new environment that navigates the maze
from a first person view (FPV). To do this, we add an angle, θ and angular velocity, vθ to the
pointmass’ state and change the action space to angular velocity, vθ̃ and acceleration along the axis
the pointmass is facing, ax . The Cartesian velocities vx , vy , are computed as:
                           vx += ax · cos θ · ∆t, vy += ax · sin θ · ∆t
where ∆t the angular velocity is set to vθ̃ and the MuJoCo simulator is stepped for frame skip
timesteps. We render images from a camera on the pointmass facing the same direction as the axis
of acceleration and use that as our observation.
Since the action space has changed, we train a policy to navigate to goals using PPO Schulman et al.
(2017) and use the resulting policy to collect our dataset. Goals and images are modified the same
as in the top view environment.
The FPV environment is partially observable for a number of reasons. Like the top view, the veloc-
ities cannot be inferred from a single observation. In this environment, however, the global location
is not necessarily inferable from any one frame. As can be seen in Figure 9, there are a number of
different states in the maze with a similar observation. Having a history of previous observations is
required to keep track of the position. Figure 10 shows four frames from the environment.

D.1.3   E XPERIMENT I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND E XTRA E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
The total sample size of the offline data for training is 500k for each navigation environment, where
each sample is a (100×100×3)-dimensional image. At each training iteration, we randomly sample


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure 10: Trajectories from the three curtain and first person environments.


16 batches with time horizon 64 in each batch. The total number of iterations of training is 200k.
All the numbers presented in the tables and Figure 4 is the average over the last 10k iterations of the
training process. The state estimation errors are the average absolute errors between the true states
and the estimated states. The results across different baselines and different navigation environments
are provided in Table 3. Since all the numbers is bounded by 1, for better visualization, we provide
a barplot of state prediction accuracy (defined as (1 − state estimate error) × 100) in Figure 4.
With decomposing the state error into the position (observable) and velocity (observable) errors, the
results are provided in Table 4.

       Objective      Kmax      No-Curtain     One-Curtain     Three-Curtains     First Person
       No History       1          49.3           49.9              53.7              11.8
       No History      15          46.8           49.1              52.6              11.4
          AH            1           8.6           12.7              12.8               5.3
          AH           15           8.9           12.0              11.8               4.6
        AH+A            1          44.3           45.6              46.8              25.3
        AH+A           15          19.1           20.0              18.7              18.3
          FJ           15           7.3           12.9              13.6               5.3
         FJ+A          15           3.7            5.4              6.2                5.4
         MIK            1          15.3           16.4              16.2               6.0
         MIK           15           6.6           12.3              13.1               4.9
        MIK+A           1          12.5            8.1              8.0                6.0
        MIK+A          15           3.4            4.7              6.0                4.8

Table 3: State Estimation Errors (%) on various tasks with maxk=1 vs. maxk=15, with SP=False,
no-exo.

In terms of the optimizer, we use Adam optimizer to optimize the losses with learning rate 1e-4. To
avoid overfitting, we add L2 regularization on forward-running states with the decaying regulariza-
tion amount. In terms of the neural networks we are training on, there are three neural networks
(Encoder, Probe, Action Prediction) with details provided in the following.
Encoder The images are encoded using MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) with 8 layers and patch
size 10, and GRU (Chung et al., 2014) with 2 layers and hidden size 256 is used as the sequence
model. For MIK and MIK+A, there is a 2nd GRU network which runs backwards for decoding
the future. Alternatively, using a bidirectional RNN for the future works roughly equally well but
requires a slightly more involved implementation.
Probe We use a 2-hidden layer MLP with hidden size 256 aiming to train a mapping from the
latent states to the true states, which in our case is a 4-dimensional vector containing the position


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Objective      P/V     No-Curtain     One-Curtain      Three-Curtains     First Person
         No History      P          2.2            6.5               13.3               7.7
            AH           P          7.5            7.1                5.6               5.0
          AH+A           P         22.9           24.0               22.4              25.1
            FJ           P          3.2            7.1                7.1               5.0
           FJ+A          P          2.2            5.1                6.4               5.5
           MIK           P          2.5            6.1                6.5               4.7
          MIK+A          P          1.7            3.7                6.2               4.9
         No History      V         91.5           91.7               91.9              15.2
            AH           V         10.0           16.9               18.1               4.3
          AH+A           V         15.2           16.0               15.0              11.5
            FJ           V         11.3           18.6               20.1               5.7
           FJ+A          V          5.2            5.8                6.0               5.4
           MIK           V         10.7           18.1               19.5               5.0
          MIK+A          V          5.0            5.6                5.7               4.7

Table 4: Position and Velocity Estimation Errors (%) on various tasks with no exogenous noise, with
no self-prediction loss, and with maxk=15.


and velocity of the agent. The loss for the probe is square loss, and no gradients pass from the probe
to the representation, such that the use of the probe does not affect the learned representation.
Action Prediction To train a mapping from the current and next latent state to the current action,
we use an embedding layer to embed the discrete variable, and then apply a 2-hidden layer MLP
with hidden size 256 with the cross entropy loss. In processing the sequence, we compute the action
prediction loss for all pairs of time-steps in parallel, thus covering all k values up to a hyperparameter
maxk. Experimentally we investigated both maxk=1 and maxk=15. Action prediction losses are
provided in Table 5. AH+A contains all the history which is a trivial question for action prediction
so that it has almost 0 loss. One optional extra step is to add Self-Prediction (SP) here, by doing this,
we use a 3-layer MLP with hidden size 512. The self-prediction objective allows gradients to flow
into st but blocks gradients into st+k . Adding self-prediction leading to improvement as shown
in Table 6. Importantly, it somewhat reduces the degree of difference seen between the various
objectives but the overall ordering of results is similar to when self-prediction is not used.

             Objective      No-Curtain     One-Curtain      Three-Curtains     First Person
             No History       230.8          266.9              281.0              75.4
                AH              9.2           54.9               61.7              12.4
              AH+A              0.5            0.5               0.5                0.4
                FJ            143.4          182.7              191.5              57.8
               FJ+A           123.7          134.6              136.9              57.9
               MIK            118.5          162.3              171.4              46.4
              MIK+A            99.6          112.5              114.1              37.4

                    Table 5: Action-Prediction Loss (%) with Various Objectives.

Exogenous Noise To construct exogenous noise, we randomly sample images from the CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2014) as the exogenous noise and add them to the original images. Some
examples of the no-curtain navigation environment with exogenous noise are provided in Figure 11
as an illustration. The results are provided in Table 7.


                Figure 11: No-curtain navigation environment with exogenous noise.



                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Objective      Self-Prediction    No-Curtain     One-Curtain     Three-Curtains     First Person
   No History           N               46.8           49.1              52.6              11.4
   No History           Y               46.9           48.4              52.3              11.3
      AH                N               8.9            12.0              11.8               4.6
      AH                Y               4.1             7.9               9.2               9.9
    AH+A                N               19.1           20.0              18.7              18.3
    AH+A                Y               18.7           17.9              19.4              11.5
      FJ                N               7.3            12.9              13.6               5.3
      FJ                Y               6.2            10.1              10.9               3.8
     FJ+A               N               3.7             5.4               6.2               5.4
     FJ+A               Y               3.3             3.6               3.8               4.1
     MIK                N               6.6            12.3              13.1               4.9
     MIK                Y               6.0             9.9              10.7               3.7
    MIK+A               N               3.4             4.7               6.0               4.8
    MIK+A               Y               3.3             3.5               3.8               3.8

Table 6: State Estimation Errors (%) on various tasks without exogenous noise and with maxk=15,
where we show the effect of adding the self-prediction objective, which generally improves the
quality of results but leaves the ordering of the methods’ performance mostly unchanged.

            Objective      No-Curtain     One-Curtain     Three-Curtains     First Person
            No History        47.6           49.2              52.7              12.1
               AH              9.9           13.3              13.2               4.9
             AH+A             18.8           18.8              18.9              18.3
               FJ             10.0           14.7              15.3               5.7
              FJ+A             5.8            7.1              7.2                5.8
              MIK             10.1           14.4              14.7               5.3
             MIK+A             6.1            7.1              7.4                5.4

Table 7: State Estimation Errors (%) on various tasks with exogenous noise, and with no-SP, with
maxk=15.


D.2   O FFLINE RL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND S ETUP

We include details on our offline RL experiments including partial observability in the datasets. Fig-
ure 12 shows few sample observations from the Cheeta-Run domain when adding random patches
to each observation. For our experiments, we use the visual dataset v-d4rl Lu et al. (2022) and to
make it partially observable, we randomly add patches of size (16 × 16) to each observation. This
makes the observations non-Markovian in general, such that it is difficult to learn the agent-centric
state directly from the observations.
For the experimental setup, we follow the same pre-training of representations procedure from Islam
et al. (2023), where we train the encoders learning latent space during pre-training. We then follow
the fine-tuning procedure using the fixed representations from the encoders (keep them frozen) and
then do offline RL (specifically TD3 + BC) on top of the learnt representations. We use TD3 +
BC since it has been already shown to be a minimalistically useful algorithm to learn from offline
datasets. We do not use any other offline RL algorithm since in this work, we mainly prioritize on
the ability of the encoders to be able to recover the agent-centric state.
Our results show that the inverse kinematics based objectives can be quite useful for recovering
the agent-centric state, as stated and justified from our theoretical results; and experimental results
show that by using a forward-backward sequence model to handle past and future observations, such
inverse kinematics based objectives can be useful especially in presence of non-Markovian obser-
vation spaces. Our expeirmental results are indeed quite better compared to the recently proposed
ACRO method Islam et al. (2023) on such visual offline datasets. We study the ability of the learnt
encoders to be able to learn robust representations from partially observable offline datasets.


                                                  22
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 12: Illustration of patched observations from the visual offline datasets, adapted from Lu
    et al. (2022). In addition, during frame-stacking when learning from pixel-based observations, we
    also randomly add zero padding to 2 out of 3 of the stacked frames, to make the pixel-based offline
    RL setting even more challenging.


                                                cheetah_run_expert                                                         cheetah_run_medium_expert                                                            cheetah_run_medium                                                                humanoid_walk_medium_expert
                     350
                                                                                                                 450
                     325                                                                                                                                                                           450                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                 400
                     300                                                  AH                                                                               AH                                      400                                     AH                                                                                    AH
Cumulative Returns


                                                                                            Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                              Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cumulative Returns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                     275                                                  AH + A                                 350                                       AH + A                                                                          AH + A                                                                                AH + A
                                                                                                                                                                                                   350
                                                                          MIK + A                                                                          MIK + A                                                                         MIK + A                                       30                                      MIK + A
                     250                                                                                         300
                                                                          CURL                                                                             CURL                                    300                                     CURL                                                                                  CURL
                     225
                                                                          ACRO                                   250                                       ACRO                                                                            ACRO                                          20                                      ACRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                   250
                     200                                                  DRIML                                                                            DRIML                                                                           DRIML                                                                                 DRIML
                                                                          HOMER                                  200                                       HOMER                                   200                                     HOMER                                         10                                      HOMER
                     175
                                                                          1-Step Inverse                         150
                                                                                                                                                           1-Step Inverse                          150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-Step Inverse                                                                        1-Step Inverse
                     150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                        4   5        6                7      8         9                               4     5        6                7      8         9                                4     5      6                7      8         9                                     4       5     6                7      8         9
                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                                 Iterations                   1e3                                                Iterations                   1e3                                                      Iterations                   1e3

                                            humanoid_walk_medium                                                                 walker_walk_expert                                                          walker_walk_medium_expert                                                                walker_walk_medium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  450
                            70                                                                                                                                                                     800
                                                                                                                 800
                            60                                                                                                                                                                     700
                                                                          AH                                                                               AH                                                                              AH                                     400                                            AH
       Cumulative Returns


                                                                                            Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                              Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cumulative Returns
                            50                                            AH + A                                                                           AH + A                                  600                                     AH + A                                                                                AH + A
                                                                                                                 600
                            40                                            MIK + A                                                                          MIK + A                                 500                                     MIK + A                                350                                            MIK + A
                                                                          CURL                                                                             CURL                                                                            CURL                                                                                  CURL
                            30                                                                                   400                                                                               400
                                                                          ACRO                                                                             ACRO                                                                            ACRO                                                                                  ACRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  300
                            20                                            DRIML                                                                            DRIML                                   300                                     DRIML                                                                                 DRIML
                                                                          HOMER                                  200                                       HOMER                                                                           HOMER                                                                                 HOMER
                            10                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                          1-Step Inverse                                                                   1-Step Inverse                                                                  1-Step Inverse                         250                                            1-Step Inverse
                                    0                                                                                                                                                              100
                                        4   5        6                7      8         9                               4     5        6                7      8         9                                4     5      6                7      8         9                                     4       5     6                7      8         9
                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                                 Iterations                   1e3                                                Iterations                   1e3                                                      Iterations                   1e3


    Figure 13: Patching of Observations : Full of Experimental Results comparing All the Inverse
    Kinematics based objectives to other baselines on the 16 × 16 patched observation setup.


                                                cheetah_run_expert                                                         cheetah_run_medium_expert                                                            cheetah_run_medium                                                                   humanoid_walk_expert
                     140                                                                                                                                                                           120
                                                                                                                 175                                                                                                                                                                 1.8
                     120                                                                                         150                                                                               100
                                                                          AH                                                                               AH                                                                              AH                                                                                    AH
Cumulative Returns


                                                                                            Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                              Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cumulative Returns


                     100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.6
                                                                                                                 125                                                                                80
                                                                          AH + A                                                                           AH + A                                                                          AH + A                                                                                AH + A
                            80                                            MIK + A                                100                                       MIK + A                                                                         MIK + A                                                                               MIK + A
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                               1.4
                            60                                            CURL                                    75
                                                                                                                                                           CURL                                                                            CURL                                                                                  CURL
                                                                          ACRO                                                                             ACRO                                     40                                     ACRO                                                                                  ACRO
                            40                                                                                    50                                                                                                                                                                 1.2
                                                                          DRIML                                                                            DRIML                                                                           DRIML                                                                                 DRIML
                            20                                            HOMER                                   25                                       HOMER                                    20                                     HOMER                                                                                 HOMER
                                                                          1-Step Inverse                                                                   1-Step Inverse                                                                  1-Step Inverse                            1.0                                         1-Step Inverse
                                    0                                                                              0                                                                                 0
                                        4   5        6                7      8         9                               4     5        6                7      8         9                                4     5      6                7      8         9                                     4       5     6                7      8         9
                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                                 Iterations                   1e3                                                Iterations                   1e3                                                      Iterations                   1e3

                                            humanoid_walk_medium                                                                 walker_walk_expert                                                          walker_walk_medium_expert                                                                walker_walk_medium
                                    6                                                                            120                                                                               120                                                                            225

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                    5                                                                            100                                                                               100
                                                                          AH                                                                               AH                                                                              AH                                                                                    AH
               Cumulative Returns


                                                                                            Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                              Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cumulative Returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  175

                                    4
                                                                          AH + A                                                                           AH + A                                                                          AH + A                                 150                                            AH + A
                                                                                                                  80                                                                                80
                                                                          MIK + A                                                                          MIK + A                                                                         MIK + A                                                                               MIK + A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  125
                                    3
                                                                          CURL                                                                             CURL                                                                            CURL                                                                                  CURL
                                                                                                                  60                                                                                60                                                                            100
                                                                          ACRO                                                                             ACRO                                                                            ACRO                                                                                  ACRO
                                    2
                                                                          DRIML                                                                            DRIML                                                                           DRIML                                         75                                      DRIML
                                                                                                                  40                                                                                40
                                                                          HOMER                                                                            HOMER                                                                           HOMER                                         50                                      HOMER
                                    1
                                                                          1-Step Inverse                                                                   1-Step Inverse                                                                  1-Step Inverse                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1-Step Inverse
                                                                                                                  20                                                                                20
                                        4   5        6                7      8         9                               4     5        6                7      8         9                                4     5      6                7      8         9                                     4       5     6                7      8         9
                                                         Iterations                   1e3                                                 Iterations                   1e3                                                Iterations                   1e3                                                      Iterations                   1e3


    Figure 14: Random-Zeroing of FrameStacks : Full of Experimental Results comparing All the
    Inverse Kinematics based objectives to other baselines on the randomly zeroing of framestacks setup,
    where in addition to this, we also apply patching of size 16 × 16.


                                                                                                                                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E   C OMPARISON WITH D REAMER , D EEP MDP, AND AIS
We further compare the performance of our model with Dreamer Hafner et al. (2019a), AIS Subra-
manian et al. (2022) and DeepMDP Gelada et al. (2019)


                                             24
