Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D R S: L EARNING R EUSABLE D ENSE R EWARDS
FOR M ULTI -S TAGE TASKS

 Tongzhou Mu, Minghua Liu, Hao Su
 UC San Diego
 {t3mu,mil070,haosu}@ucsd.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         The success of many RL techniques heavily relies on human-engineered dense
         rewards, which typically demands substantial domain expertise and extensive trial
         and error. In our work, we propose DrS (Dense reward learning from Stages),
         a novel approach for learning reusable dense rewards for multi-stage tasks in a
         data-driven manner. By leveraging the stage structures of the task, DrS learns a
         high-quality dense reward from sparse rewards and demonstrations if given. The
         learned rewards can be reused in unseen tasks, thus reducing the human effort for
         reward engineering. Extensive experiments on three physical robot manipulation
         task families with 1000+ task variants demonstrate that our learned rewards can be
         reused in unseen tasks, resulting in improved performance and sample efficiency
         of RL algorithms. The learned rewards even achieve comparable performance to
         human-engineered rewards on some tasks. See our project page for more details.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The success of many reinforcement learning (RL) techniques heavily relies on dense reward functions
(Hwangbo et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2018), which are often tricky to design by humans due to heavy
domain expertise requirements and tedious trials and errors. In contrast, sparse rewards, such as a
binary task completion signal, are significantly easier to obtain (often directly from the environment).
For instance, in pick-and-place tasks, the sparse reward could simply be defined as the object being
placed at the goal location. Nonetheless, sparse rewards also introduce challenges (e.g., exploration)
for RL algorithms (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018; Ecoffet et al., 2019). Therefore, a crucial
question arises: can we learn dense reward functions in a data-driven manner?
Ideally, the learned reward will be reused to efficiently solve new tasks that share similar success
conditions with the task used to learn the reward. For example, in pick-and-place tasks, different
objects may need to be manipulated with varying dynamics, action spaces, and even robot morpholo-
gies. For clarity, we refer to each variant as a task and the set of all possible pick-and-place tasks as a
task family. Importantly, the reward function, which captures approaching, grasping, and moving the
object toward the goal position, can potentially be transferred within this task family. This observation
motivates us to explore the concept of reusable rewards, which can be learned as a function from
some tasks and reused in unseen tasks. While existing literature in RL primarily focuses on the
reusability (generalizability) of policies, we argue that rewards can pose greater flexibility for reuse
across tasks. For example, it is nearly impossible to directly transfer a policy operating a two-finger
gripper for pick-and-place to a three-finger gripper due to action space misalignment, but a reward
inducing the approach-grasp-move workflow may apply for both types of grippers.
However, many existing works on reward learning do not emphasize reward reuse for new tasks. The
field of learning a reward function from demonstrations is known as inverse RL in the literature (Ng
et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008). More recently, adversarial imitation learning
(AIL) approaches have been proposed (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Kostrikov et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2017;
Ghasemipour et al., 2020) and gained popularity. Following the paradigm of GANs (Goodfellow et al.,
2020), AIL approaches employ a policy network to generate trajectories and train a discriminator to
distinguish between agent trajectories from demonstration ones. By using the discriminator score
as rewards, (Ho & Ermon, 2016) shows that a policy can be trained to imitate the demonstrations.
Unfortunately, such rewards are not reusable across tasks – at convergence, the discriminator outputs


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2 for both the agent trajectories and the demonstrations, as discussed in (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Fu
1

et al., 2017), making it unable to learn useful information for solving new tasks.
In contrast to AIL, we propose a novel approach for learning reusable rewards. Our approach
involves incorporating sparse rewards as a supervision signal in lieu of the original signal used for
classifying demonstration and agent trajectories. Specifically, we train a discriminator to classify
success trajectories and failure trajectories based on the binary sparse reward. Please refer to Fig. 2
(a)(b) for an illustrative depiction. Our formulation assigns higher rewards to transitions in success
trajectories and lower rewards to transitions within failure trajectories, which is consistent throughout
the entire training process. As a result, the reward will be reusable once the training is completed.
Expert demonstrations can be included as success trajectories in our approach, though they are not
mandatory. We only require the availability of a sparse reward, which is a relatively weak requirement
as it is often an inherent component of the task definition.
Our approach can be extended to leverage the inherent structure of multi-stage tasks and derive
stronger dense rewards. Many tasks naturally exhibit multi-stage structures, and it is relatively easy to
assign a binary indicator on whether the agent has entered a stage. For example, in the “Open Cabinet
Door” task depicted in Fig. 1, there are three stages: 1) approach the door handle, 2) grasp the handle
and pull the door, and 3) release the handle and keeping it steady. If the agent is grasping the handle
of the door but the door has not been opened enough, then we can simply use a corresponding binary
indicator asserting that the agent is in the 2nd stage. 1 By utilizing these stage indicators, we can learn
a dense reward for each stage and combine them into a more structured reward. Since the horizon for
each stage is shorter than that of the entire task, learning a high-quality dense reward becomes more
feasible. Furthermore, this approach provides flexibility in incorporating extra information beyond
the final success signal. We dub our approach as DrS (Dense reward learning from Stages).
Our approach exhibits strong performance on challenging tasks. To assess the reusability of the
rewards learned by our approach, we employ the ManiSkill benchmark (Mu et al., 2021; Gu et al.,
2023), which offers a large number of task variants within each task family.We evaluate our approach
on three task families: Pick-and-Place, Open Cabinet Door, and Turn Faucet, including 1000+ task
variants. Each task variant involves manipulating a different object and requires precise low-level
physical control, thereby highlighting the need for a good dense reward. Our results demonstrate
that the learned rewards can be reused across tasks, leading to improved performance and sample
efficiency of RL algorithms compared to using sparse rewards. In certain tasks, the learned rewards
even achieve performance comparable to those attained by human-engineered reward functions.
Moreover, our approach drastically reduces the human effort needed for reward engineering. For
instance, while the human-engineered reward for “Open Cabinet Door” involves over 100 lines of
code, 10 candidate terms, and tons of “magic” parameters, our approach only requires two boolean
functions as stage indicators: if the robot has grasped the handle and if the door is open enough. See
appendix B for a detailed example illustrating how our method reduces the required human effort.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
    • We propose DrS (Dense reward learning from Stages), a novel approach for learning reusable
      dense rewards for multi-stage tasks, effectively reducing human efforts in reward engineering.
    • Extensive experiments on 1,000+ task variants from three task families showcase the effective-
      ness of our approach in generating high-quality and reusable dense rewards.

2       R ELATED W ORKS
Learning Reward from Demo (Offline) Designing rewards is challenging due to domain knowledge
requirements, so approaches to learning rewards from data have gained attention. Some methods
adopt classification-based rewards, i.e., training a reward by classifying goals (Smith et al., 2019;
Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Du et al., 2023) or demonstration trajectories (Zolna et al., 2020). Other
methods (Zakka et al., 2022; Aytar et al., 2018) use the distance to goal as a reward function, where
the distance is usually computed in a learned embedding space, but these methods usually require
that the goal never changes in a task. These rewards are only trained on offline datasets, hence they
can easily be exploited by an RL agent, i.e., an RL can enter a state that is not in the dataset and get a
wrong reward signal, as studied in (Vecerik et al., 2019; Xu & Denil, 2021).
    1
        Stage indicators are only required during RL training, but not required when deploying policy to real world.


                                                          2
          Multi-Stage Sparse Reward as Supervision
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                        ⭐ Stage Indicator:                  ⭐ Stage Indicator:               ⭐ Stage Indicator:
                        Grasp the Handle                   Door is Open Enough                Door is Static


            Stage 1:                            Stage 2:                       Stage 3:
                                                                                                                  Success
       Approach the Handle                   Pull the Handle              Leave the Door Still

   Figure 1: An illustration of stage indicators in an OpenCabinetDoor task, which can be naturally
   divided into three stages plus a success state. A stage indicator is a binary function representing
   whether    theDense
Learning Reusable current  state
                       Rewards     is in a certain
                               for Multi-Stage Tasks stage, and it can be simply defined by some boolean functions.


   Learning Reward from Demo (Online) The above issue can be addressed by allowing agents to
   verify the reward in the environment, and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is the prominent
   paradigm. IRL aims to recover a reward function given expert demonstrations. Traditional IRL
   methods (Ng et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008; Ratliff et al., 2006) often require
   multiple iterations of Markov Decision Process solvers (Puterman, 2014), resulting in poor sample
   efficiency. In recent years, adversarial imitation learning (AIL) approaches are proposed (Ho &
   Ermon, 2016; Kostrikov et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2017; Ghasemipour et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019). They
   operate similarly to generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020), in which a
   generator (the policy) is trained to maximize the confusion of a discriminator, and the discriminator
   (serves the role of rewards) is trained to classify the agent trajectories and demonstrations. However,
   such rewards are not reusable as we discussed in the introduction - classifying agent trajectories
   and demonstrations is impossible at convergence. In contrast, our approach gets rid of this issue by
   classifying the success/failure trajectories instead of expert/agent trajectories.
   Learning Reward from Human Feedback Recent studies (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al.,
   2018; Jain et al., 2013) infer the reward through human preference queries on trajectories or explicitly
   asking for trajectory rankings (Brown et al., 2019). Another line of works (Fu et al., 2018; Singh et al.,
   2019) involves humans specifying desired outcomes or goals to learn rewards. However, in these
   methods, the rewards only distinguish goal from non-goal states, offering relatively weak incentives
   to agents at the beginning of an episode, especially in long-horizon tasks. In contrast, our approach
   classifies all the states in the trajectories, providing strong guidance throughout the entire episode.
  Reward Shaping Reward shaping methods aim to densify sparse rewards. Earlier works (Ng et al.,
  1999) study the forms of shaped rewards that induce the same optimal policy as the ground-truth
  reward. Recently, some works (Trott et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021) have shaped the rewards as the
  distance to the goal, similar to some offline reward learning methods mentioned above. Another
  idea (Memarian et al., 2021) involves shaping delayed reward by ranking trajectories based on a
  fine-grained preference oracle. In contrast to these reward shaping approaches, our method leverages
  demonstrations, which are available in many real-world problems (Sun et al., 2020; Dasari et al.,
  2019). This not only boosts the reward learning process but also reduces the additional domain
  knowledge required by these methods.
   Task Decomposition The decomposition of tasks into stages/sub-tasks has been explored in various
   domains. Hierarchical RL approaches (Frans et al., 2018; Nachum et al., 2018; Levy et al., 2018)
   break down policies into sub-policies to solve specific sub-tasks. Skill chaining methods (Lee et al.,
   2021; Gu et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2019) focus on solving long-horizon tasks by combining multiple
   short-horizon policies or skills. Recently, language models have also been utilized to break the whole
   task into sub-tasks Ahn et al. (2022). In contrast to these approaches that utilize stage structures in
   policy space, our work explores an orthogonal direction by designing rewards with stage structures.

   3      P ROBLEM S ETUP
   In this work, we adopt the Markov Decision Process (MDP) M := hS, A, T, R, i as the theoretical
   framework, where R is a reward function that defines the goal or purpose of a task. Specifically, we
   focus on tasks with sparse rewards. In this context, “sparse reward” denotes a binary reward function
   that gives a value of 1 upon successful task completion and 0 otherwise:


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                rewards        reuse, fixed
                                                                                            discrimi               discrimi           discrimi
              discriminator                                discriminator
                                                                                            nator 0        ……       nator i     …… nator n-1
                                                                                                                                                     training                                  test
                                                                                                                                                                    discriminators
                                                                                                                                                      agent                                   agent
               neg    pos                                      neg    pos
                                                                                                                                                               agent
                                                                                                                                                            trajectories
          buﬀer 0     buﬀer 1                          buﬀer 0        buﬀer 1               buﬀer 0         ……     buﬀer i       ……        buﬀer n

                                                                                                                                                     training            demo                  test
                                                                                                                                                      tasks           trajectories            tasks
  failure       success          demo          failure          success         demo         trajectories        successful              demo
agent traj.    agent traj.    trajectories   agent traj.       agent traj.   trajectories   end at stage i       trajectories         trajectories          Phase 1:                     Phase 2:
                                                                                                                                                         reward learning               reward reuse
                                                (b) Our Reward Learning                                    (c) Our Reward Learning
       (a) GAIL (off-policy)                                                                                                                                     (d) Our Overall Pipeline
                                                      (One Stage)                                                (Multi-Stage)

Figure 2: a) GAIL’s discriminator aims to distinguish agent trajectories from demonstrations. b) In
single-stage tasks, the discriminator in our approach aims to distinguish success trajectories from
failure ones. c) In multi-stage tasks, our approach train a separate discriminator for each stage. The
discriminator for stage k aims to distinguish trajectories that reach beyond stage k from those that
only reach up to stage k. d) Overall, our approach has 2 phases: reward learning and reward reuse.

                                                  ⇢
                                                           1         task is completed by reaching one of the success states s
                      Rsparse (s) =                                                                                                                                                               (1)
                                                           0         otherwise
Our objective is to learn a dense reward function from a set of training tasks, with the intention of
reusing it for unseen test tasks. Specifically, we aim to successfully train RL agents from scratch
on the test tasks using the learned rewards. The desired outcome is to enhance the efficiency of RL
training, surpassing the performance achieved by sparse rewards.
We assume that both the training and test tasks are in the same task family. A task family refers to a
set of task variants that share the same success criteria, but may differ in terms of assets, initial states,
transition functions, and other factors. For instance, the task family of object grasping includes tasks
such as “Alice robot grasps an apple” and “Bob robot grasps a pen.” The key point is that tasks within
the same task family share a common underlying sparse reward.
Additionally, we posit that the task can be segmented into multiple stages, and the agent has access to
several stage indicators obtained from the environment. A stage indicator is a binary function that
indicates whether the current state corresponds to a specific stage of the task. An example of stage
indicators is in Fig. 1. This assumption is quite general as many long-term tasks have multi-stage
structures, and determining the current stage of the task is not hard in many cases. By utilizing these
stage indicators, it becomes possible to construct a reward that is slightly denser than the binary
sparse reward, which we refer to as a semi-sparse reward, and it serves as a strong baseline:
                                                   Rsemi sparse (s) = k, when state s is at stage k                                                                                               (2)

We aim to design an approach that learns a dense reward based on the stage indicators. When expert
demonstration trajectories are available, they can also be incorporated to boost the learning process.
Note that the stage indicators are only required during RL training, but not required when deploying
the policy to the real world. Training RL agents directly in the real world is often impractical due to
cost and safety issues. Instead, a more common practice is to train the agent in simulators and then
transfer/deploy it to the real world. While obtaining the stage indicators in simulators is fairly easy, it
is also possible to obtain them in the real world by various techniques (robot proprioception, tactile
sensors Lin et al. (2022); Melnik et al. (2021), visual detection/tracking Kalashnikov et al. (2018;
2021), large vision-language models Du et al. (2023), etc.).

4       D R S: D ENSE REWARD LEARNING FROM S TAGES
Dense rewards are often tricky to design by humans (see an example in appendix B), so we aim to
learn a reusable dense reward function from stage indicators in multi-stage tasks and demonstrations
when available. Overall, our approach has two phases, as shown in Fig. 2 (d):

    • Reward Learning Phase: learn the dense reward function using training tasks.
    • Reward Reuse Phase: reuse the learned dense reward to train new RL agents in test tasks.

Since the reward reuse phase is just a regular RL training process, we only discuss the reward learning
phase in this section. We first explain how our approach learns a dense reward in one-stage tasks (Sec.
4.1). Then, we extend this approach to multi-stage tasks (Sec. 4.2).


                                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   R EWARD L EARNING ON O NE -S TAGE TASKS

In line with previous work (Vecerik et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2018), we employ a classification-based
dense reward. We train a classifier to distinguish between good and bad trajectories, utilizing the
learned classifier as dense reward. Essentially, states resembling those in good trajectories receive
higher rewards, while states resembling bad trajectories receive lower rewards. While previous
Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) methods (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Kostrikov et al., 2018) used
discriminators as classifiers/rewards to distinguish between agent and demonstration trajectories,
these discriminators cannot be directly reused as rewards to train new RL agents. As the policy
improves, the agent trajectories (negative data) and the demonstrations (positive data) can become
nearly identical. Therefore, at convergence, the discriminator output for both agent trajectories and
demonstrations tends to approach 12 , as observed in GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020) (also noted by
(Fu et al., 2017; Xu & Denil, 2021)). This makes it unable to learn useful info for solving new tasks.
Our approach introduces a simple modification to existing AIL methods to ensure that the discrim-
inator continues to learn meaningful information even at convergence. The key issue previously
mentioned arises from the diminishing gap between agent and demonstration trajectories over time,
making it challenging to differentiate between positive and negative data. To address this, we propose
training the discriminator to distinguish between success and failure trajectories instead of agent and
demonstration trajectories. By defining success and failure trajectories based on the sparse reward
signal from the environment, the gap between them remains intact and does not shrink. Consequently,
the discriminator effectively emulates the sparse reward signal, providing dense reward signals to
the RL agent. Intuitively, a state that is closer to the success states in terms of task progress (rather
than Euclidean distance) receives a higher reward, as it is more likely to occur in success trajectories.
Fig. 2(a) and (b) illustrate the distinction between our approach and traditional AIL methods.
To ensure that the training data consistently includes both success and failure trajectories, we use
replay buffers to store historical experiences, and train the discriminator in an off-policy manner.
While the original GAIL is on-policy, recent AIL methods (Kostrikov et al., 2018; Orsini et al., 2021)
have adopted off-policy training for better sample efficiency. Note that although our approach shares
similarities with AIL methods, it is not adversarial in nature. In particular, our policy does not aim to
deceive the discriminator, and the discriminator does not seek to penalize the agent’s trajectories.

4.2   R EWARD L EARNING ON M ULTI -S TAGE TASKS

In multi-stage tasks, it is desirable for the reward of a state in
stage k + 1 to be strictly higher than that of stage k to incentivize
the agent to progress towards later stages. The semi-sparse reward
(Eq. 2) aligns with this intuition, but it is still a bit too sparse.
If each stage of the task is viewed as an individual task, the
semi-sparse reward acts as a sparse reward for each stage. In
the case of a one-stage task, a discriminator can be employed
to provide a dense reward. Similarly, for multi-stage tasks, a Figure 3: An illustration of our
separate discriminator can be trained for each stage to serve as a learned reward, which fills the
dense reward for that particular stage. By training stage-specific gaps in semi-sparse rewards, re-
discriminators, we can effectively address the sparse reward issue sulting in a smooth reward curve.
and guide the agent’s progress through the different stages of the
task. Fig. 3 gives an intuitive illustration of our learned reward, which fills the gaps in semi-sparse
rewards, resulting in a smooth reward curve.
To train the discriminators for different stages, we need to establish the positive and negative data
for each discriminator. In one-stage tasks, positive data comprises success trajectories and negative
data encompasses failure trajectories. In multi-stage tasks, we adopt a similar approach with a slight
modification. Specifically, we assign a stage index to each trajectory, which is determined as the
highest stage index among all states within the trajectory:
                         StageIndex(⌧ : (s0 , s1 , ...)) = max StageIndex(si ),                          (3)
                                                             i
where ⌧ is a trajectory and si are the states in ⌧ . For the discriminator associated with stage k, positive
data consists of trajectories that progress beyond stage k (StageIndex > k), and negative data consists
of trajectories that reach up to stage k (StageIndex  k).


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Once the positive and negative data for each discriminator have been established, the next step is
to combine these discriminators to create a reward function. While the semi-sparse reward (Eq. 2)
lacks incentives for the agent at stage k until it reaches stage k + 1, we can fill in the gaps in the
semi-sparse reward by the stage-specific discriminators. We define our learned reward function for a
multi-stage task as follows:
                                 R(s0 ) = k + ↵ · tanh(Discriminatork (s0 ))                                     (4)
where k is the stage index of s and ↵ is a hyperparameter. Basically, the formula incorporates a
                                     0

dense reward term into the semi-sparse reward. The tanh function is used to bound the output of the
discriminators. As the range of the tanh function is (-1, 1), any ↵ < 12 ensures that the reward of a
state in stage k + 1 is always higher than that of stage k. In practice, we use ↵ = 13 and it works well.

4.3    I MPLEMENTATION                        Algorithm 1 DrS (Dense reward learning from Stages )
                                              Require: Task MDP M, Number of stages in task N , Demonstra-
From the implementation perspec-             tion dataset D := {⌧ 0 , ⌧ 1 , ...} (optional)
tive, our approach is similar to GAIL, 1: Initialize policy ⇡, critic Q, replay buffer BR
but with a different training process 2: Initialize discriminators f0 , f1 , ..., fN 1 , stage buffers
for discriminators. While the orig-          B0 , B2 , .., BN
inal GAIL is combined with TRPO 3: Fill demo D into BN : BN                     BN [ D
(Schulman et al., 2015), (Orsini et al., 4: for each iteration do
2021) found that using state-of-the-art 5:       Collect trajectories {⌧⇡0 , ⌧⇡1 , ...} by executing ⇡ in M
off-policy RL algorithms (like SAC        6:     Add trajectories to replay buffer: BR         BR [ {⌧⇡0 , ⌧⇡1 , ...}
(Haarnoja et al., 2018) or TD3 (Fu- 7:           for each trajectory ⌧⇡ in {⌧⇡ , ⌧⇡ , ...} do
                                                                        i         0    1


jimoto et al., 2018)) can greatly im-     8:          j = StageIndex(⌧⇡i ) according to Eq. 3
prove the sample efficiency of GAIL.      9:          Bj      Bj [ {⌧⇡i }
Therefore, we also combine our ap- 10:            for each gradient step for discriminators do
proach with SAC, and the full algo-      11:          for each discriminator fk do S
rithm is summarized in Algo. 1.          12:                Sample negative data from ki=0 Bi
                                                                                          S   N
                                              13:              Sample positive data from i=k+1       Bi
In addition to the regular replay buffer 14:              Update fk using BCE loss
used in SAC, our approach maintains 15:            for each gradient step for the policy ⇡ do
N different stage buffers to store tra- 16:            Sample from BR
jectories corresponding to different 17:               Compute rewards according to Eq. 4
stages(defined by Eq. 3). Each tra- 18:                Update ⇡ and Q by SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018)
jectory is assigned to only one stage
buffer based on its stage index. During the training of the discriminators, we sample data from the
union of multiple buffers. In practice, we early stop the discriminator training of k once its success
rate is sufficiently high, as we find it reduces the computational cost and makes the learned reward
more robust. Note that our approach uses the next state s0 as the input to the reward, which aligns
with common practices in human reward engineering (Gu et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2020). However,
our approach is also compatible with alternative forms of input, such as (s, a) or (s, a, s0 ).

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    S ETUP AND TASK D ESCRIPTIONS

We evaluated our approach on three challenging physical manipulation task families from the
ManiSkill (Mu et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2023): Pick-and-Place, Turn Faucet, and Open Cabinet Door.
Each task family includes a set of different objects to be manipulated. To assess the reusability of the
learned rewards, we divided the objects within each task family into non-overlapping training and
test sets, as depicted in Fig.4. During the reward learning phase, we learned the rewards by training
an agent for each task family to manipulate all training objects. In the subsequent reward reuse phase,
the learned reward rewards are reused to train an agent to manipulate all test objects for each task
family. And we compare with other baseline rewards in this reward reuse phase. It is important
to note that our learned rewards are agnostic to the specific RL algorithm employed. However, we
utilized the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm to evaluate the quality of the different rewards.
To assess the reusability of the learned rewards, it is crucial to have a diverse set of tasks that
exhibit similar structures and goals but possess variations in other aspects. However, most existing


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                           Training Tasks (~100 tasks)          Test Tasks (more than 1,000 tasks)


Pick And Place
Turn Faucet
Open Cabinet Door


Figure 4: We evaluated our approach DrS on more than 1,000 task variants from three task families
in ManiSkill (Mu et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2023). Each task variant is associated with a different object.
All tasks require low-level physical control. The objects in training and test tasks are non-overlapped.

benchmarks lack an adequate number of task variations within the same task family. As a result,
we primarily conducted our evaluation on the ManiSkill benchmark, which offers a range of object
variations within each task family. This allowed us to thoroughly evaluate our learned rewards in a
realistic and comprehensive manner.
Pick-and-Place: A robot arm is tasked with picking up an object and relocating it to a random goal
position in mid-air. The task is completed if the object is in close proximity to the goal position, and
both the robot arm and the object remain stationary. The stage indicators include: (a) the gripper
grasps the object, (b) the object is close the goal position, and (c) both the robot and the object are
stationary. We learn rewards on 74 YCB objects and reuse rewards on 1,600 EGAD objects.
Turn Faucet: A robot arm is tasked to turn on a faucet by rotating its handle. The task is completed
if the handle reaches a target angle. The stage indicators include: (a) the target handle starts moving,
(b) the handle reaches a target angle. We learn rewards on 10 faucets and reuse rewards on 50 faucets.
Open Cabinet Door: A single-arm mobile robot is required to open a designated target door on
a cabinet. The task is completed if the target door is opened to a sufficient degree and remains
stationary. The stage indicators include: (a) the robot grasps the door handle, (b) the door is open
enough, and (c) the door is stationary. We learn rewards on 4 cabinet doors and reuse rewards on 6
cabinet doors. Note that we remove all single-door cabinets in this task family, as they can be solved
by kicking the side of the door and this behavior can be readily learned by sparse rewards.
We employed low-level physical control for all task families. Please refer to the appendix A for a
detailed description of the object sets, action space, state space, and demonstration trajectories.

5.2                 BASELINES
Human-Engineered The original human-written dense rewards in the benchmark, which require a
significant amount of domain knowledge, thus can be considered as an upper bound of performance.
Semi-Sparse The rewards constructed based on the stage indicators, as discussed in Eq. 2. The agent
receives a reward of k when it is in stage k. This baseline extends the binary sparse reward.
VICE-RAQ (Singh et al., 2019) An improved version of VICE (Fu et al., 2018). It learns a classifier,
where the positive samples are successful states annotated by querying humans, and the negative
samples are all other states collected by the agent. Since our experiments do not involve human
feedback, we let VICE-RAQ query the oracle success condition infinitely for a fair comparison.
ORIL (Zolna et al., 2020) A representative offline reward learning method, where the agent does
not interact with the environments but purely learns from the demonstrations. It learns a classifier
(reward) to distinguish between the states from success trajectories and random trajectories.

5.3                 C OMPARISON WITH BASELINE R EWARDS

We trained RL agents using various rewards and assessed the reward quality based on both the
sample efficiency and final performance of the agents. The experimental results, depicted in Fig. 5,


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Evaluation results of reusing learned rewards. All curves use SAC to train, but with
different rewards. VICE-RAQ and ORIL get no success. 5 random seeds, the shaded region is std.
demonstrate that our learned reward surpasses semi-sparse rewards and all other reward learning
methods across all three task families. This outcome suggests that our approach successfully acquires
high-quality rewards that significantly enhance RL training. Remarkably, our learned rewards even
achieve performance comparable to human-engineered rewards in Pick-and-Place and Turn Faucet.
Semi-sparse rewards yielded limited success within the allocated training budget, suggesting that RL
agents face exploration challenges when confronted with sparse reward signals. VICE-RAQ failed in
all tasks. Notably, it actually failed during the reward learning phase on the training tasks, rendering
the learned rewards inadequate for supporting RL training on the test tasks. This failure aligns with
observations made by (Wu et al., 2021). We hypothesize that by only classifying the success states
from other states, it cannot provide sufficient guidance during the early stages of training, where most
states are distant from the success states and receive low rewards. Unsurprisingly, ORIL does not get
any success on all tasks either. Without interacting with the environments to gather more data, the
learned reward functions easily tend to overfit the provided dataset. When using such rewards in RL,
the flaws in the learned rewards are easily exploited by the RL agents.

5.4     A BLATION S TUDY

We examined various design choices within our approach on the Pick-and-Place task family.

5.4.1    ROBUSTNESS TO S TAGE C ONFIGURATIONS
Though many tasks present a natural structure of stages, there are still different ways to divide a
task into stages. To assess the robustness of our approach in handling different task structures, we
experiment with different numbers of stages and different ways to define stage indicators.

Number of Stages The Pick-and-Place task family originally consisted of three stages: (a) approach
the object, (b) move the object to the goal, and (c) make everything stationary. We explored two
ways of reducing the number of stages to two, namely merging stages (a) and (b) or merging stages
(b) and (c), as well as the 1-stage case. Our results, presented in Fig. 6, indicate that the learned
rewards with 2 stages can still effectively train RL agents in test tasks, albeit with lower sample
efficiency than those with 3 stages. Specifically, the reward that preserves stage (c) “make everything
stationary” performs slightly better than the reward that preserves stage (a) “approach the object”.
This suggests that it may be more challenging for a robot to learn to stop abruptly without a dedicated
stage. However, when reducing the number of stages to 1, the learned reward failed to train RL agents
in test tasks, demonstrating the benefit of using more stages in our approach.

Definition of Stages The stage indicator “object is placed” is initially defined as if the distance
between the object and the goal is less than 2.5 cm. We create two variants of it, where the distance
thresholds are 5cm and 10cm, respectively. The results, as depicted in Fig. 7, demonstrate that
changing the distance threshold within a reasonable range does not significantly affect the efficiency
of RL training. Note that the task success condition is unchanged, and our rewards consistently
encourage the agents to reach the success state as it yields the highest reward according to Eq. 4. The
stage definitions solely affect the efficiency of RL training during the reward reuse phase.
Overall, the above results highlight the robustness of our approach to different stage configurations,
indicating that it is not heavily reliant on intricate stage designs. This robustness contributes to a
significant reduction in the burden of human reward engineering.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 6: Ablation study on the Figure 7: Ablation study on the Figure 8: Fine-tune the policy
 number of stages, see here.     stage definitions, see here.    from reward learning, see here.

5.4.2    F INE - TUNING P OLICY

In our previous experiments, we assessed the quality of the learned reward by reusing it in training
RL agents from scratch since it is the most common and natural way to use a reward. However,
our approach also produces a policy as a byproduct in the reward learning phase. This policy can
also be fine-tuned using various rewards in new tasks, providing an alternative to training RL agents
from scratch. We compare the fine-tuning of the byproduct policy using human-engineered rewards,
semi-sparse rewards, and our learned rewards.
As shown in Fig. 8, all policies improve rapidly at the beginning due to the good initialization
of the policies. However, fine-tuning with our learned reward yields the best performance (even
slightly better than the human-engineered reward), indicating the advantages of utilizing our learned
dense reward even with a good initialization. Furthermore, the significant variance observed when
fine-tuning the policy with semi-sparse rewards highlights the limitations of sparse reward signals in
effectively training RL agents, even with a very good initialization.

5.4.3    A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES

Additional ablation studies are provided in appendix E, with key conclusions summarized as follows:
    • DrS is compatible with various modalities of reward input, including point cloud data. E.1
    • Reward learned by GAIL, even with stage indicators, is not reusable. E.2
    • The way of combining the dense rewards from each stage matters. E.3


6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
To make RL a more widely applicable tool, we have developed a data-driven approach for learning
dense reward functions that can be reused in new tasks from sparse rewards. We have evaluated the
effectiveness of our approach on robotic manipulation tasks, which have high-dimensional action
spaces and require dense rewards. Our results indicate that the learned dense rewards are effective
in transferring across tasks with significant variation in object geometry. By simplifying the reward
design process, our approach paves the way for scaling up RL in diverse scenarios.
We would like to discuss two main limitations when using the multi-stage version of our approach.
Firstly, though our experiments show the substantial benefits of knowing the multi-stage structure of
tasks (at training time, not needed at policy deployment time), we did not specifically investigate how
this knowledge can be acquired. Much future work on be done here, by leveraging large language
models such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) (by our testing, they suggest stages highly aligned to the
ones we adopt by intuition for all tasks in this work) or employing information-theoretic approaches.
Further discussions regarding this point can be found in appendix F.
Secondly, the reliance on stage indicators adds a level of inconvenience when directly training RL
agents in the real world. While it is infrequent to directly train RL agents in the real world due to cost
and safety issues, when necessary, stage information can still be obtained using existing techniques,
similar to (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; 2021). For example, the “object is grasped” indicator can be
acquired by tactile sensors (Lin et al., 2022; Melnik et al., 2021), and the “object is placed” indicator
can be obtained by forward kinematics, visual detection/tracking techniques (Kalashnikov et al.,
2018; 2021), or even large vision-language models (Du et al., 2023).


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Budden, Thomas Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando De Freitas. Playing
  hard exploration games by watching youtube. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Sudeep Dasari, Frederik Ebert, Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper,
  Siddharth Singh, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11215, 2019.
Yuqing Du, Ksenia Konyushkova, Misha Denil, Akhil Raju, Jessica Landon, Felix Hill, Nando
  de Freitas, and Serkan Cabi. Vision-language models as success detectors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.07280, 2023.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a new
  approach for hard-exploration problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995, 2019.
Kevin Frans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Meta learning shared
  hierarchies. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11248, 2017.
Justin Fu, Avi Singh, Dibya Ghosh, Larry Yang, and Sergey Levine. Variational inverse control with
  events: A general framework for data-driven reward definition. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Richard Zemel, and Shixiang Gu. A divergence minimization
  perspective on imitation learning methods. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1259–1277.
  PMLR, 2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Jiayuan Gu, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Hao Su, and Jitendra Malik. Multi-skill mobile manipulation
   for object rearrangement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02778, 2022.
Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiaing Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone
   Tao, Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, Xiaodi Yuan, Pengwei Xie, Zhiao Huang, Rui Chen, and Hao
   Su. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manipulation skills. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Huy Ha, Pete Florence, and Shuran Song. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot
  skill acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14535, 2023.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dario Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis, Vladlen
  Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science
  Robotics, 4(26):eaau5872, 2019.

Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.

Ashesh Jain, Brian Wojcik, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning trajectory preferences
  for manipulators via iterative improvement. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  26, 2013.

Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 651–673.
 PMLR, 2018.

Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski,
 Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic rein-
 forcement learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08212, 2021.

Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tompson.
   Discriminator-actor-critic: Addressing sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial imitation
   learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02925, 2018.

Youngwoon Lee, Shao-Hua Sun, Sriram Somasundaram, Edward S Hu, and Joseph J Lim. Com-
  posing complex skills by learning transition policies. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.

Youngwoon Lee, Joseph J Lim, Anima Anandkumar, and Yuke Zhu. Adversarial skill chaining for
  long-horizon robot manipulation via terminal state regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07999,
  2021.

Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies
 with hindsight. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023.

Yijiong Lin, John Lloyd, Alex Church, and Nathan F Lepora. Tactile gym 2.0: Sim-to-real deep
  reinforcement learning for comparing low-cost high-resolution robot touch. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 7(4):10754–10761, 2022.

Fangchen Liu, Zhan Ling, Tongzhou Mu, and Hao Su. State alignment-based imitation learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10947, 2019.

Andrew Melnik, Luca Lach, Matthias Plappert, Timo Korthals, Robert Haschke, and Helge Ritter.
  Using tactile sensing to improve the sample efficiency and performance of deep deterministic
  policy gradients for simulated in-hand manipulation tasks. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 8:538773,
  2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Farzan Memarian, Wonjoon Goo, Rudolf Lioutikov, Scott Niekum, and Ufuk Topcu. Self-supervised
  online reward shaping in sparse-reward environments. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
  on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2369–2375. IEEE, 2021.

Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Cathera Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang,
  Zhiwei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill: Generalizable manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale
  demonstrations. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.

Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31:3303–3313, 2018.

Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
 Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pp. 278–287, 1999.

Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, volume 1,
  pp. 2, 2000.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Manu Orsini, Anton Raichuk, Léonard Hussenot, Damien Vincent, Robert Dadashi, Sertan Girgin,
 Matthieu Geist, Olivier Bachem, Olivier Pietquin, and Marcin Andrychowicz. What matters
 for adversarial imitation learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 14656–14668, 2021.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.

Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Michiel Van de Panne. Deepmimic: Example-
  guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills. ACM Transactions On
 Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–14, 2018.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.

Nathan D Ratliff, J Andrew Bagnell, and Martin A Zinkevich. Maximum margin planning. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 729–736, 2006.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Archit Sharma, Tony Z Zhao, and Chelsea Finn. Waypoint-based imitation
  learning for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14326, 2023.

Avi Singh, Larry Yang, Kristian Hartikainen, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. End-to-end robotic
  reinforcement learning without reward engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07854, 2019.

Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.

Laura Smith, Nikita Dhawan, Marvin Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Avid: Learning
  multi-stage tasks via pixel-level translation of human videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04443,
  2019.

Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James
  Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al. Scalability in perception for autonomous
  driving: Waymo open dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 2446–2454, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping your distance:
  Solving sparse reward tasks using self-balancing shaped rewards. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Mel Vecerik, Oleg Sushkov, David Barker, Thomas Rothörl, Todd Hester, and Jon Scholz. A practical
 approach to insertion with variable socket position using deep reinforcement learning. In 2019
 international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 754–760. IEEE, 2019.
Zheng Wu, Wenzhao Lian, Vaibhav Unhelkar, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Stefan Schaal. Learning
  dense rewards for contact-rich manipulation tasks. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6214–6221. IEEE, 2021.
Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang, and
  Tao Yu. Text2reward: Automated dense reward function generation for reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11489, 2023.
Danfei Xu and Misha Denil. Positive-unlabeled reward learning. In Conference on Robot Learning,
  pp. 205–219. PMLR, 2021.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to rewards
 for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.
Kevin Zakka, Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Jeannette Bohg, and Debidatta Dwibedi.
  Xirl: Cross-embodiment inverse reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp.
  537–546. PMLR, 2022.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, and Roberto Martín-Martín. robosuite: A modular
  simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
Konrad Zolna, Alexander Novikov, Ksenia Konyushkova, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Yusuf
  Aytar, Misha Denil, Nando de Freitas, and Scott Reed. Offline learning from demonstrations and
  unlabeled experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13885, 2020.


                                               13
