Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P HYSICS - AWARE
HAND - OBJECT INTERACTION DENOISING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The credibility and practicality of a reconstructed hand-object interaction se-
         quence depend largely on its physical plausibility. However, due to high occlu-
         sions during hand-object interaction, physical plausibility remains a challenging
         criterion for purely vision-based tracking methods. To address this issue and en-
         hance the results of existing hand trackers, this paper proposes a novel physically-
         aware hand motion de-noising method. Specifically, we introduce two learned
         loss terms that explicitly capture two crucial aspects of physical plausibility: grasp
         credibility and manipulation feasibility. These terms are used to train a physically-
         aware de-noising network. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
         that our approach significantly improves both fine-grained physical plausibility
         and overall pose accuracy, surpassing current state-of-the-art de-noising methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Hand pose tracking during hand-object interaction is a crucial task for various applications such as
gaming, virtual reality, and robotics. Vision-based hand tracking methods have made significant
progress in recent years by estimating hand poses from vision data sequences. However, heavy
occlusions often occur during hand-object interaction, leading to ambiguity for vision-based track-
ers. Consequently, even state-of-the-art tracking methods still produce obvious errors and generate
physically implausible artifacts such as inter-penetrating hand-objects and unrealistic manipulation.
It is critical to remove such artifacts, increase the physical plausibility, and therefore ensure the
usefulness of tracking results.
Several previous works have proposed to post-process the estimations generated by vision-based
trackers using de-noising techniques. Some works have attempted to optimize hand poses by mini-
mizing low-level penetration and attraction energy Chen et al. (2022). However, such optimization
methods may struggle to handle severe noise, as they easily get stuck at local optima. Other works
instead train neural networks for de-noising purposes Grady et al. (2021)Zhou et al. (2022), lever-
aging data-driven pose or contact priors to correct potentially significant pose errors. Nevertheless,
purely data-driven approaches rely on the quality of the training dataset labels to achieve satisfactory
visual effects and physical plausibility, and may be susceptible to overfitting and over-smoothing.
Additionally, there is no guarantee that the resulting neural network is physically-aware.
In an effort to overcome the limitations of existing methods, we propose to combine data-driven
de-noising with explicit modeling of the physical plausibility. In particular, such modeling needs to
cover two essential aspects: i) grasp credibility, which demands that the hand pose in each frame
be realistic given the object’s geometry, avoiding interpenetration in particular; ii) manipulation
feasibility, which considers the object’s movement and requires proper hand-object contact that can
plausibly explain the object’s trajectory through hand manipulation, complying with physical laws.
Incorporating physics-based constraints into data-driven de-noising necessitates reshaping the loss
landscape, enabling the network to learn to de-noise hand motions while adhering to physical con-
straints. While this idea appears straightforward, achieving it is difficult due to the intricate and
non-differentiable process of verifying the plausibility of hand motions. Furthermore, when the de-
noising algorithm violates physical constraints, it is necessary to provide a suitable path to guide it
back to feasible motions. Meeting this requirement is even more challenging.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce neural physical losses for assessing grasp
credibility and manipulation feasibility, respectively. These losses are differentiable and can approx-
imate non-differentiable and computationally intensive physical metrics effectively. Furthermore,
they not only differentiate physically invalid hand motions from valid ones but also offer good pro-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


jection directions to correct physically implausible hand motions. We integrate these neural phys-
ical losses into a novel hand motion denoising framework. Specifically, we design a de-noising
auto-encoder that operates on a dual hand-object-interaction representation, along with a two-stage
training process that effectively balances physical constraints and data priors.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our designs, we conduct experiments on both data with synthetic
errors and actual errors caused by trackers and achieve both qualitative and quantitative improve-
ments over the previous state of the arts. To sum up, our main contributions are: First, we propose a
physically-aware hand-object interaction de-noising framework which nicely combines data priors
and physics priors. Second, we introduce differentiable neural physical losses to model both grasp
credibility and manipulation feasibility to support end-to-end physically-aware de-noising. Third,
we demonstrate the generalization of our neural physical losses regarding object, motion, and noise
pattern variations, and show their effectiveness on different benchmarks.

2   R ELATED WORK
Hand reconstruction and tracking The problem of reconstructing 3D hand surfaces from RGB
or depth observations has garnered considerable attention in research. The existing body of work
can be broadly classified into two distinct paradigms. Discriminative approaches focus on directly
estimating hand shape and pose parameters from the observation, employing techniques such as
3D CNNs and volumetric representations Ge et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2021); Zhao et al. (2020);
Malik et al. (2020); Boukhayma et al. (2019). In contrast, generative approaches adopt an iterative
optimization process to refine a parametric hand model, iteratively aligning its projection with the
observed data Sridhar et al. (2014); Taylor et al. (2016; 2017). While recent advancements have
explored more challenging scenarios, such as reconstructing two interacting hands Zhang et al.
(2021a); Mueller et al. (2019); Smith et al. (2020), these approaches often overlook the presence of
objects, leading to decreased reliability in interaction-intensive scenarios. The absence of object-
awareness limits their ability to accurately reconstruct hand surfaces in dynamic environments.

Hand pose denoising The goal of hand pose denoising is to improve the reliability and accu-
racy of the hand pose estimation or tracking system, enabling more robust and realistic hand mo-
tion analysis and interaction in applications such as virtual reality, augmented reality, robotics, and
human-computer interaction. TOCH Zhou et al. (2022)improves motion refinement by establishing
spatio-temporal correspondence between objects and hands. GraspTTA Jiang et al. (2021) utilizes
contact consistency reasoning to generate realistic and stable human-like grasps. D-Grasp Christen
et al. (2022) generates physically realistic and dynamic grasps for interactions between the hand and
objects. Grabnet Taheri et al. (2020) aims to create accurate and visually realistic hand mesh models
while interacting with previously unseen objects.

Physical plausibility in hand-object interaction The physical plausibility during hand-object
interaction has been studied by many previous works. Zhang et al. (2021b) uses a neural network to
learn from human motion and synthesize physics-plausible manipulation. Christen et al. (2022) and
Yang et al. (2022) generate a physics-based hand control policy with deep reinforcement learning
to reach specific grasping or moving goals. While these works focus on synthesizing hand motions,
some works, such as Grady et al. (2021), and Hu et al. (2022), explore reconstructing or refining
hand-object interaction leveraging physics priors, which is more relevant to our work. However,
these works have limitations such as being limited to static grasps, relying on purely data-driven
approaches and assuming only finger tips as source of forces.

3   M ETHOD
In this section, we describe our method for physically-aware hand pose de-noising. We begin by
introducing the problem and outlining our approach. Given a potentially noisy hand pose trajectory
during human-object interaction, represented by a sequence of hand meshes over T frames denoted
by He = (H e i )1≤i≤T with H
                           e i ∈ RK×3 , our method conditions on the object’s geometry and dynamic
information to refine the input and get more physically-plausible results Ĥ = (Ĥ i )1≤i≤T . We
consider hand-object interaction sequences containing a single hand and a single rigid object. Let
O = (Oi )1≤i≤T with Oi ∈ RL×3 denote object vertices over T frames.
To combine data priors and physics priors in the de-noising process, we introduce a dual repre-
sentation of hand-object interaction F = (F i )1≤i≤T = (F(H i , Oi ))1≤i≤T that enables physical


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 1: Overview of the training process.
reasoning besides capturing data priors about hand-object interaction. We elaborate on this represen-
tation in Section 3.1. Using F as an intermediate representation, we refine hand poses via mapping
noisy representation Fe to its correct version F̂ with a de-noising auto-encoder. Using the refined
representation F̂ , the corrected hand pose sequence Ĥ is fitted. Details regarding the architecture of
our de-noising network can be found in Section 3.1.
To produce more physically plausible results, during the training of the de-noising network, besides
traditional data losses, we propose two neural physical loss terms for assessing grasp credibility
and manipulation feasibility. They are capable of conducting physical reasoning given the HOI
representation F and producing assessment scores differentiable to F . What’s more, with carefully
designed training scheme and training targets, these loss terms form smooth landscape, and therefore
yield contributive signals that effectively guide the de-noising network to gain physical-awareness
and produce more physically-plausible results. Section 3.2 and 3.3 describe the construction of these
two loss terms. And we describe their usage in the training process in Section 3.1.

3.1   T RAINING FRAMEWORK
Dual HOI representation Instead of directly using hand vertices as the representation in the
de-noising process, we propose a dual hand-object interaction representation that combines holis-
tic hand pose information and fine-grained hand-object relation. This intermediate representation
bridges explicit hand mesh vertices and physics-related knowledge learned by the proposed neural
loss terms, allowing knowledge to flow between them and eventually improve the physical plausibil-
ity of the refined hand pose. On the one hand, by emphasizing hand-object relation at two different
granularity, this dual representation enables the physical loss terms to reason about contact and deep
penetration cases and better evaluate the physical plausibility of a given hand pose. On the other
hand, with its focus on the physics-related characters of hand poses, when used to fit the explicit
hand pose representation, this proposed representation can effectively improve vital aspects of the
hand pose regarding physical plausibility.
Given hand vertices H = (H i )1≤i≤T of hand MANO Romero et al. (2022) meshes and object
vertices O = (Oi )1≤i≤T over T frames. The whole HOI representation (F i )1≤i≤T we use is
denoted as:
                                            F i = (S i , T i )
We regress the 21 hand key points (S i )1≤i≤T with S i ∈ R21×3 from hand vertices and model object-
centric hand-object correspondence with the implicit field proposed by Zhou et al. (2022), that is,
(T i )1≤i≤T where T i = {Cji }N             i   i  i N
                                j=1 = {(mj , dj , pj )}j=1 . With N points randomly sampled on the
                                   i
object surface in the i-th frame, Cj represents the corresponding hand point of the j-th object point.
To find hand-object correspondence, we cast rays in the object surface’s normal directions from the
sampled points and consider hand points the rays first hit, as the corresponding points. mij is set to
1 if the j-th object point has corresponding hand point and is 0 otherwise. dij denotes the distance


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between the j-th object points and its corresponding hand point, while pij ∈ R3 encodes the semantic
information of the hand point encoded as its position in the canonical space. After obtaining the
refined representation, we can fit hand mesh to the representation and obtain the denoised hand
poses.

De-noising anto-encoder We use an auto-encoder as our backbone, which consumes noisy data
in the form of our dual HOI representation Fe and produces the corrected version F̂ . Our de-noising
network adopts the PointNet Qi et al. (2017) architecture to process the the TOCH field part T i of
the input representation into a global object feature for the i-th frame, which is then concatenated
with the hand-centric part S i in our representation to form the HOI frame feature xi . (xi )1≤i≤T is
considered as time series data and further processed by a RNN, whose output is used to decode the
refined representation F̂ .

Training process To obtain a physically aware de-noising network, we train the auto-encoder in
two stages as shown in Figure 1. In the stage I, we train the model with supervision from ground
truth data, learning a projection mapping from noisy hand pose representation to the clean data
manifold. The training loss of stage I can be expressed as:
                               LI = αT LT (T̂ , TGT ) + αS LS (Ŝ, SGT )
where LT and LS measure the difference between the refined representation F̂ and the ground truth
representation FGT . To reinforce the physical awareness of the de-noising network, we introduce
the two physical loss terms in stage II. Specifically, we freeze the auto-encoder trained in stage I,
but plug in a mapping layer ϕ between the encoder and the decoder, which is trained with the neural
physical losses in stage II. ϕ consumes latent vectors produced by the encoder, together with the
linear accelerations of the object obtained with finite difference method. As the dual representation
is in object-frame, it is necessary to introduce of linear acceleration to enable ϕ to reason about
manipulation feasibility. We enable ϕ to capture the physical reasoning enforced by the two losses,
therefore reshaping the clean hand pose manifold learned in stage I.The training loss of stage II
integrates three components:
                 LII = αgrasp Lgrasp (Ŝ, O) + αmanip Lmanip (T̂ ) + αreg ||ϕ(v, a) − v||2
where Lgrasp and Lmanip are the learned physical losses to be explained in the following sections,
while v denotes the latent vector produced by the encoder and a = (ai )1≤i≤T denotes the linear
accelerations of the object. The regulation term ensures proximity between the mapped and the
original latent vector, therefore maintaining the data priors learned in the first stage.

3.2   G RASP CREDIBILITY LOSS
Given a single frame from a HOI sequence, with no knowledge about the movement of the object,
the geometry relation between hand and object is the most important clue for humans to evaluate the
plausibility of such a frame. To be specific, the hand pose must conform to the object’s geometry,
forming a plausible grasp and avoiding penetration or collision. While many recent works, such as
Hasson et al. (2021), Gundogdu et al. (2019) and Buffet et al. (2019), focus on mitigating hand-
object penetration during hand pose estimation, they tend to be helpless when dealing with deep
penetration cases where the hand penetrates through the object completely instead of just entering
the object surface, which are common when dealing with thin and delicate object parts.
When deep penetration happens, the direction to move the vertices to resolve penetration becomes
ambiguous as the hand mesh lies on both side of the object, and it is very challenging to have a
differentiable term producing correct gradients. While our method understands how to handle deep
penetration through data prior learned from a novel penetration depth metric P D.
P D quantifies the severity of penetration of a noisy hand pose H  e i , which is paired with the corre-
sponding clean hand pose H i , with respect to the object mesh vertices Oi . The metric is computed
by comparing H  e with the ground truth hand mesh vertices.

To compute this penetration depth metric, we focus on the hand vertices in H      e whose counterparts
in H are in contact with the object. Specifically, we consider hand points with distances less than
a threshold ccontact = 2mm to the object surface as contact points. For C contact points {hi }C  i=1 on
                                                                                                C
the ground truth hand mesh, whose counterparts on the evaluated mesh are denoted as {hi }i=1 , we
                                                                                            e
compute their shift between two meshes as {⃗hi = e hi − hi }C                                       C
                                                            i=1 . At the object contact points {oi }i=1 ,


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The proposed grasp credibility loss and manipulation feasibility loss can help quantify the
physical plausibility of hand pose estimation results in a smooth way. Curves on the left depict the
loss landscape of neural losses trained with different target. In the images on the right, the darkness
of hand colors indicates the value of our proposed neural losses. Notice that loss trained with hard
target only (Loss-) produce less smooth landscape.

we compute the normal {⃗ni }Ci=1 of the object surface. Then the metric is computed as:
                   P D(H e , H i | Oi ) = (
                            i
                                                     max         (−⃗nj · ⃗hj ))+
                                                    j=1,2,...,C
                                             ||⃗    nj ·⃗
                                               hj −(⃗       nj ||<ctangent
                                                        hj )⃗

where x+ denotes max(0, x) and ctangent is set to 1cm empirically so that only hands vertices with
small shift in directions orthogonal to the object surfaces are considered for penetration evaluation,
avoiding false positive cases where the hand vertices shift so much that the their positions with
respect to the object change completely. This definition can be considered as an approximation of
the penetration depth at the most severe penetration position. Compared with previous works that
measure the intersection volume or count hand vertices inside the object mesh to evaluate hand-
object inter-penetration, our metric better reflects deep penetration cases.
This metric, however, isn’t differentiable to our intermediate hand-object interaction representation,
hence can’t be directly used for improving the geometry credibility of results produced by our de-
noising network. We train a physics-aware neural network ψgrasp with a PointNet-like backbone that
consumes hand skeletons and object point clouds to produce prediction results p between 0 and 1,
where 0 indicates no severe penetration and 1 indicates the opposite. We introduce a threshold cPD
use the comparison result of P D > cPD as a hard target, as well as the original P D as a soft training
target to encourage smooth prediction output. The loss for training Lgrasp can be defined as:
                Lgrasp train (p, P D) = αgrasp hard BCE(p, bhard ) + αgrasp soft BCE(p, bsoft )
                              bhard = 1P D≥cPD , bsoft = 1 − e−csoft ∗P D
We set csoft = ln(2)
                 cPD such that bsoft = 0.5 when P D = cPD to make sure that bhard and bsoft are
consistent. We set cPD = 1.5cm empirically. BCE(·, ·) denotes the binary cross entropy function.
As shown in Figure 2, the combination of soft target and hard target during the training allows Lgrasp
to distinguish deep penetration cases smoothly, improving its usability as a loss term.
We also attempt to improve the generalization ability of Lgrasp and the loss landscape smoothness
by assuring data variation in its training dataset. Using a HOI dataset containing ground truth data
{(H i , Oi )}D                                           ei i D
              i=1 , we first get its perturbed version {(H , O )}i=1 by adding Gaussian noise to the
MANO parameters. To assure variation in noise magnitude, we further conduct linear interpolation
between the MANO parameters of the ground truth data and the perturbed data to get m hand
poses from each perturbed-clean hand pose pair. The dataset we finally obtain can be expressed
                    i  i m                i                                             i      i
S
  i=1,2,...,D {(H̆j , O )}j=1 where H̆j denotes the j-th interpolation result between H̆1 = H and
H̆ i = H
  m
         e i.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   M ANIPULATION FEASIBILITY LOSS

For a HOI sequence to be realistic, besides grasp credibility that only focuses on the single frame,
whether the object’s movement seems feasible also matters. To this end, we propose two manipu-
lation feasibility metrics, force error (F E) and manipulation expense (M E), that evaluate whether
the given hand-object contact can feasibly move the object along its trajectory. The two metrics are
used as hard target and soft target respectively to train the neural physical loss term Lmanip . The two
metrics, as well as the neural loss term Lmanip , take the hand-object correspondence part T of our
representation and the object’s linear acceleration a as input.
In the first force error metric, we measure to what extent can the object’s movement be explained by
forces applied at the the contacts within the corresponding friction cones.
 Given an implicit field T i , we consider the M contact points among the randomly sampled N points
 on the object surface, and denote the object surface normal at these contact points as {⃗n}M     j=1 . Let
 F⃗ = m0 (−⃗g + ⃗a) denote the force needed for the object with mass m0 to achieve its acceleration
⃗a when subject to gravity m0⃗g . We obtain ⃗a with finite difference method. And let {f⃗j }M     j=1 with
 fj ∈ R3 denotes the set of contact forces applied to the object that we solve for. We require the
 forces to lie in the corresponding friction cones specified by the coefficient of static friction µ. Then
 the force error metric can be expressed as:
                                                                     M
                                                                     X
                          F E({⃗nj }M
                                    j=1 , ⃗
                                          F ) =       min         ||    f⃗j − F⃗ ||
                                                ⃗
                                                f          q
                                                  j               1
                                                ⃗ || ·(−⃗
                                              ||f
                                                        nj )≥   1+µ2
                                                                       j=1
                                                  j

Notice that F E is always between 0 and 1, and ideally, for a physically plausible frame, F E should
be 0. Since we only care about the relative force error, m0 can be set to any non-zero constant. We
set m0 = 1kg. µ is set to 0.8 empirically. We elaborate on the choices of these physical properties
in the supplementary material.
While this force error metric can be used as a binary result to verify whether the movement of the
object is feasible given a certain hand pose, a major drawback is that its value doesn’t correctly reflect
how infeasible a hand pose is. However, to obtain a loss term with smoother landscape, a metric
with continuous result indicating the degree of manipulation feasibility would be more favorable.
Therefore, we propose the manipulation expense metric that evaluates how far the given hand pose
is from the closest feasible hand pose.
Intuitively, this manipulation expense metric considers all the plausible force distribution maps that
yield the required total force, and find the one that best match the current contact map, in that least
forces are applied at object points which are actually far from the hand. The difference between
the current contact map and its best match found in the above manner can reflect the quality of the
current contact map regarding manipulation feasibility.
In this metric, we consider all N sampled object points in T i , and dj denotes the signed distance
between the j-th sampled object point and its corresponding hand point. Let {f⃗j }N               ⃗
                                                                                        j=1 with fj ∈ R
                                                                                                        3

denote potential forces exerted at the N sampled points, the manipulation expense metric can be
expressed as:
                                                            XN
           M E({⃗nj }N
                     j=1 , {dj }N
                                j=1 , ⃗
                                      F ) =      min              ||f⃗j || · (|dj | − ccontact )+
                                               ⃗
                                               f      q
                                                j              1
                                               ⃗ || ·(−⃗
                                             ||f
                                                       nj )≥ 1+µ 2   j=1
                                                j
                                                   PN ⃗ ⃗
                                                          f
                                                      j=1 j =F


We calculate F E and M E by solving for {f⃗j }M                 ⃗ N
                                                      j=1 and {fj }j=1 through optimization processes
respectively. Please refer to our supplementary material for details. We train a PointNet-like neural
predictor ψmanip that produces a output q between 0 and 1, to form the manipulation feasibility loss.
The training loss of ψmanip is formed as:
             Lmanip train (q, F E, M E) = αmanip hard BCE(q, shard ) + αmanip soft BCE(q, ssoft )
                                                                       arctan(M E)
                     shard = 1F E≥cF E , ssoft = 1F E≥cF E · (0.5 +                   )
                                                                              π
αmanip hard and αmanip soft are constant weights. We use the same training dataset for Lmanip as the one
used to train Lgrasp .


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Qualitative results on GRAB dataset. We can see that TOCH produces physically implau-
sible results when dealing with thin and delicate parts of objects, while our results are more realistic.
4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section we evaluate the proposed method on data with synthetic noise and actual tracking
noise. We first introduce the datatsets (Section 4.1) and the evaluation metrics (Section 4.2). Results
of our approach on correcting synthetic tracking error and refining results from vision-based trackers
are in (Section 4.3) and (Section 4.4) respectively. Finally, we conduct ablation studies to evaluate
the advantages of our physically-aware loss design in Section 4.5.


4.1   DATASETS

GRAB. We train our de-noising network and the two neural loss terms on GRAB Taheri et al. (2020),
a MoCap dataset for whole-body grasping of objects containing 51 objects from Brahmbhatt et al.
(2020). We follow the recommended split and select 10 objects for evaluation and testing.
HO-3D. HO-3D is a dataset of hand-object interaction videos captured by RGB-D cameras, paired
with frame-wise annotations of 3D hand poses and object poses. We use HO-3D to evaluate how
well our pipeline trained with synthetic pose errors can generalize to real tracking errors produced
by vision-based trackers. We use the second official release of HO-3D.


4.2   M ETRICS

Mean Per-Joint Position Error (MPJPE) and Mean Per-Vertex Position Error (MPVPE). We
report the average Euclidean distances between refined and ground truth 3D hand joints and vertices.
These metrics measure the accuracy of hand poses and shapes.
Intersection Volume (IV). This metric measures volume of the intersection between the hand mesh
and the object mesh. It reflects the degree of hand-object inter-penetration.
Penetration Depth (PD). To better measure cases of deep penetration, we also report the penetration
depth metric proposed in Section 3.2. Since the ground truth hand poses of HO-3D are withheld, we
cannot calculate PD on HO-3D and only report it on GRAB.
Contact IoU. This metric assesses the Intersection-over-Union between the ground truth contact
map and the predicted contact map. The contact maps are obtained by considering object vertices
within 2 mm from the hand as in contact. This metric is also reported on GRAB only.
Plausible Rate. To consider both grasp credibility and manipulation feasibility for a holistic assess-
ment regarding physical plausibility, we use this metric that reflects both aspect. For a given frame
of hand pose to be plausible, i) the PD metric should be less than 1.5cm (this threshold is chosen
following Zhang et al. (2021b)), ii) the force error metric proposed in 3.3 should be less than 0.1.
Since PD is not available for HO-3D, we only consider ii) for evaluation on HO-3D.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   R EFINING SYTHETIC E RROR
To employ our de-noising method in more realistic applications and achieve best potential perfor-
mance, it would be ideal to train the model on the predictions of the target tracking method to be
augmented. Yet this might lead to overfitting to tracker-specific noise, which is undesirable for gen-
eralization. Hence we trained the network on dataset with Gaussian noise of different composition
and magnitude, which synthesizes the hand errors that tracking methods induce. Quantitative results
are shown in Table 1 and qualitative results are presented in Figure 3
Table 1: Quantitative results on refining GRAB dataset with sythetic noise. T-0.01 denotes the
dataset with translation noise complying the distribution N (0, 0.01), θ-0.3 denotes the dataset with
pose noise complying the distribution N (0, 0.3), other noise patterns are denoted similarly. We
additionally add ∆r ∼ N (0, 0.05) to the global orientation in all the datasets. We train the network
only on the ”T-0.01, θ-0.3” dataset and test it on datasets with different noise patterns. Our method
is robust to different noise patterns and magnitudes, especially in its ability to produce physically
plausible results.
                                                                              T-0.01       T-0.02
                  T-0.01        T-0.02          θ-0.3         θ-0.5
                                                                              θ-0.3        θ-0.5
   MPJPE       16.01 → 6.91 27.83 → 10.01 7.52 → 5.61 8.74 → 6.38 18.86 → 7.39 31.49 → 11.97
   MPVPE       16.32 → 6.24 28.43 → 10.46 6.23 → 6.31 8.85 → 6.97 19.13 → 6.78 33.25 → 11.24
 contact IoU 3.31 → 24.82 2.39 → 21.77 5.45 → 25.14 4.46 → 24.18 3.62 → 23.94 2.47 → 20.50
     IV         0.91 → 0.90 1.43 → 1.10 0.88 → 0.92 1.77 → 0.94 0.87 → 1.13 2.35 → 1.12
     PD         0.77 → 0.32 0.85 → 0.43 0.74 → 0.44 1.22 → 0.47 0.80 → 0.44 1.56 → 0.45
plausible rate 0.42 → 0.95 0.33 → 0.92 0.45 → 0.93 0.43 → 0.93 0.42 → 0.91 0.31 → 0.90


Table 2: Quantitative results on HO-3D dataset. The hand joint and mesh errors are obtained after
Procrustes alignment following the official evaluation protocol of HO-3D.

                                     MPJPE     MPVPE        IV    plausible rate
                    Hasson et al.     11.4       11.4      8.75        0.71
                      TOCH            10.9       11.3      7.24        0.73
                       Ours           10.7       11.2      5.95        0.85

4.4   R EFINING VISION - BASED HAND TRACKER
We also use our network to refine the results produced by state-of-the-art vision-based models on
HO-3D dataset. To evaluate how well our method generalize to actual tracker error, both the de-
noising auto-encoder and the two neural loss terms are trained only on GRAB with synthetic errors,
and then used on HO-3D without further fine-tuning. Hasson et al. Hasson et al. (2020), a RGB-
based hand pose tracker is used to predict hand poses on the test split of HO-3D dataset. Zhou et al.
(2022) and our method are used to refine the results it produces. The results are shown in Table 2.
Physical plausibility is significantly improved, which is indicated by IV and plausibility rate.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDIES
Physically-aware loss. To demonstrate the advantages of our proposed physically-aware loss terms
in modeling and improving physical plausibility, in stage II, we remove signals from the two neural
loss terms perspectively and train two baseline de-noising networks. Comparison between them and
our complete method is presented in Table 3.
Without the grasp credibility loss, the network tends to more actively adhere the hand to the ob-
ject surface, increasing the contact area so that FE and ME can likely be reduced. However, this
is achieved at the expense of more severe hand-object inter-penetration, indicated by IV and PD.
Removing the manipulation feasibility loss induces the opposite result. While lower IV and PD are
attained, cases where the object is hovering in the air appear more frequently.
Soft target for training neural losses. When training the physically-aware neural loss terms, we
use both soft target and hard target for smooth loss landscape. To demonstrate the advantages of this
design, we train baseline neural losses with hard target only and compare them with neural losses
trained with both targets, and present comparisons in Table 4 and Figure 2 regarding their classifi-
cation performance on test set and ability of improving the de-noising network when exploited.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Qualitative results on HO-3D dataset. Our method effectively denoises tracking result,
and produces more physically plausible hand-object interaction than TOCH.

                               Table 3: Ablation on the physical neural losses.

                                MPJPE       MPVPE      contactIoU       IV       PD     plausible rate
              GT                    -            -           -         0.75       -          0.92
            TOCH                 13.17        12.24        21.83       2.24     0.55         0.78
        Ours(w/o Lmanip )        7.41         6.78         23.96       0.96     0.41         0.82
        Ours(w/o Lgrasp )        7.28         6.65         23.51       2.43     0.59         0.81
             Ours                 7.39         6.78        23.94       1.13     0.44         0.91



Table 4: We use the losses to discern implausible frames on the test split of Perturbed GRAB and
report their F-scores. While the classification performance of losses trained with two types of target
choices are close, neural losses trained with both targets yield better results when exploited.

    (a) Target used to train grasp credibility loss.   (b) Target used to train manipulation feasibility loss.

                      F-score       PD       IV                               F-score   plausible rate
         hard           0.85       0.49     1.52               hard            0.90           0.84
      hard + soft       0.93       0.44     1.13            hard + soft        0.88           0.91


5    C ONCLUSION
We propose a physically-aware hand-object interaction de-noising framework which combines data
priors and physics priors to generate plausible results.In particular, our differentiable neural physical
losses effectively assess grasp credibility and manipulation feasibility of given hand poses and form
smooth loss landscape, enabling physically-aware de-noising. Experiments demonstrate that our
method generalize well to novel objects, motions and noise patterns.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have provided implementation details in the main paper and supplementary material. We will
release the code to reproduce our results upon acceptance.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Adnane Boukhayma, Rodrigo de Bem, and Philip HS Torr. 3d hand shape and pose from images in
  the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 10843–10852, 2019.
Samarth Brahmbhatt, Chengcheng Tang, Christopher D Twigg, Charles C Kemp, and James Hays.
  Contactpose: A dataset of grasps with object contact and hand pose. In Computer Vision–ECCV
  2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIII 16,
  pp. 361–378. Springer, 2020.
Thomas Buffet, Damien Rohmer, Loic Barthe, Laurence Boissieux, and Marie-Paule Cani. Implicit
  untangling: A robust solution for modeling layered clothing. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 38(4):1–12, 2019.
Jiayi Chen, Mi Yan, Jiazhao Zhang, Yinzhen Xu, Xiaolong Li, Yijia Weng, Li Yi, Shuran Song, and
   He Wang. Tracking and reconstructing hand object interactions from point cloud sequences in the
   wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12009, 2022.
Liangjian Chen, Shih-Yao Lin, Yusheng Xie, Yen-Yu Lin, and Xiaohui Xie. Mvhm: A large-scale
  multi-view hand mesh benchmark for accurate 3d hand pose estimation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 836–845, 2021.
Sammy Christen, Muhammed Kocabas, Emre Aksan, Jemin Hwangbo, Jie Song, and Otmar
  Hilliges. D-grasp: Physically plausible dynamic grasp synthesis for hand-object interactions.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  20577–20586, 2022.
Liuhao Ge, Zhou Ren, Yuncheng Li, Zehao Xue, Yingying Wang, Jianfei Cai, and Junsong Yuan.
  3d hand shape and pose estimation from a single rgb image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10833–10842, 2019.
Patrick Grady, Chengcheng Tang, Christopher D Twigg, Minh Vo, Samarth Brahmbhatt, and
  Charles C Kemp. Contactopt: Optimizing contact to improve grasps. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1471–1481, 2021.
Erhan Gundogdu, Victor Constantin, Amrollah Seifoddini, Minh Dang, Mathieu Salzmann, and
  Pascal Fua. Garnet: A two-stream network for fast and accurate 3d cloth draping. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8739–8748, 2019.
Yana Hasson, Bugra Tekin, Federica Bogo, Ivan Laptev, Marc Pollefeys, and Cordelia Schmid.
  Leveraging photometric consistency over time for sparsely supervised hand-object reconstruction.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 571–
  580, 2020.
Yana Hasson, Gül Varol, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Towards unconstrained joint hand-
  object reconstruction from rgb videos. In 2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp.
  659–668. IEEE, 2021.
Haoyu Hu, Xinyu Yi, Hao Zhang, Jun-Hai Yong, and Feng Xu. Physical interaction: Reconstructing
  hand-object interactions with physics. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers, pp. 1–9,
  2022.
Hanwen Jiang, Shaowei Liu, Jiashun Wang, and Xiaolong Wang. Hand-object contact consistency
  reasoning for human grasps generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03304, 2021.
Jameel Malik, Ibrahim Abdelaziz, Ahmed Elhayek, Soshi Shimada, Sk Aziz Ali, Vladislav
  Golyanik, Christian Theobalt, and Didier Stricker. Handvoxnet: Deep voxel-based network for
  3d hand shape and pose estimation from a single depth map. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7113–7122, 2020.
Franziska Mueller, Micah Davis, Florian Bernard, Oleksandr Sotnychenko, Mickeal Verschoor,
  Miguel A Otaduy, Dan Casas, and Christian Theobalt. Real-time pose and shape reconstruc-
  tion of two interacting hands with a single depth camera. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  38(4):1–13, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.
Javier Romero, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Embodied hands: Modeling and capturing
  hands and bodies together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02610, 2022.
Breannan Smith, Chenglei Wu, He Wen, Patrick Peluse, Yaser Sheikh, Jessica K Hodgins, and
  Takaaki Shiratori. Constraining dense hand surface tracking with elasticity. ACM Transactions
  on Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–14, 2020.
Srinath Sridhar, Helge Rhodin, Hans-Peter Seidel, Antti Oulasvirta, and Christian Theobalt. Real-
  time hand tracking using a sum of anisotropic gaussians model. In 2014 2nd International Con-
  ference on 3D Vision, volume 1, pp. 319–326. IEEE, 2014.
Omid Taheri, Nima Ghorbani, Michael J Black, and Dimitrios Tzionas. Grab: A dataset of whole-
 body human grasping of objects. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
 Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 581–600. Springer, 2020.
Jonathan Taylor, Lucas Bordeaux, Thomas Cashman, Bob Corish, Cem Keskin, Toby Sharp, Ed-
  uardo Soto, David Sweeney, Julien Valentin, Benjamin Luff, et al. Efficient and precise inter-
  active hand tracking through joint, continuous optimization of pose and correspondences. ACM
  Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–12, 2016.
Jonathan Taylor, Vladimir Tankovich, Danhang Tang, Cem Keskin, David Kim, Philip Davidson,
  Adarsh Kowdle, and Shahram Izadi. Articulated distance fields for ultra-fast tracking of hands
  interacting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(6):1–12, 2017.
Zeshi Yang, Kangkang Yin, and Libin Liu. Learning to use chopsticks in diverse gripping styles.
  ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–17, 2022.
Baowen Zhang, Yangang Wang, Xiaoming Deng, Yinda Zhang, Ping Tan, Cuixia Ma, and Hon-
  gan Wang. Interacting two-hand 3d pose and shape reconstruction from single color image. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 11354–11363,
  2021a.
He Zhang, Yuting Ye, Takaaki Shiratori, and Taku Komura. Manipnet: neural manipulation synthe-
  sis with a hand-object spatial representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 40(4):1–14,
  2021b.
Zhengyi Zhao, Tianyao Wang, Siyu Xia, and Yangang Wang. Hand-3d-studio: A new multi-view
  system for 3d hand reconstruction. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2478–2482. IEEE, 2020.
Keyang Zhou, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Jan Eric Lenssen, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Toch: Spatio-
  temporal object-to-hand correspondence for motion refinement. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022:
  17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part III, pp. 1–19.
  Springer, 2022.


                                                11
