Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L A MPP: L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS P ROBABILISTIC P RI -
ORS FOR P ERCEPTION AND ACTION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Language models trained on large text corpora encode rich distributional informa-
             tion about real-world environments and action sequences. This information plays a
             crucial role in current approaches to language processing tasks like question an-
             swering and instruction generation. We describe how to leverage language models
             for non-linguistic perception and control tasks. Our approach casts labeling and
             decision-making as inference in probabilistic graphical models in which language
             models parameterize prior distributions over labels, decisions and parameters,
             making it possible to integrate uncertain observations and incomplete background
             knowledge in a principled and query-efficient way. Applied to semantic segmenta-
             tion, household navigation, and activity recognition tasks, this approach improves
             predictions on rare, out-of-distribution, and structurally novel inputs.1



1       I NTRODUCTION

Common-sense priors are crucial for decision-making under uncertainty in real-world environments.
Suppose that we wish to label the objects in the scene depicted in Fig. 1(b). Once a few prominent
objects (like the bathtub) have been identified, it is clear that the picture depicts a bathroom. This
helps resolve some more challenging object labels: the curtain in the scene is a shower curtain, not a
window curtain; the object on the wall is more likely a mirror than a painting. Prior knowledge about
likely object or event co-occurrences are essential not just in vision tasks, but also for navigating
unfamiliar places and understanding other agents’ behaviors. Indeed, such expectations play a key
role in human reasoning for tasks like object classification and written text interpretation (Kveraga
et al., 2007; Mirault et al., 2018).
In most problem domains, current machine learning models acquire information about the prior
distribution of labels and decisions from task-specific datasets. Especially when training data is
sparse or biased, this can result in systematic errors, particularly on unusual or out-of-distribution
inputs. How might we endow models with more general and flexible prior knowledge?
We propose to use language models (LMs)—learned distributions over natural language strings—as
task-general probabilistic priors. Unlike segmented images or robot demonstrations, large text corpora
are readily available and describe diverse facets of human experience. LMs trained on them encode
much of this information—like the fact that plates are located in kitchens, and that whisking eggs is
preceded by breaking them—with greater diversity and fidelity than provided by most task-specific
datasets. Such linguistic supervision has also been hypothesized to play a role in aspects of human
common-sense knowledge that are difficult to learn from direct experience (Painter, 2005).
In text generation tasks, LMs are used as knowledge sources in tasks spanning common-sense
question answering (Talmor et al., 2021), storytelling (Ammanabrolu et al., 2020; 2021), and program
synthesis (Lew et al., 2020). They have also been applied to grounded language understanding
problems via “model chaining” approaches, which encode the output of perceptual systems as natural
language strings that can be input to LMs (Zeng et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2022). In general, such
approaches are effective but computationally costly to run—LMs must be queried for every possible
labeling decision, limiting their applicability to problems with simple action or label spaces.

    1
        Our code will be made publicly available upon acceptance.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this paper, we focus on LMs as a source of                                                                             make
probabilistic background knowledge that can be
                                                              Latent
                                                              labels    Y′         bathroom             find TV         pancakes
                                                                             p(                      p( a TV in a )
                                                                                  a bathroom )
                                                                                               ×
                                                                                  a bathtub in                           to make
integrated with existing domain models and in-
                                                                                                                       ( crack egg )
                                                                                                        living room
                                                            LM prior                                                  p pancakes,
                                                             p(Y, Y′)        p(
                                                                                  in a bathroom )
                                                                                  a shower curtain
ference procedures. By using LMs to place prior                                                             living
                                                                                                                         then whisk
                                                                                                     TV
distributions over labels, decisions or model                                                               room      crack
                                                        Target labels   Y    bathtub      shower
                                                                                          curtain                     egg
                                                                                                                              whisk
parameters, we can combine “top-down” back-
ground knowledge with “bottom-up” task mod-              Observation
                                                           generator
els, resulting in a principled framework for in-            p(X ∣ Y )
tegrating linguistic supervision with structured
uncertainty about non-linguistic variables.             Observations    X        Image                Object             Action
                                                                              Segmentation           Navigation        Recognition
We call this approach L A MPP (Language                  (a)             (b)            (c)         (d)
Models as Probabilistic Priors). L A MPP is
a generic modeling framework that operates Figure 1: In L A MPP, the LM′ provides a prior over a
                                                  structured label space P (Y, Y ) and a task-specific ob-
on top of and improves base models for exist- servation model provides P (X | Y ). We apply L A MPP
ing tasks. Similar in spirit to chain-of-thought to concrete tasks, including image segmentation and
prompting (Wei et al., 2022) and Socratic model video action recognition. In image segmentation, the
approaches (Zeng et al., 2023), L A MPP is not LM provides a prior over what objects are likely to co-
a (single) model that can be applied in the same occur (based on room-object probabilities), which allows
way across domains, but rather a “modeling phi- it to determine that the observed curtain is a shower cur-
losophy” based on querying LMs for the pa- tain. In action recognition, the LM provides a prior over
rameters of task-specific priors rather than for what action sequences are likely to accomplish the target
predictions directly. Our experiments show that tasks, allowing it to infer the action sequence in a video.
this approach can match or outperform existing “prediction-first” approaches for integrating LMs and
domain models, while requiring orders of magnitude fewer LM queries.
We present three case studies featuring tasks with diverse objectives and input modalities—semantic
image segmentation, robot navigation, and video action recognition. Across problem domains,
L A MPP consistently improves performance on rare, out-of-distribution, and structurally novel inputs,
and sometimes in-distribution accuracy. We also show that L A MPP offers complementary benefits
to multimodal pre-training schemes (like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) that learn from paired text
and task data. Our results show that language is a useful source of background knowledge for
general decision-making, and that uncertain background knowledge can be integrated with uncertain
observations to yield accurate predictions. Moreover, LaMPP interacts with LMs once per domain
rather than once per input, it can be applied to large test sets and label spaces with no query overhead.


2    M ETHOD

A language model (LM) is a distribution over natural language strings. LMs trained on sufficiently
large text datasets become good models not just of grammatical phenomena, but various kinds of
world knowledge (Talmor et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021). Our work proposes to extract probabilistic
common-sense priors from language models, which can then be used to supplement and inform
arbitrary task-specific models operating over multiple modalities. These priors can be leveraged at
multiple stages in the machine learning pipeline:
Prediction: In many learning problems, our ultimate goal is to model a distribution p(y | x) over
labels or decisions y given (non-linguistic) observations x. These ys might be structured objects: in
Fig. 1(b), x is an image and y is a set of labels for objects in the image. By Bayes’ rule, we can write
p(y | x) ∝ p(y)p(x | y), which factors this decision-making problem into two parts: a prior over
labels p(y), and a generative model of observations p(x | y). With such a generative model, we may
immediately combine it with a representation of the prior p(y) to model the distribution over labels.
Learning: In models with interpretable parameters, we may also leverage knowledge about the
distribution of these parameters themselves during learning, before we make any predictions at all.
Given a dataset D of examples (xi , yi ) and a predictive model p(y | x; θ), we may write:

                                                         Y
                         p(θ | D) ∝ p(D | θ)p(θ) =                p(yi | xi ; θ) p(θ) ,
                                                              i



                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in this case making it possible to leverage prior knowledge of θ itself, e.g., when optimizing model
parameters or performing full Bayesian inference.
In structured output spaces like segmented images or robot trajectories, a useful prior contains
information about which joint configurations are plausible (e.g., an image might contain sofas and
chairs, or showers and sinks, but not sinks and sofas). How can we use an LM to obtain and use
distributions p(y) or p(θ)? Applying L A MPP in a given problem domain involves four steps:

      1. Choosing a base model: We use any model of observations p(x | y) or labels p(y | x; θ).
      2. Designing a label space: When reasoning about a joint distribution over labels or parameters,
         correlations between these variables might be expressed most compactly in terms of some
         other latent variable (in Fig. 1(b), object labels are coupled by a latent room). Before
         querying an LM to obtain p(y) or p(θ), we may introduce additional variables like this one
         to better model probabilistic relationships among labels.
      3. Querying the LM: We then obtain scores for each configuration of y or θ by prompting
         a language model with a query about the plausibility of the configuration, then evaluating
         the probability that the LM assigns to the query. Examples are shown in Fig. 1(b–c). For
         all experiments in this paper, we use the GPT-3 (specifically, the text-davinci-003
         model) to score queries (Brown et al., 2020).
      4. Inference: Finally, we perform inference in the graphical model defined by p(y) and p(x | y)
         (or p(θ) p(y | x, θ)) to find the highest-scoring configuration of y for a given x.

In Sections 3–5, we apply this framework to three learning problems. In each section, we eval-
uate L A MPP’s ability to improve generalization over base models. We focus on three types of
generalization: zero-shot (ZS), out-of-distribution (OOD), and in-distribution (ID). The type of
generalization required depends on the availability and distribution of training data: ZS evaluations
focus on the case in which p(x | y) is known (possibly just for components of y, e.g., appearances of
individual objects), but no information about the joint distribution p(y) (e.g., configurations of rooms)
is available at training time. OOD evaluations focus on biased training sets (in which particular label
combinations are over- or under-represented). ID evaluations focus on cases where the full evaluation
distribution is known and available at training time.
Finally, we note that L A MPP is much cheaper than approaches
                                                                           bedroom         r     room
                                                                                                    p(                   )
                                                                                                         a nightstand in
in which the LM is responsible for directly generating final pre-                                        a bedroom
dictions. In L A MPP, there is a fixed overhead cost to construct
the graphical model for each domain, after which inference           bed    y1          nightstand
                                                                                                             y2     true
                                                                                                                    label
does not require interacting with an LM at all; model probabil-
                                                                                 p(                      )
                                                                                      a nightstand looks
ities can be re-composed and reused indefinitely for each new                         like a table

inference.                                                           bed    d1                 table         d2     noisy
                                                                                                                    label


3   L A MPP FOR S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION
                                                                                                             x2
We first study the task of semantic image segmentation: iden-               x1
tifying object boundaries in an image and labeling each object                                            image
                                                                                                          segments
xi with its class yi . How might background knowledge from
an LM help with this task? Intuitively, it may be hard for a
                                                          Figure 2: Generative model for image
bottom-up visual classifier to integrate global image context
                                                          semantic segmentation. Images orig-
and model correlations among distant objects’ labels. LMs inate in a room r, which generates the
encode common-sense information about the global structureobjects y1 , y2 in the room, which gen-
                                                          erate noisy labels d1 , d2 representing
of scenes, which can be combined with easy-to-predict object
labels to help with more challenging predictions.         perceptually similar objects. Finally,
                                                          each di generates an image segment xi ,
                                                          a continuous region of image pixels de-
3.1 M ETHODS                                              picting each object. Rooms r, true la-
                                                          bels yi , and noisy labels di are latent,
Base model Standard models for semantic segmentation dis- while image segments xi are observed.
criminatively assign a label yi to each pixel xi in an input image
x according to some pseg (yi | x). We use RedNet (Jiang et al., 2018), a ResNet-50-based autoencoder
model, or CLIPSeg (Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022), a zero-shot segmentation model built off CLIP,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Base Model         Total # Tokens     Best / Worst /
          + Method           ($ Cost)           Avg. ∆IoU             ∆ IoU over object classes

          RedNet (ID)        9.5e+5 tokens      +18.9 / −2.16 /
          + L A MPP          ($1.86*)           +0.5


          RedNet (ID)        1.6e+8 tokens      +16.9 / −37.2 /
          + SM               ($3112*)           −10.3


          RedNet (OOD)       9.5e+5 tokens      +8.92 / −2.50 /
          + L A MPP          ($1.86*)           +0.2


          CLIPSeg (ZS)       9.5e+5 tokens      +13.3 / −5.0 /
          + L A MPP          ($1.86*)           +0.4


Table 1: Image semantic segmentation results for ID and OOD generalization. We report the total cost (in terms
of # tokens, and the rough dollar amount) for running the entire experiment. L A MPP is much cheaper than SM.
We also report the improvement to Intersection-over-Union (IoU) when applying either L A MPP or a Socratic
model approach to each base model. We compute separate ∆IoU for each object class and report the largest,
smallest, and average ∆IoU over classes in the third column, visualizing the full distribution of ∆IoU over object
classes in the rightmost column. L A MPP improves semantic segmentation dramatically on certain categories,
while having minimal effect on all other categories. *Costs computed relative to Sept. 28, 2023 pricing.

to compute pseg . By computing arg maxy p(y | x) for each pixel in an input image, we obtain a
collection of segments: contiguous input regions assigned the same label (see Fig. 2 bottom). When
applying L A MPP, we treat these segments as given, but infer a new joint labeling.
Label Space We hypothesize a generative process (Fig. 2) in which every image originates in a
room r. Conditioned on the room, a fixed number of objects are generated, each with label yi . To
model possible perceptual ambiguity, each true object labels in turn generates a noisy object label di .
Finally, each of these generates an image segment xi .
We use the base segmentation model pseg to compute p(xi | di ) by applying Bayes’ rule locally for
each segment: p(xi | di ) ∝ pseg (di | xi )/p(di ). All other distributions are parameterized by a LM.
Ultimately, we wish to recover object labels yi ; latent labels r and d help extract usable background
information about objects’ co-occurrence patterns and perceptual properties.
LM Queries We compute the object–room co-occurrence probabilities p(yi | r) by prompting the
LM with: “A(n) [r] has a(n) [yi ]: [plausible / implausible] ”. We compute the relative probability
assigned to the tokens plausible and implausible, then normalize over all object labels y to parameter-
ize the final distribution. We use the same procedure to parameterize the object–object confusion
model p(di | yi ), using the prompt: “The [di ] looks like the [yi ]: [plausible / implausible] ”.
Inference The model in Fig. 2 defines a joint distribution over all labels y = y1 , . . . , yn . To re-label
a segmented image, we compute the max-marginal-probability label for each segment independently:
                                                            X X X
                           arg max p(yi | x) = arg max                         p(x, d, y, r)                  (1)
                                                            r    y\{yi }   d


The form of the decision rule used for semantic segmentation (which includes several simplifications
for computational efficiency) can be found in Appendix A.1.

3.2    E XPERIMENTS

We use the SUN RGB-D dataset (Song et al., 2015), which contains RGB-D images of indoor
environments. We also implement a Socratic model (SM) baseline that integrates LM knowledge
without considering model uncertainties. We take noisy labels from the image model (di ) and directly


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


query the LM for true labels (yi ). Details of this baseline can be found in Appendix A.2. We evaluate
the RedNet and CLIPSeg base models, this Socratic model approach, and L A MPP on in-distribution,
out-of-distribution, and zero-shot generalization.
ID Generalization We use a RedNet checkpoint trained on the entire SUNRGB-D training split. As
these splits were not created with any special biases in mind, the training split should reflect a similar
label distribution to the test split.
OOD Generalization We train RedNet on a distribution p(yi , yj ) that differs from the true distri-
bution. We do this by picking two object labels that commonly occur together (i.e. picking yi and
yj such that p(yi , yj ) is high), and removing all images from the training set where they do occur
together (thus making p(yi , yj ) close to zero in the training set). In this case, we choose beds and
nightstands and remove images where they co-occur from the training set. We evaluate on the original
test split where beds and nightstands frequently co-occur.
ZS Generalization We use CLIPSeg applied to the SUNRGB-D domain without fine-tuning. We
use CLIPSeg instead of RedNet here because CLIPSeg is pre-trained and designed to be applied
zero-shot, whereas RedNet is not pre-trained.

3.3   R ESULTS

We measure change in intersection-over-union (∆IoU) between predicted and ground-truth object
segmentations afforded to each object class after applying L A MPP and SM to each base model.
Results can be found in Table 1 and Appendix A.3.
We see that in all cases, L A MPP improves the accuracy of the base classifier. To get a better
understanding of the distribution of improvements over object categories, we report per-category
differences in IoU of our model relative to the baseline image model (columns 2 and 4). As expected
L A MPP offers very large accuracy improvements on a small number of rare classes, while preserving
model behavior on all other classes. The third column shows that L A MPP is much cheaper than SM.
Note that we do not run SM in the OOD or ZS cases due to its prohibitive cost.
In the ID setting, the accuracy of detecting shower curtains (see Appendix A.3) improves by nearly
20 points with L A MPP, as the base model obtains near-0% mIoU on shower curtains, almost always
mistaking them for (window) curtains. Here, background knowledge from language fixes a major
(and previously undescribed) prediction error for a rare class. The Socratic model approach repairs
prediction errors on the same rare class as L A MPP in the ID setting, but introduces many other errors.
In the OOD setting, the base image model sees far fewer examples of nightstands and consequently
never predicts nightstands on the test data. (Nightstands are frequently predicted to be tables and
cabinets instead). This is likewise rectified with L A MPP: background knowledge from language
reduces model sensitivity to a systematic bias in dataset construction.
Finally, in the ZS setting, we see that L A MPP is able to offer additional improvements even on top
of a model trained in a multi-modal fashion. This shows that even large, pre-trained multi-modal
models are subject to biases that can be fixed with (other) LMs.

4     L A MPP FOR NAVIGATION

We next turn to the problem of object navigation. Here, we wish to build an agent that, given a goal
object g (e.g., a television or a bed), can take actions a to explore and find g in an environment, while
using noisy partial observations x from a camera for object recognition and decision-making. Prior
knowledge about where goal objects are likely located can guide this exploration, steering agents
away from regions of the environment unlikely to accomplish the agent’s goals.

4.1   M ETHODS

Base model We assume access to a pre-trained navigation policy (in this case, from the STUBBORN
agent; Luo et al., 2022) that can plan a path to any specified coordinate a in the environment given
image observations x. Our goal is to build a high-level policy π(a | x) that can direct this low-level
navigation. We focus on household environments, and assume access to a coarse semantic map of


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


an environment that identifies rooms, but not locations of objects within them. In each state, the
STUBBORN low-level navigation policy also outputs a scalar score reflecting its confidence that the
goal object is present.                                                           goal
                                                                                 TV      g     object
Label space Our high-level policy alternates between per-
forming two kinds of actions a: Navigation, where the agent
chooses a room r in the environment to move to (when a room                     living   r     agent
                                                                                               location
                                                                                room
is selected, we direct the low-level navigation policy to move                               p(a TV in a living room)

to a point in the center of the room, and then explore randomly
                                                                                true     y     goal object
                                                                                               present?
within the room for a fixed number of time steps), and Selec-
tion, whenever an observation is received during navigation,
the agent evaluates whether it the goal object is present (if so,
the episode ends).                                                                       x     agent
                                                                                               observation

A rollout of this policy thus consists of a sequence of navigation
actions, interleaved with a selection action for every observation  Figure 3: Generative model for object
obtained while navigating. In both cases, choosing actions          navigation. Given goal object g, we
effectively requires inference of a specific unobserved property    depict a decomposition of the agent’s
of environment state: whether the goal object is in fact present    success score y, which takes on value 1
                                                                    (true) if g is present and 0 (false) other-
near the agent. We represent this property with a latent variable   wise. We focus on a household domain
y. When navigating, the agent must infer the room that is most      in which agents navigate to rooms r. r
likely to contain the goal object. When selecting, the agent        generates the success condition y (indi-
must infer whether its current perception is reliable.              cating whether g is present at the agent
                                                                    location), which generates the agent ob-
We normalize the low-level policy’s success score and interpret servation x of the location. Goal ob-
it as a distribution p(x | y), then use the LM to define a distri- jects g and rooms r are given, success
bution p(y | r, g). Together, these give a distribution over latent conditions y are latent, and agent obser-
success conditions and observations given goals and locations, vations x are partially observed.
which are used to select high-level actions.
LM queries For p(y | r, g), we use the same query as in Section 3 for deriving object–room
probabilities, inserting g in place of yi , except here we do not normalize over object labels (since y is
binary), and simply take the relative probability of generating the token plausible.
Inference With this model, we define a policy that performs inference about the location of the
goal object, then greedily attempts to navigate to the location most likely to contain it. This requires
defining p(a | x, g) for both navigation and selection steps. In Navigation, the agent chooses a room
r maximizing p(y | r, g). (The agent does not yet have an observation from the new room, so the
optimal policy moves to the room most likely to contain the goal object a priori.) In Selection, the
agent ends the episode only if p(y | x, r, g) > τ for some confidence threshold τ . We use τ = 0.2 in
our experiments, tuned on a subset of the training data.
During exploration, the agent maintains a list of previously visited rooms. Navigation steps choose
only among rooms that have not yet been visited.


4.2   E XPERIMENTS

We consider a modified version of the Habitat Challenge ObjectNav task (Yadav et al., 2022). The
task objective is to find and move to an instance of the object in unfamiliar household environments
as quickly as possible. The agent receives first-person RGBD images, compass readings, and 2D
GPS values as inputs at each timestep. In our version of the task, we assume access to a high-level
map of the environment which specifies the coordinates and label of each room. Individual objects
are not labeled; the agent must rely on top-down knowledge of where certain objects are likely to be
in order to efficiently find the target object.
We implement a SM baseline where the LM guides agent exploration by specifying an ordering
of rooms to visit. Details can be found in Appendix B.1. This is similar to prior work that use
LMs to specify high-level policies (Zeng et al., 2023; Sharma et al., 2022), whereby neither LM nor
observation model uncertainties are accounted for when generating the high-level policy.
We modify the base STUBBORN agent to condition on the high-level map. The base model visits
rooms in a random order (effectively beginning with a uniform belief over object locations given


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rooms). Results in Appendix B.4 show that an agent equipped with this high-level policy performs
comparably to the original STUBBORN agent. We evaluate how much Socratic modeling or L A MPP
improves the ability of this Uniform Prior agent to perform zero-shot generalization, where the
training data does not contain any information about p(y | r, g).2

4.3     E VALUATION & R ESULTS                        Base Model   Total # Tokens
                                                      + Method     ($ Cost)          goal obj classes
We evaluate success rate (SR), the percent
of instances in which the agent success- Unif Prior         1.2e+4 tokens
fully navigated to the goal object.3 Because  vs. L A MPP ($0.03*)
the STUBBORN agent is designed to han-
dle only single floors we evaluate only in- Unif Prior      2.7e+5 tokens
stances in which the goal object is located   vs. SM        ($0.54*)
on the same floor as the agent’s starting Table 2: Navigation Results for ZS generalization. We report
location.                                    improvements to success rates (SR) when applying either
                                                  L A MPP or SM to a base uniform priors model. We compute
Results are reported in Table 2 and Ap- separate ∆SR for each goal object class and report the largest,
pendix B.3. We report ∆SR on each goal smallest, and average ∆SR over goal objects in the second
object from applying either L A MPP or SM column. We visualize the full distribution of ∆SR over goal
to the base model. Using L A MPP, we find objects in the rightmost column. By using L A MPP, we are
greatest improvements in goal object cate- able to achieve significant improvement over almost all object
gories that have strong tendencies to occur classes. *Costs computed relative to Sept. 28, 2023 pricing.
only in specific rooms, such as TV monitors (+33.3), and smallest for objects that occur in many
different rooms, like plants (+0.0) (Appendix B.3). Compared to SM, L A MPP improves SR by a
wide margin (see Appendix B.5 for analysis). L A MPP is also substantially more query-efficient: SM
requires one query per navigation action, while L A MPP performs a fixed number of initial queries,
which are reused across all actions and episodes.

5       L A MPP FOR ACTION R ECOGNITION AND S EGMENTATION

The final task we study focuses on video understanding: specifically, taking demonstrative videos
of a task (e.g., making an omelet) and segmenting them into actions (e.g., cracking or whisking
eggs). Because it is hard to procure segmented and annotated videos, datasets for this task are
usually small, and it may be difficult for models trained on task data alone to learn robust models
of task-action relationships and action orderings. Large LMs’ training data contains much more
high-level information about tasks and steps that can be taken to complete them.

5.1     M ETHODS

Base model Given a video of task t, we wish to label each video frame xi with an action yi (chosen
from a fixed inventory of plausible actions for the task) according to arg maxy1 ···yn p(y1 · · · yn |
x1 · · · xn , t). We build on a model from Fried et al. (2020) that frames this as inference in a task-
specific hidden Markov model (HMM) in which a latent sequence of actions generates a sequence of
video frames according to:
                                                 Y
                           p(x1···n | y1···n ) ∝   p(xj | yj ; η) p(yj | yj−1 ; θ)                  (2)
                                                  j

(omitting the dependence on the task t for clarity). This generative model decomposes into an
emission model with parameters η and a transition model with parameters θt , and allows efficient
inference of p(y | x).4 p(yj | yj−1 ; θ) is a multinomial distribution parameterized by a transition
matrix encoding probability each action yj−1 is followed by action yj .
    2
     At the time these experiments were conducted, room labels were not yet present in the dataset, so we could
only study the zero-shot setting. To evaluate L A MPP, the first two authors of the paper manually annotated
room labels in the evaluation set.
   3
     We report Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) in Appendix B.3.
   4
     The model in Fried et al. (2020) is a hidden semi-Markov model (HSMM) in which latent action states
generate multiple lower-level actions in sequence. We omit the HSMM emission model for clarity of presentation.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                           make
                                                                                         pancakes      t    task

Here we apply L A MPP to the problem of learning model pa-
                                                                          α(crack egg →whisk)          α    Dirichlet
rameters themselves. We use a LM to place a prior on transition
                                                                          = p( to make pancakes,
                                                                                                            prior
parameters θ, thus incorporating prior knowledge from LMs                      crack egg then whisk)
while learning action transition distributions from data. Given                                        θ    transition
                                                                                                            probabilities
a dataset of labeled videos of the form (x1...n , y1...n ), we com-
pute a maximum a posteriori estimate of θ:                                crack
                                                                           egg
                                                                                   y1                  y2   action
                               XX
         arg max log p(θ) +              log p(yj | yj−1 ; θ) ,    (3)
             θ                 x,y   j                                             x1                  x2   video
                                                                                                            frame

(likewise for η).
Label space We parameterize the prior p(θ) as a Dirich-
let distribution  with hyperparameters α, according to which
                                                                   Figure 4: Generative model for action
p(θ) ∝ i θiαi −1 . Intuitively, the larger αi is, the more prob-
          Q
                                                                   segmentation. The base model is a
able the corresponding θi is judged to be a priori. Here, param-   HMM with transition probabilities pa-
eters θy→y′ are probabilities of transitioning from action y to    rameterized by θ. We generate a prior
y ′ ; we would like αy→y′ to be large for plausible transitions.   over model parameters θ: Each task t
                                                                   generates a Dirichlet prior α over ac-
Prompting the LM To derive values of α for each action tion transitions, which in turn generates
                   ′
transition y → y , we query the LM with the prompt: “Your θ. θ parameterizes the action transi-
task is to [t]. Here is an *unordered* set of possible actions: tion distribution y1 → y2 . Each ac-
{[Y ]}. Please order these actions for your task. The step after tion yi at timestep i then generates the
[y] can be [y ′ ] ”, where Y is a set of all available actions for observed video frame xi . Tasks t and
                                                                   video frames xi are observed, actions
the task. We condition the LM on the non-highlighted portion y are partially-observed,       and parame-
                                            ′                       i
of the prompt and set αy→y′ = λ · pLM (y | prompt(y)), where ter priors α and parameters θ are latent.
λ controls the strength of the prior.
Inference The use of a Dirichlet prior means that Eq. (3) has a convenient closed-form solution:
                                           αy→y′ + #(y → y ′ ) − 1
                                  θy→y′ = P                            ,                                                (4)
                                          ( y′′ αy→y′′ ) + #(y) − |Y |

where #(y → y ′ ) denote number of occurrences of the transition y → y ′ in the training data, #(y)
denotes number of occurrences of y in the training data, and |Y | is total number of actions.

5.2   E XPERIMENTS

We use the CrossTask dataset (Zhukov et al., 2019), which features instructional videos depicting
tasks (e.g., make pancakes). The learning problem is to segment videos into regions and annotate
each region with the corresponding action being depicted (e.g., add egg). We evaluate the ability of
the L A MPP to improve the zero-shot and out-of-distribution generalization abilities of the base
model. For all experiments with L A MPP, we use λ = 10. We do not study an SM baseline for this
task, as they are unable to generate parameters rather than labels.5
ZS Generalization We assume that the training data contains no information about the transition
distribution p(yi | yi−1 , t). However, we still assume access to all video scenes and their action
labels, which allows us to learn emission distributions p(xi | yi ). We do this by assuming access to
only an unordered set of video frames from each task, where each frame is annotated with its action
label, but with no sense of which frame preceded or followed it.
Because we have no access to empirical counts of transitions from the training data, the model falls
                                                                              α   ′ −1
back completely on its priors when computing those parameters θy→y′ = (P ′′ αy→y ′′ )−|Y | which is
                                                                            y   y→y
uniform for the base model and derived from the LM for L A MPP.
OOD Generalization We bias the transition distribution by randomly sampling a common transition
from each task and holding out all videos from the training set that contain that transition.
    5
      We also find that L A MPP did not improve the base model in-domain. We believe this is because the
base model is simple enough that simply counting transitions and observation co-occurrence is sufficient for
estimating parameters, and the action space is small enough that the dataset sufficiently covers the actions and
transitions for each task.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   E VALUATION & R ESULTS
                                                        Base Model        # Tokens             ∆ Recall
Following Fried et al. (2020), we evaluate step         + Method          ($ Cost)      (class avg. / freq avg.)
recall, i.e. the percentage of actions in the           HMM (ZS)          5.4e+5              +1.3 / +1.9
real action sequence that are also in the model-        + L A MPP         ($1.09*)
predicted action sequence. For simplicity, we ig-       HMM (OOD)         5.4e+5              +0.5 / +0.3
nore background actions during evaluation. Re-          + L A MPP         ($1.09*)
sults are shown in Table 3 and Appendix C.2.
For both the ZS and OOD settings, step recall       Table 3: Video segmentation results for ZS and OOD
slightly improves with L A MPP. The small mag-      generalization. We report the average improvement in
nitude of improvement may be because the LM         step recall for L A MPP applied to the base HMM model
                                                    from Fried et al. (2020). We report both a class-averaged
sometimes does not possess a sensible prior over    step recall (over actions) and a frequency-averaged step
action sequences: for example, it is biased to-     recall (over videos). We also report the distribution of
wards returning actions in the order they are       ∆ recall over tasks in the rightmost column. Note in the
named in the prompt.                                ZS case, L A MPP provides significant improvement in
                                                    certain task classes. *Costs relative to Sept. 28, 2023 pricing.

6     R ELATED W ORK

String Space Model Chaining There has been much recent work in combining and composing
the functionality of various models entirely in string space. The Socratic models framework (Zeng
et al., 2023) proposes chaining together models operating over different modalities by converting
outputs from each into natural language strings. Inter-model interactions are performed purely in
natural language. While such methods have yielded strong results in tasks like egocentric perception
and robot manipulation (Ahn et al., 2022), they are fundamentally limited by the expressivity of
the string-valued interface. Models often output useful features that cannot be easily expressed in
language, such as graded or probabilistic uncertainty (e.g., in a traditional image classifier). Even if
such information is written in string form, there is no guarantee that language models will correctly
use it for formal symbolic reasoning—today’s LLMs still struggle with arithmetic tasks expressed as
string-valued prompts. (Ye & Durrett, 2022). Thus, string-space approaches are limited when outputs
from task-specific models involve gradation or uncertainty that is not easily expressed in language.
Concurrent to the present work is LMPriors (Choi et al., 2022), which similarly seeks to use
language model scores as a source of common-sense information in other decision-making tasks.
There, LMs are applied to feature selection, reward shaping, and casual inference tasks, rather than
explicit probabilistic models. However, the approach involves sampling greedily from the prior
distribution of the language model over variable names, discarding any/all graded information about
the relationship between variables. We therefore explore how language model outputs can be worked
with probabilistically instead.
LMs and Probabilistic Graphical Models Many prompting methods for language processing tasks,
like chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) and bootstrapped rationale-generation (Zelikman
et al., 2022) may be interpreted as probabilistic programs built from LM queries (Dohan et al., 2022).
However, this analysis exclusively considers language tasks; to the best of our knowledge, the present
work is the first to specifically connect language model evaluations to probabilistic graphical models
in non-language domains.


7     C ONCLUSION

We present L A MPP, a generic technique for integrating background knowledge from language
into decision-making problems by extracting probabilistic priors from language models. L A MPP
improves zero-shot, out-of-distribution, and in-distribution generalization across image segmentation,
household navigation, and video-action recognition tasks. It enables principled composition of
uncertain perception and noisy common-sense and domain priors, and shows that language models’
comparatively unstructured knowledge can be integrated naturally into structured probabilistic
approaches for learning or inference. The effectiveness of L A MPP depends crucially on the quality
of the LMs used to generate priors. While remarkably effective, today’s LMs still struggle to produce
calibrated plausibility judgments for some rare tasks. As the quality of LMs for core NLP tasks
improves, we expect that their usefulness for L A MPP will improve as well.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
Large language models are known to learn false or misleading information and socially-biased
distributions from their pre-training data. Blind application of these priors to various domains can
thus result in potentially erroneous or biased predictions. As seen above, improvements at assigning
specific labels tasks are tied to the accuracy of the priors over those labels. An important benefit of
L A MPP is that these priors have simple, explicit representations (as conditional probability tables
rather than large neural models). However, even these will inherit biases and errors from the LMs
that generate them, and human review is essential before deploying L A MPP in real-world scenarios.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We will make the code publicly available upon acceptance. All prompts we used for query-
ing GPT* models are available in the Appendix. In our experiments, we queried the GPT3
text-davinci-002 model for token probabilities over output tokens. Further details on hyper-
parameter settings and computational requirements can be found in Appendices D and E.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey,
 Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Wesley Cheung, William Broniec, and Mark O. Riedl. Automated sto-
  rytelling via causal, commonsense plot ordering. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2020.
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Jack Urbanek, Margaret Li, Arthur Szlam, Tim Rocktäschel, and Jason
  Weston. How to motivate your dragon: Teaching goal-driven agents to speak and act in fantasy
  worlds. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 807–833, Online, June 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.64. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.64.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Ben-
  jamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and
  Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
  M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
  pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Kristy Choi, Chris Cundy, Sanjari Srivastava, and Stefano Ermon. LMPriors: Pre-trained language
  models as task-specific priors. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=U2MnmJ7Sa4.
David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
 Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A. Saurous, Jascha Sohl-dickstein, Kevin Murphy, and
  Charles Sutton. Language model cascades. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.
Daniel Fried, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Stephen Clark, and Aida Nematzadeh.
  Learning to segment actions from observation and narration. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2569–2588, Online, July 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.231. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.231.
Jindong Jiang, Lunan Zheng, Fei Luo, and Zhijun Zhang. Rednet: Residual encoder-decoder
   network for indoor rgb-d semantic segmentation, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
   1806.01054.
Kestutis Kveraga, Avniel Ghuman, and Moshe Bar. Top-down predictions in the cognitive brain.
  Brain and Cognition, 65(2):145–168, 2007.
Alexander K. Lew, Michael Henry Tessler, Vikash K. Mansinghka, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum.
  Leveraging unstructured statistical knowledge in a probabilistic language of thought. Proceedings
  of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2020.
Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1813–1827, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.143. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2021.acl-long.143.
Timo Lüddecke and Alexander Ecker. Image segmentation using text and image prompts. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 7086–7096, June 2022.
Haokuan Luo, Albert Yue, Zhang-Wei Hong, and Pulkit Agrawal. Stubborn: A strong baseline for
  indoor object navigation, 2022.
Jonathan Mirault, Joshua Snell, and Jonathan Grainger. You that read wrong again! a transposed-word
  effect in grammaticality judgments. Psychological Science, 29:095679761880629, 10 2018. doi:
  10.1177/0956797618806296.
C. Painter. Learning Through Language in Early Childhood. Continuum Collection. Bloomsbury
  Publishing, 2005. ISBN 9781847143945. URL https://books.google.com/books?
  id=4sB0i-DfT0MC.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2021.
Pratyusha Sharma, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob Andreas. Skill induction and planning with la-
  tent language. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1713–1726, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.120. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.120.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In Second Workshop on Language and Reinforcement Learning, 2022.
   URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aflRdmGOhw1.
Shuran Song, Samuel Lichtenberg, and Jianxiong Xiao. Sun rgb-d: A rgb-d scene understanding
  benchmark suite. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 567–576. IEEE Computer Society, 2015. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298655. URL https:
  //doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298655.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yoav Goldberg, Yejin Choi, and
  Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA 2.0: Exposing the limits of AI through gamification. In
  Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
  (Round 1), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qF7FlUT5dxa.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
  In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Karmesh Yadav, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, John Turner, Aaron Gokaslan, Oleksandr
  Maksymets, Rishabh Jain, Ram Ramrakhya, Angel X Chang, Alexander Clegg, Manolis
  Savva, Eric Undersander, Devendra Singh Chaplot, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat challenge 2022.
  https://aihabitat.org/challenge/2022/, 2022.
Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot prompting for textual reasoning.
  In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. STar: Bootstrapping reasoning
  with reasoning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Fed-
  erico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke,
  and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language.
  In Submitted to The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=G2Q2Mh3avow. under review.
Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, David Fouhey, Ivan Laptev, and
  Josef Sivic. Cross-task weakly supervised learning from instructional videos. In Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      L A MPP FOR S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION
A.1     M ETHODS

We derive the following decision rule from the model in Fig. 2:
  p(yi | x) ∝
            ∼                                                                                  
                                          X                 Y       X p(r | yj )p(dj = yj | xj )
      p(yi | di = d∗i )p(di = d∗i | xi )    p(r)p(yi | r)                                      
                                           r               j=1···n   y
                                                                                 p(r)
                                                                           j

                                                                                                            (5)

We obtain this decision rule as described below. Here we denote rooms r, true object labels
y, noisy object labels d, and observations x. (Underlines denote sets of variables, so e.g., x =
{x1 , . . . , xn }.) Finally, we write d∗i to denote the base model’s prediction for each image segment
(d∗i = arg max pseg (di | xi )). To see this:

               X X X
p(yi | x) ∝                     p(x, y, d, r)
                r   y\{yi } d
               X X X                                                  Y
           =                    p(r) p(yi | r)p(di | yi )p(xi | di )    p(yj | r)p(dj | yj )p(xj | dj )
                r   y\{yi } d                                          j
               X                   X                           Y X           X
           =        p(r) p(yi | r)   p(di | yi )p(xi | di )        p(yj | r)   p(dj | yj )p(xj | dj )
                r                    di                           j   yj            dj

Rather than marginalizing over all choices of d, we restrict each sum to a single term. For di , we
choose the most likely detector output di = d∗i . For dj , we choose the corresponding yj in the
outer sum. Together, these simplifications reduce the total number of unnecessary LM queries about
unlikely object confusions, and give a lower bound:
                                              X                YX
          ≥ p(di = d∗i | yi )p(x | di = d∗i )   p(r)(p(yi | r)         p(yj | r)p(dj = yj | yj )p(xj | yj )
                                                    r                  j       yj

Applying Bayes’ rule locally:

               p(yi | di = d∗i )p(di = d∗i ) p(di = d∗i | xi )p(xi )
           =
                          p(yi )                  p(di = d∗i )
                                    YX
                 X                             p(r | yj )p(yj )                  p(dj = yj | xj )p(xj )
                     p(r)p(yi | r)                              p(dj = yj | yj )
                  r                   i y
                                                    p(r)                              p(dj = yj )
                                                j



Finally, we make two modeling assumptions. First, we assume that of the form p(y) and p(d)—the
marginal distributions of true and noisy object labels—are uniform. This allows us to use LMs as a
source of information about object co-occurrence probabilities without relying on their assumptions
about base class frequency. Second, for non-target detections xj , we assume the probability that
noisy labels match the true labels is constant over object categories. Then, dropping constant terms
gives:
                                                                       Y X p(r | y )
                                                                                  j
                                                    X
           ∝ p(yi | di = d∗i )p(di = d∗i | xi )         p(r)p(yi | r)                p(dj = yj | xj )
                                                    r                  j y
                                                                             p(r)
                                                                               j



A.2     S OCRATIC M ODEL BASELINE

We attempt to make the Socratic models inference procedure for this task as analogous to the L A MPP
approach as possible: the LM must account for both room-object co-occurrence likelihoods and
object-object resemblance likelihoods when predicting true labels. However, here, the LM must


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Base Model         mIoU                      ∆IoU by Object Category
          RedNet (ID)         47.8

          + L A MPP           48.3



          + SM                37.5


          RedNet (OOD)        33.8

          + L A MPP           34.0


          CLIPSeg (ZS)        27.7

          + L A MPP           28.2



Table 4: Image Segmentation results. We report mIoU, or intersection-over-union averaged over each object
category. We also report the improvements to IoU for each object category when L A MPP or Socratic Models is
applied to RedNet trained on in-domain or out-of-domain data, and CLIPSeg applied zero shot.


implicitly incorporate these likelihoods into its text-scoring, rather than integrating them into a
structured probabilistic framework.
Specifically, the Socratic model baseline is given model predictions dbi for each segment xi and
re-labels each segment by querying GPT-3 with:

         You can see: [d]
                       b

         You are in the [r]
         The thing that looks like [dbi ] is actually [yi ] .

The LM is given the non-highlighted portions and asked to generate the portions highlighted in yellow.
db is the set of all unique objects detected by the base model, written out as a comma-separated list. r
is a room type generated by the LM based on these objects (inferred by normalizing over possible
room types), and yi is the actual identity of the object corresponding to this segment. We replace all
pixels formerly predicted as dbi with yi .

A.3    F ULL R ESULTS

See Table 4 for the full results over object categories. In the ID case, note that shower curtain
improved dramatically with the incorporation of L A MPP. This is because the base model almost
always classifies shower curtains as window curtains, while explicitly incorporating room priors from
language models fixes this major class of error. Moreover, in the OOD setting, the base image model
sees far fewer examples of nightstands and consequently never predicts nightstands on the test data.
(Nightstands are frequently predicted to be tables and cabinets instead). This is likewise rectified
with LAMPP: background knowledge from language reduces model sensitivity to a systematic bias
in dataset construction
The goal objects that improved the most with the incorporation of L A MPP (shower curtain, nightstand
in the OOD case) are all ones that strongly co-occur with specific rooms, indicating the usefulness of
incorporating room-object co-occurrence priors.



                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             (a) Table → Nightstand                               (b) Sofa → Bed


                                            (c) Desk → Table
                Figure 5: Image Segmentation Domain: Examples of errors from L A MPP.


A.4   E RROR A NALYSIS

We manually inspect 50 random outputs from L A MPP on the ID setting and identify broadly the
following categories of errors, which are illustrated in Fig. 5.


      1. Mislabelling: The ground truth labels are sometimes incorrect. For example, in Fig. 5(a),
         the nightstand is mislabelled as a “table”. L A MPP is then wrongly penalize when it changes
         the table to a nightstand.

      2. Missegmentation: Object boundaries may be incorrectly identified, as in Fig. 5(b) and
         Fig. 5(c). This can confuse L A MPP as it may be unlikely for two visually-similar items to
         co-occur in the same room (e.g. beds and sofas), and L A MPP may try to “paint over” the
         mis-segmented chunk with the wrong label.

      3. Example inconsistent with LM priors: For a small number of examples, the LM prior may
         be incorrect. These examples can be thought of as being sampled from the tail of the
         distribution. For example, in Fig. 5(b), the LM believes that it is unlikely for beds and
         sofas to co-occur in the same room. However, this particular example is of a furniture shop,
         meaning that it is actually the case that the bed and sofa are next to each other.

      4. Insufficient information to LM: Because we may only interact with LMs through text, the
         LM loses out on certain visual signal that may help disambiguate between two semantically-
         similar object labels. For example, in Fig. 5(c), L A MPP incorrectly converts the desk into
         a table, likely because the LM does not have sufficient information to conclude that the
         image is of an office setting (desks are more often used to in the context of work). Note that
         “computer” and “printer” weren’t available labels for the segmentation model, but may have
         be useful information for the LM.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     L A MPP FOR NAVIGATION
B.1    S OCRATIC M ODEL BASELINE

As in the image segmentation case, we have a Socratic model baseline. LM priors are integrated into
exploration through directly querying the LM with

         The house has: [r].
         You want to find a [g]. First, go to each [r0 ] . If not found, go to each [r1 ] . If not
         found, go to each · · ·

whereby r is a list of all room types in the environment, for example, 3 bathrooms, 1 living room, 1
bedroom. The LM returns the best room type r0 to navigate to in order to find g. The agent visits all
r0 in order of proximity. If the object is not found, the LM is queried for the next best room type to
visit, etc., until the object is found or we run out of rooms in the environment.

B.2    M ETHODS

Below we provide intuition for why our policy outlined in Section 4.1 follows from the generative
story of the success score yi depicted in Fig. 3. We assume objects are equally likely to be distributed
across all rooms.
At a high level, an agent greedily optimizing for success should move to a room r that maximizes
p(y | x, r, g) which, following Fig. 3 is equivalent to maximizing:
               p(y | g, r)p(x | y) ∝ p(y | g, r)p(y | x)p(x)/p(y) ∝ p(y | g, r)p(y | x)                    (6)

The policy that maximizes Eq. (6) iterates between navigation and selection actions:

      1. Navigation: We navigate to the unobserved room with the highest p(y | r).6 This follows
         directly from Eq. (6) and the assumption of uniform initial object locations.
      2. Selection: Once we have some observations x of the room, we branch off into two cases:
          (a) Deciding to continue: We do not see g (low p(y | x)). If we take n (= 25) steps in
              the room and do not see any instance of g, we become relatively confident that the
              room does not contain g at all, so p(y | x) → 0 for that room. (Consequently, the
              objective p(y | x)p(y | r) also → 0 for this room.) We eliminate this room from the
              list of unobserved rooms and return to step 1.
          (b) Deciding to stop: We see g (high p(y | x)), either on the way to the room or within the
              room. We navigate to exact location that maximizes p(y | x) and decide to stop based
              on p(y | x)p(r | y).

B.3    F ULL R ESULTS

See Table 5 for the full set of results over goal-object categories. Note that the goal objects that
improved the most with the incorporation of L A MPP (TV monitor, sofa, toilet) are all ones that
strongly co-occur with specific rooms, indicating the usefulness of incorporating room-object co-
occurrence priors.

B.4    U NIFORM P RIORS M ODEL VS . O RIGINAL STUBBORN AGENT M ODEL

Recall that we modified the original STUBBORN agent in the navigation task to utilize the high-level
map, by uniformly sampling a random (unvisited) room to visit. More specifically, the uniform priors
model utilizes effectively the same high-level policy as L A MPP-based agent, but replaces LM priors
over over object-room co-occurrences with uniform priors:
                                                              1
                         p(y = True | r, g) =                              .                     (7)
                                               # room types in environment
   6
     For rooms with the same p(y | r), or if there are multiple rooms of the same type, we navigate in order of
proximity to the agent’s current location.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Base Model                    SR               SPL       ∆SR by Goal Object Category
                                 Class        Freq.   Class Freq.
           Orig STUBBORN          52.7        53.8    21.2   22.8
           Unif Prior (ZS)        52.1        51.7    20.2   21.5

           + L A MPP              66.5        65.9    35.4   36.0



           + SM                   61.2        65.3    31.3   35.1



Table 5: Navigation results, showing class-averaged success rate (SR; averaged over goal objects) and frequency-
averaged success rate (averaged over episodes). We also report SPL, Success weighted by (normalized inverse)
Path Length. Finally, we report the improvements to success rate over each object category when L A MPP vs.
Socratic Models is applied.

                     Model                              Class-Avg. SR     Freq.-Avg. SR
                     L A MPP                                 66.5              65.9
                     −p(y | r) during selection              58.8              64.9
                     Socratic model                          61.2              65.3

Table 6: Navigation results verification ablations. We ablate the LM uncertainties over p(y | r) when computing
the selection action, making L A MPP functionally similar to a Socratic model baseline. We find that having
these uncertainties are crucial; without them, L A MPP actually underperforms the Socratic model baseline.


Note in the zero-shot case we have no additional information about p(y | r, g), so we must assume it
is uniform.
We report average success rates over object categories of the original STUBBORN agent vs. a
uniform priors agent vs. an L A MPP-based agent vs. a Socratic-model-based agent in Table 5. We
find that L A MPP is able to outperform both the original STUBBORN agent and the uniform priors
agent.

B.5    A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

Why does L A MPP outperform Socratic modeling? In the SM approach, high-level decisions from
the LM and low-level decisions from observation models are usually considered separately and
delegated to different phases (it is hard to combine these information sources in string-space): in
our implementation, the SM baseline uses the top-down LM for navigation, and the bottom-up
observation model for selection.
Because the policy dictated by the L A MPP probabilistic model also ignores bottom-up observation
probabilities until the goal object is observed, the navigation step of both approaches is functionally
equivalent. However, for the selection step, we find that combining bottom-up and top-down uncer-
tainties is crucial (recall that L A MPP thresholds p(y | x, r, g) at selection steps, which decomposes
to p(y | x)p(y | r, g)).
To further understand and how using LM probabilities contributes at this phase, we run a version
of L A MPP where we simply change the decision rule at the selection action to p(y | x). Results
are reported in Table 6. Note that we actually underperform the SM baseline when we take away
top-down uncertainties p(y | r, g) — once again highlighting the importance of combining both
sources of uncertainty.

C     L A MPP FOR V IDEO -ACTION S EGMENTATION



                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Base Model          Step Recall                        ∆ Step Recall by Task
                         Class Freq.
      HSMM (ZS)          44.4     46.0


      + L A MPP          45.7     47.9


      HSMM (OOD)         37.6     40.9


      + L A MPP          38.1     41.2


Table 7: Action recognition and segmentation results, showing class-averaged step recall (averaged over tasks)
and frequency-averaged step recall (averaged over videos). We also report the improvements to step recall over
each object category when L A MPP is applied.


C.1    S ELECTING THE LM PROMPT

We performed significant prompt engineering in this setting (on the training set), and found that with
all of the prompts we tried, GPT-3 was biased towards outputting actions in the order that they were
presented to the model. The following are some examples of other prompts we tried:
         Your task is to [t]. Your actions are: {[Y ]}
         The step after [y] is [y ′ ]: [plausible / implausible]

         Your task is to [t]. Your actions are: {[Y ]}
         The step after [y] is [y ′ ]

We also tried having the LM produce a global ordering and setting probability from an action later in
the sequence to earlier in the sequence to 0:

         Your task is to [t]. Your set of actions is: {[Y ]}
         The correct ordering is:

The prompt in 5.1 was slightly better at combating this effect, though still highly imperfect.

C.2    F ULL R ESULTS

See Table 7 for the full set of results over actions.



C.3    E RROR A NALYSIS

In this domain, GPT-3 often produced priors that were unaligned with the true distribution, leading
to errors in downstream prediction with L A MPP. As noted in C.1, we found that GPT-3 has a
proclivity to output actions in the order that they were presented in the prompt. To further probe
errors in GPT-3’s priors, we plot GPT-3’s distribution over actions for tasks against the ground-truth
distribution over actions in the real training and validation datasets. We found that, when these priors
were uncorrelated with real priors from the dataset, there tended to fall into the following categories:

      1. Bias towards ordering in prompt: see discussion in Appendix C.1.
      2. Task ambiguity: The LM and ground-truth demonstrations may prefer slightly different
         ways of accomplishing the same task. For example, in the “Grill steak” task (Fig. 6(a,b)),


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      p(y′ ∣ y = ∅, t = Grill Steak)    p(y′ ∣ y = cut steak, t = Grill Steak)    p(y′ ∣ y = tight wheel, t = Change a Tire)


     (a) Distribution over initial      (b) Distribution over actions following     (c) Distribution over actions following
    actions for task “Grill Steak”         “cut steak” for task “Grill Steak”       “tight wheel” for task “Change a Tire”

Figure 6: LM vs. ground-truth distributions over action sequences for tasks. GPT-3 priors are plotted in blue,
while training-set distributions and validation-set distributions are plotted in blue and orange respectively. The
red line represents a “smoothed” LM prior which combines GPT-3 priors with learned priors.


           GPT-3 prefers to cut the steak before cooking (green line in Fig. 6(a) shows that the LM’s
           highest-probability initial action is “cut steak”), while the ground-truth distribution prefers
           cutting the steak after cooking (blue & orange lines in Fig. 6(b) shows that the datasets’
           highest-probability action after “cut steak” is “taste steak”).
       3. Action ambiguity: Note that, in this dataset, actions are typically named with a very short
          description, which may sometimes cause ambiguity. For example, in the “Change a tire”
          task Fig. 6(c), it is unclear whether actions involving the wheel is referring to the old wheel
          or the new wheel, and the action “start loose” is unclear.
       4. Structural limitations of HSMM: Because we are modelling a sequence of scenes from videos
          with an HSMM, the action segmentations may be imperfect – for example, in Fig. 6(b), the
          HSMM learns that it is highly likely for the action after “cut steak” to also be “cut steak”
          from the training datasets (with probability ∼ 0.5), perhaps because the cutting scene hasn’t
          ended. The LM is unable to these transitions.
       5. Wrong LM Priors: GPT-3 sometimes simply has incorrect priors about the action orderings
          for tasks, for example putting a fairly high probability on “widthdraw wheel” after “tight
          wheel” for task “Change a tire” in Fig. 6(c).


D      T RAINING D ETAILS

D.1     H YPERPARAMETERS

Since our method builds upon each base model, we used standard hyperparameters to train and run
inference for each base model. For the components of L A MPP that we build on top of the base
models, there are usually only a few hyperparameters to tune, which we tune based on performance
on a held-out development set.
In image segmentation, we tune is a weighting term λ at the final decision layer that trades off the
weight on the LM prior and the observation posterior.
                                 log p(y | x) = λ log p(y) + (1 − λ) log p(x | y)
We find he optimal λ to be 0.9. In the navigation case, we tune a threshold τ that determines when
the agent stops (p(y | x, r, g) > τ ) and find the optimal τ is 0.2 For video-action segmentation, we
have a hyperparameter α controlling the weight on the prior (see Eq. (4)), which we set to 10.

E     C OMPUTATIONAL D ETAILS

We run all experiments on a single 32GB NVIDIA V100 GPU.


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For image segmentation experiments, we used either: 1. a pretrained RedNet checkpoint, 2. a RedNet
checkpoint trained for 1000 epochs on OOD data, 3. a pretrained zero-shot CLIPSeg model. 1 and 3
required no training, 2 required training for ∼ 3-4 days on the GPU. Inference for a single experiment
takes several hours each on a single GPU.
For navigation experiments, we used the pre-trained STUBBORN model. A full inference run on
our GPU takes about a full day to complete. (However, multiple inference experiments could be run
in parallel using the same GPU – the bottleneck is simulating every step of every trajectory, rather
than GPU inference.)
For video-action segmentation experiments, we use the HSMM model trained by Fried et al. (2020).
On a single GPU, the model typically takes only a few minutes to fully train and a few minutes for
inference. Several inference experiments can be run in parallel on the same GPU.
Finally, to derive LM priors, we query the OpenAI API. Using our method uses a budget of ∼$12
(in totality, over all experiments in all domains), as it queries a fixed number queries ahead of time
(∼4k queries), which get reused over the entire test set. Meanwhile, running full SM experiments
requires on the order of several hundred dollars in totality – frequently requiring multiple queries per
test sample.

F    L IMITATIONS
While flexible, L A MPP is not applicable to every machine learning task, and specifically requires (1)
a formalization of the task as a probabilistic graphical model, in which (2) values of some variables
(e.g. labels) can be represented as natural language strings, and (3) probabilistic relations between
these variables are described (with some degree of precision) in large-scale text corpora. As shown
above, many success cases involve common-sense knowledge about human environments or human
task structures; more specialized tasks (e.g. fine-grained image classification or medical diagnosis)
may not enjoy the same benefits.


                                                  20
