Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N ROBUSTNESS -ACCURACY C HARACTERIZATION OF
L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS USING S YNTHETIC
DATASETS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         In recent years, large language models (LLMs) that were pretrained at scale on
         diverse data have proven to be a successful approach for solving different down-
         stream tasks. However, new concerns about proper performance evaluation have
         been raised, especially for test-data leakage caused by accidentally including them
         during pretraining, or by indirectly exposing them through API calls for evaluation.
         Motivated by these, in this paper, we propose a new evaluation workflow that
         generates steerable synthetic language datasets and proxy tasks for benchmarking
         the performance of pertrained LLMs on sentence classification tasks. This ap-
         proach allows for better characterization of the joint analysis on the robustness and
         accuracy of LLMs without risking sensitive information leakage. It also provides a
         more controlled and private way to evaluate LLMs that avoids overfitting specific
         test sets. Verified on various pretrained LLMs, the proposed approach demonstrates
         promising high correlation with real downstream performance.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have emerged, showcasing remarkable capabilities
across a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) applications (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022a; Thoppilan
et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022). To empower LLMs with more generic
abilities (zero-shot, reasoning, and generalization), notable progress has been made in proposing
prefix-tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), instruction-tuning (Wei et al., 2022a), scratchpad prompting (Nye
et al., 2021; Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022c), etc. As we continue to scale up LLMs to
critical sizes, they often exhibit emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022b) that they are not directly trained
to have, including performing arithmetic, answering questions, summarizing passages, and more.
While new opportunities present themselves with foundation models, they also bring forth potential
risks and challenges (Bommasani et al., 2021; Blodgett & Madaio, 2021; Wiggins & Tejani, 2022;
Thieme et al., 2023; Biderman et al., 2023). For example, despite the unprecedented publicity of
LLMs and beliefs in their emergent abilities, some also argued the emergent abilities of LLMs are
a mirage (Schaeffer et al., 2023) and a change in metric choice can lead to a different conclusion.
Recently, researchers have also openly expressed concerns about the potential for language models
to be trained on test sets (Liang, 2023). Even worse, private or held-out unpublished test sets may
as well be vulnerable to data leakage through querying the LLMs via APIs for evaluation purposes.
Extraction attacks (Carlini et al., 2019; 2021), membership inference attacks (Hisamoto et al., 2020;
Thomas et al., 2020; Mireshghallah et al., 2022), and generative embedding inversion attack (Li
et al., 2023), caused by unintended memorization (Carlini et al., 2019; Biderman et al., 2023) further
deepened our concerns about privacy leakage during test time.
To address this caveat of “information leakage” during test time, in this paper, we aim at proposing
a new testbed for benchmarking LLMs with synthetic data. We design this testbed to serve as a
“minimum” model test for two basic skills infants must learn when acquiring language, identifying
(sentiments in) words and linguistic structures (Frost et al., 2020). To achieve these, we (1) create a
basic artificial language with some long-range dependency structure to mimic statistical learning of
language, (2) create class labels associated with different notions (sentiment or some other attributes),


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of SynTextBench. SynTextBench generates a set of synthetic datasets from
any given lexicon with word-level labels. We test the given LLM on sentence-level tasks with these
datasets and obtain robustness-accuracy characterization under a range of steerable task difficulties.
For each LLM, we can plot the robustness-accuracy trade-off curve and make model comparisons.
and then (3) probe LLMs on that. Specifically, we leverage existing sentiment lexicons, such as
SentiWordNet 3.0 (Baccianella et al., 2010), to generate working word lists based on the word (or
synset) level labels. We build positive, negative, and neutral word lists from SentiWordNet 3.0, and
constructing sentences following the nesting parentheses (Papadimitriou & Jurafsky, 2020), which
mimics the recursion structural hypothesis about the narrow language faculty in humans (Hauser et al.,
2002) and the dependency tree structure in natural language (Chiang & Lee, 2022). By maneuvering
the mixing percentage of binary words (positive/negative words) and neutral words, we create a
configurable testbed for evaluating the performance of LLMs on different levels of difficulty and
complexity. Finally, we benchmark and quantify the ability of each LLM on sentence classification
tasks by comparing their performance on a set of our synthetic datasets with varying difficulty levels.
We dub our evaluation framework using synthetic data by SynTextBench and present the workflow in
Figure 1, where we focus on benchmarking LLM sentence embeddings in terms of their accuracy
and robustness. By accuracy, we are interested in analyzing the linear separability of sentence
representations rendered by different pretrained LLMs. We note that in learning sentence embeddings,
the go-to metrics are cosine distance or linear probing accuracy, both of which imply separability. By
robustness, we refer to the decision margin on these sentence embeddings with respect to the optimal
classification strategy. We derive both measures using only the constructed synthetic datasets, which
allow for privacy-preserving benchmarking of LLMs. SynTextBench is designed as an extendable
framework for the evaluation of language sentence representations that covers a range of controllable
task difficulties. We envision our framework to also be easily adaptable to other societal properties
such as value assessment and will facilitate independent and sustainable LLM auditing (Weidinger
et al., 2021; Ganguli et al., 2022; Madiega, 2021; Mökander et al., 2023; Rastogi et al., 2023).
Our main contributions are:
• We introduce SynTextBench, a novel theoretically-grounded framework to generate steerable
synthetic datasets towards a holistic evaluation of LLMs. The use of synthetic datasets alleviates the
risk of test-data leakage and offers new tools for LLM testing and auditing.
• SynTextBench provides a configurable lightweight testbed and a quantifiable metric for evaluating
the robustness and accuracy of LLMs on different levels of difficulty and complexity for sentence
classification tasks, with no restrictions on the model architecture.
• We conduct experiments with several state-of-the-art LLMs on our testbed and report their
performance and behavior. SynTextBench, as a real-data-free evaluation method, shows high correla-
tion with robustness-accuracy performance evaluated on real data. Further study demonstrates its
capability of making quick attribution comparisons such as analyzing fine-tuning effects for LLMs.

2     M ETHODOLOGY
2.1   W HY USING SYNTHETIC DATASETS FOR LLM EVALUATION ?
To reduce the reliance on real-world data, we propose to build synthetic NLP tasks by generating
synthetic sentences as model inputs at test time. This way, we no longer need to exchange sensitive
private data or label-annotated data as test sets with LLM APIs. In making a steerable and transparent
evaluation framework for LLMs, we first detail the desiderata of proxy tasks and the evaluation metric.
• Task substance: Tasks should test a pretrained LLM’s ability to encode sentence representations
that preserve class separability when evaluated by a linear classifier.
• Task difficulty: Tasks’ difficulty should be configurable to allow for comprehensive analysis, i.e.,
one can generate tasks of various levels of difficulty.
• Task feasibility: Tasks should be feasible to solve, i.e., the sentences should be distinguishable to


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      a. Generate word lists from SentiWordNet                                     c. Running example
                                                                                                                                                t6   =
                                                         Neutral                         t1        t2        t3        t4        t5
                                                                                                                                                                                  Prob.
                                                                                                                                                              ‘<eos>’               𝑝!
                                                         words
                                                                                    Unpaired                                                                                    𝑝" 1 − 𝑝!

                                                                                     words
                                                                                             =                                                                               (1 − 𝑝" ) 1 − 𝑝!

       SentiWordNet                            Pos/Neg              Positive        t1        t2        t3        t4        t5        t6                            t7   =
                                                words


  { }
           rich, acceptable, true,
                                                                     words
                                                                                    Unpaired
           clean, repellent,                                                                 =
                                                                                     words
           abused, unacceptable,
           wrong, emerging, last,
           adsorptive , flat……
                                                                   Negative         t1        t2        t3        t4        t5        t6   t7                       t8   =
                                                                    words            Unpaired
                                                                                              =                                                              Unpaired_𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠. 𝑝𝑜𝑝() =
                                                                                      words

  b. Synthetic sentence generation with nesting parenthesis
                                                                                   𝐷 = 𝑝! ⋅‘<eos>’ +𝑝" 1 − 𝑝! ⋅                                           +(1 − 𝑝" ) 1 − 𝑝! ⋅

           Paired words                   t6    ~𝐷
                                                                                   New                                                               ~ 1−𝑝 ⋅             +𝑝⋅
                                                                                                         Unpaired
                                                                                   words                  words                                          Positive                Neutral
      t1      t2      t3       t4    t5                            ……                                                                                     words                  words

                                                                                                                                                     = 𝑈𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠. 𝑝𝑜𝑝()
                                                                                               <eos>

Figure 2: Overview of the sentence generation procedure. In block a, we generate word lists from
SentiWordNet 3.0. In block b, we generate each sentence token following nesting parenthesis and
mixing distribution D. In block c, we show a running example of sequentially generating t6 , t7 , t8 .
a certain degree by an algorithm that works on the raw sentences input.
• Task independence: Tasks’ ground-truth should be independent of the LLM to be evaluated, in
order to avoid biased evaluation, e.g., the label in the task should not be given by an LLM.
• Task equity: Tasks should be able to be generated by anyone and affordable for anyone without
requiring any private data or favoring any party with more resources.
• Metric informativeness: The designed framework should give a quantifiable metric that has a
clear implication (e.g., the larger the better) and correlates well with the real performance.
With these in mind, it is straightforward to see why we should not opt for synthetic datasets generated
by any LLM: (1) task difficulty would not be configurable, (2) the evaluation might favor the LLM
that generates the synthetic sentences and/or the pseudo-labels (causing label leakage), and (3) any
auditor without access to proprietary LLMs or datasets cannot run independent evaluation.
In the following, we explain how we leverage sentiment lexicons, such as SentiWordNet 3.0, to create
building blocks for our framework. Then, we put together building blocks and generate synthetic
inputs to LLMs by observing a nesting structure. We adjust the mixing ratio of ingredients in the
recipe to simulate tasks of different difficulties. We depict this procedure in Figure 2. Finally, we will
introduce our evaluation workflow and how we arrive at a quantifiable metric.

2.2        C ONSTRUCTING SYNTHETIC DATASETS AND TASKS
Word List. Building a synthetic task requires us to define the synthetic inputs to be used. Here,
we utilize sentiment lexicons with word-level labeling. SentiWordNet labels the synsets of WORD-
NET (Miller, 1995) according to the notions of “positivity”, “negativity”, and “neutrality”. Each
of the entries in SentiWordNet has PosScore and NegScore denoting the positivity and negativity
score, and ObjScore is calculated by 1 - (PosScore + NegScore), denoting the neutrality score. When
categorizing these words, we remove the sense number associated with the words and group words
into individual word list based on the following criteria: for a word w,
• if PosScore > NegScore, we categorize w into the positive word list;
• if PosScore < NegScore, we categorize w into the negative word list;
• if PosScore = NegScore = 0, we categorize w into the neutral word list.
We give running examples in the Appendix Table 5 for better understanding. In practice, we perform
the procedure on SentiWordNet 3.0 and gather a positive word list with 23147 words, a negative
word list with 26440 words, and a neutral word list with 154993 words. The same procedures can be
applied to any sentiment lexicons with word-level labeling, which will result in different word lists.
To this end, we created the word lists from SentiWordNet 3.0 as depicted in Figure 2(a).
Sentence structure. A recent literature (Papadimitriou & Jurafsky, 2020) explored the power of
music and Java code in training models that transfer to NLP tasks. It further stated that, not only
music and Jave code, non-linguistic artificial parentheses languages can also train language models


                                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that yield substantial gains compared to random data when testing on natural language (Chiang &
Lee, 2020; Ri & Tsuruoka, 2022; Papadimitriou & Jurafsky, 2023). Motivated by this, we follow
one of the abstract structures, nesting parenthesis, when generating the synthetic sentences in our
proxy tasks. The inclusion of the parenthesis is to guarantee we test for the linguistic structures,
whose importance is repeatedly advocated in literature from both machine learning and cognitive
science (Frost et al., 2020; Wilson et al., 2020; Manning et al., 2020). Specifically, nesting parenthesis
involves paired tokens and a recursive structure. For example, by referring to Figure 2(b), one sees
that t1 and t4 are paired words, while t2 and t3 are another paired words. In our example, the words
are hierarchically nested, meaning the token to be paired with t2 , which is t3 in our case, should
appear before the pairing token with t1 . In other words, it observes a “last in first out” data structure,
and the arcs in Figure 2(b) do not cross.
Sentence generation and difficulty level. With the created word list from above, we will now
explain how to do sentence generation following the structure introduced. Let us revisit the case in
Figure 2(b). Assume we want to generate a positive sentence (label y = 1), and we already generated
the first five tokens t1 : t5 in the sentence with colors denoting the picked word. Now, to decide the
next token, we sample t6 from a mixing distribution D, where
         D = pe · ‘<eos>’ + pn (1 − pe ) · last unpaired word + (1 − pn )(1 − pe ) · Dnew .            (1)
To interpret distribution D, we realize that there are essentially 3 possible outcomes for the incoming
t6 token: (1) it can be the end of sentence indicator ‘<eos>’, (2) it can be the popped token
from the stack that stores the unpaired words, i.e., the last unpaired word, (3) it can be a new
word. If it is to pick a new word, this word will be sampled from the distribution of new words
Dnew , which directly depends on the label y of the sentence to be generated and the desired task
difficulty. For a positive sentence (y = 1), Dnew|y=1 is described by the probability density function
(PDF) p · fNEU (x) + (1 − p) · fPOS (x), where p specifies the percentage of neutral words in a
synthetic sentence, fNEU gives the PDF of neutral words, and fPOS gives the PDF of positive words.
Similarly, if we are to generate a negative sentence (y = −1), we have Dnew|y=−1 described by
p · fNEU (x) + (1 − p) · fNEG (x), where fNEG gives the PDF of negative words.
In Figure 2(c), we show a running example of the sentence generation process, where we flip a coin
with 3 outcomes each time to decide on a new token. When the realization is “new words” (like in t6
and t7 ), this word will also be pushed to the stack “Unpaired words” that stores unpaired words. When
we are deciding t8 , we draw “unpaired words” and hence t8 is determined by Unpaired words.pop().
In essence, with the generated sentence, its label is determined by construction, which guarantees
the task independence since the label is not given by an LLM. It also allows configurable task
difficulty by adjusting the percentage p of neutral words in a synthetic sentence. That is, it is easier
to predict the sentiment of sentences consisting of 90% positive words and 10% neutral words
than that of sentences constructed all by neutral words. On the whole, by fixing a mixing ratio p,
together with the fixed pe and pn given in the above, one synthetic dataset will be constructed as
well as a resulting proxy sentiment classification task. By varying the mixing ratio p, a set of tasks
with diverse difficulties can be created. In the Appendix Figure 5, we prove the task feasibility by
demonstrating the separability of generated synthetic datasets by SentiWordNet sentiment analysis
algorithm (Denecke, 2008). With an increasing mixing ratio p, while the task becomes harder, we
show there at least exists an algorithm that can separate the data to a certain degree, showcasing a
lower bound on the optimal classification strategy. By our workflow of constructing synthetic datasets
and tasks, we also guarantee task equity since the generation process requires no access to any LLM
or private data, and can be readily replicated by anyone with limited resources. Furthermore, we
note that the construction of synthetic datasets and tasks described herein is also extendable to other
lexicons and tasks by swapping the lexicon used for extracting word lists.
Lastly, we note that during the construction of synthetic sentences, the probability pe associated with
the special token ‘<eos>’ is determined by its frequency in the English Wikipedia corpus. For the
remaining mass 1 − pe , pn portion is assigned to new words, with its value picked following Pa-
padimitriou & Jurafsky (2020), which is pn = 0.5. Additionally, when there are no unpaired words
in the stack (e.g., when drawing the starting token of the sentence, or when all the unpaired words
are popped), we assign its probability pn (1 − pe ) to new words. We show the length profile of our
synthetic data in Figure 4 in Appendix.
Discussions. The inclusion of parenthesis in our sentence structure guarantees we test for the
linguistic structures but at the same time makes non-grammatical test sets. While grammar might be


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Benchmarking LLMs using synthetic datasets (SynTextBench)
Input: Sentiment lexicons S, a range of difficulty levels P , an LLM g, threshold accuracy aT .
Output: SynTextBench score that quantifies the robustness-accuracy performance.
 1: Construct positive/negative/neutral word lists from sentiment lexicon S.
 2: for p in P do
 3:       Generate a synthetic binary classification task and obtain training set (xtrain , y train ) and test
    set (xtest , y test ).
 4:       Calculate transformation T1 and T−1 from z1train = {g(x) | (x, y) ∈ (xtrain , y train ), y = 1}
            train
    and z−1       = {g(x) | (x, y) ∈ (xtrain , y train ), y = −1}.
 5:       Transform training set and test set zˆ1 train = T1 (z1train ), z−1     ˆ train = T−1 (z−1 train
                                                                                                          ) and
        test          test      test         test
    zˆ1      = T1 (z1 ), z−1  ˆ      = T−1 (z−1 ).
 6:       Derive the Bayes optimal classifier f according to sign(µ̃T (ẑ − µ1 +µ     2
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           )) based on zˆ1 train
    and z−1 ˆ train , i.e. µ1 = mean(zˆ1 train ), µ2 = mean(z−1  ˆ train ).
                                                   test          test
 7:       Read out the accuracy a of f on zˆ1           and z−1
                                                              ˆ       , and calculate the average scale mar-
                                                                µ +µ
                          ¯                     ¯         |(ẑ− 1 2 2 )T µ̃|
    gin δ := avg(∥∆z ∥2 ) according to ∥∆z ∥2 =                ∥µ̃∥22        for correctly-classified sentence
    embeddings.
 8:    Denote the accuracy and average margin pair on the task by (ap , δp ).
 9: end for
10: Define a goodness function s(a) = |P1 | {p∈P,ap >a} δp , for a ∈ R[0, 1].
                                           P
                           R1
11: SynTextBench score = a s(a)da.
                             T


crucial in some NLP tasks that requires more advanced reasoning. For sentiment analysis, we believe
it should not have a strong dependency on grammar (we exclude the scenario of negation which can
be detected by a rule-based method). For example, the reviews “love love fantastic”, “love fantastic
love” and their word permutations should all be predicted as positive, regardless of their grammar.
We support this intuition by additional experiment where we noticed that 86% of the labels given by
Huggingface sentiment analysis pipeline on product reviews classification (Hu & Liu, 2004) remain
the same after removing 284 stop words (listed in the Appendix A.2) from the sentences and hence
making them non-grammatical. We leave more details and sentence examples to Appendix A.4.

2.3   ROBUSTNESS - ACCURACY EVALUATION
Given an LLM g, let x, y be the input sentence and its label, z be the sentence embeddings z =
g(x) ∈ Rn , we are interested in evaluating the accuracy of the sentence embedding classifiers f , and
the average distance ∆ from sentence embeddings to the linear classifiers (i.e., decision margins).
We let z1 be {z : z = g(x), y = 1} and z−1 be {z : z = g(x), y = −1}.
Preparing sentence embeddings. Recall that Bert-flow (Li et al., 2020) and Bert-whitening (Su
et al., 2021) transformed the sentence embeddings into an isotropic Gaussian distribution to rem-
edy the anisotropic behavior in the sentence embedding vector space. We thereby also perform
whitening on sentence representations before we draw the decision rule on the embeddings. Trans-
forming a set of sentence embeddings of a class into an isotropic Gaussian involves two steps:
(1) model the mean by and covariance Σy of original embeddings zy , (2) apply a transforma-
tion to the embeddings F T S −1/2 zy , where F SF T = Σy is the singular value decomposition of
Σy . Nevertheless, since Σy can be ill-conditioned, directly applying S −1/2 on embeddings zy
might amplify noisy signals due to numerical instability. Thus, we propose to reduce the dimen-
sion according to energy-preservation (Leskovec et al., 2020) (also called variance-based methods
                                                                            P           k
                                                                                            s
by Falini (2022)). We select to keep K dimensions according to arg mink Pni=1 sii ≥ 0.99, where
                                                                                       i=1
si = diag(S)[i] is the i-th largest singular value of S. Till now, we see that the sentence embed-
                                                                −1/2
dings are transformed to an RK vector space via F:,1:k      T
                                                               S1:k,1:k zy . We perform these operations
for both classes (y = 1 and y = −1) separately. Since we want the transformed embeddings to
observe the original relative distance between two classes, we further scale the distance between two
whitened Gaussians by dInter-class /dIntra-class , where the numerator dInter-class = ∥b1 − b−1 ∥ calculates
the inter-class distance (the distance between two class centers b1 and b−1 ), and the denominator


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  1
                        Pm1 i            Pm2 j
dIntra-class = m1 +m 2
                       ( i=1 ∥z1 − b1 ∥ + j=1   ∥z−1 − b−1 ∥) calculates the intra-class distance (the
average distance from class data to class mean) with m1 and m2 being the number of positive
sentences and negative sentences, respectively. We let Ty denote the overall transformation operations
and obtain transformed embeddings zˆ1 = T1 (z1 ) and z−1 ˆ = T−1 (z−1 ).
Decision margins induced by robust Bayes optimal classifiers. Recall that robust Bayes optimal
classifiers explicitly give the optimal classification strategy for class-conditional Gaussian distribution
in the presence of data perturbations (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Dan et al., 2020). Here, we see that (ẑ, y)
are modeled as Pµ1 ,µ2 ,IK : ẑ|y = 1 ∼ N (µ1 , IK ), ẑ|y = −1 ∼ N (µ2 , IK ), and y ∈ C = {+1, −1}.
While finding the robust Bayes optimal classifier generally involves solving the optimization problem
arg min∥z∥2 ≤ϵ (µ − z)T Σ−1 (µ − z) (cf. Appendix A.1), we can prove that, when the covariance is
an identity matrix, the class priors P(y = 1) = τ , P(y = −1) = 1 − τ , the perturbation radius ϵ, then
the optimal classifier is given as simply f : sign(wT (ẑ − µ1 +µ2
                                                                    2
                                                                      ) − q/2), where q = log{(1 − τ )/τ },
                                  µ1 −µ2
w = µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ), and µ̃ = 2 . Furthermore, when the classes are balanced (i.e., τ = 1/2), the
robust Bayes optimal classifier overlaps with the Bayes optimal classifier. That is, the (robust) Bayes
optimal classifier is plainly sign(µ̃T (ẑ − µ1 +µ
                                                2
                                                   2
                                                     )), which is independent of ϵ. We then use this given
classifier to calculate the accuracy on the synthetic datasets. In fact, we prove in Appendix A.7 that,
as long as µ̃ lies completely within a degenerate subspace of the eigenspace of the covariance matrix
(i.e., with eigenpairs {(λk , vk ), k ∈ [n]}, for ∀ i, j ∈{k : λk ̸= 0, µ̃T vk ̸= 0}, λi = λj = λ), the
ϵ-robust Bayes optimal classifiers overlap for all ϵ. In the case of an identity covariance matrix, the
degenerated subspace of the eigenspace expands the whole RK , hence µ̃ lies in the space naturally.
Now that we have specified the optimal robust classification rule on the transformed sentence
embeddings, we write out the decision margin induced by the classifiers using an informal but
more intuitive statement: For any sample z, the Bayes optimal classifier f of class-balanced class-
                                                                                              µ1 +µ2 T
                                                                                      |(ẑ−         ) µ̃|
conditional Gaussian distribution Pµ1 ,µ2 ,IK , yields a decision margin of ∥∆∥2 =          2
                                                                                          ∥µ̃∥2   , and
if we scale the margin by the distance between two Gaussian centers, we obtain a scaled margin of
                µ +µ
           |(ẑ− 1 2 2 )T µ̃|
∥∆¯z ∥2 =       ∥µ̃∥22        . We give the formal results for the generic class prior in Appendix A.7.
To this end, we have prepared sentence embeddings and specified the way of calculating decision
margins induced by a robust Bayes optimal classifier. In the following, we will state the complete
algorithm for characterizing robustness-accuracy performance of LLMs using synthetic datasets.

2.4   S YN T EXT B ENCH SCORE AND ALGORITHM
With Section 2.2 and Section 2.3, we
now can simulate synthetic tasks of a
configured level of difficulty and evalu-
ate their accuracy and margin. In our
benchmarking process, we essentially
build on this foundation to generate a se-
quence of tasks with different difficulty
levels and inspect how the magnitude of
decision margins changes with the clas-
sifier accuracy. In terms of robustness-
accuracy characterization, it is desirable
for an LLM to consistently yield high
classification accuracy, while maintain-
ing a big decision margin (that is, less
sensitive to perturbations in the embed-
ding space). The pseudocode of the
proposed framework, SynTextBench, is Figure 3: The goodness function s(a) of nine pretrained
given in Algorithm 1.                        language models. The SynTextBench score is calculated
                                             by the area under the curve.
In practice,           we let P         =
{0, 0.05, . . . , 0.9, 0.95}, and subsequently generate 20 synthetic datasets with p = 0 being
the easiest and p = 0.95 being the hardest (cf. Section 2.2). Then, we perform analysis on the
sentence embeddings of various synthetic datasets, and threshold the accuracy at aT based on
utility. The threshold serves as a penalty for poor sentence embeddings that lead to an undesirable
accuracy under this threshold, matching our task substance of testing LLM’s ability to preserve


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


linear separability. By referring to Figure 1, Line 1 in Algorithm 1 determines the word lists
from a given lexicon. From Line 2 to Line 9, the for-loop generates one synthetic dataset at one
time, on which we compute an (accuracy, average margin) pair (ap , δp ) and draw one point on the
margin-accuracy 2D plot as in Figure 1. We apply Algorithm 1 on various models and obtain a
margin-accuracy curve for each model. Since we not only care about the curvature of the curve but
also how the P(accuracy, average margin) pairs span on the curve, we define a goodness function
s(a) = |P1 | {p∈P,ap >a} δp on R[0, 1] in Line 10 to account for the span. By our definition, s(a)
will be a monotonically decreasing function (e.g., Figure 3) and calculate the expected margin
conditioned on the accuracy level. The final SynTextBench score is defined by the integration over
                                                                               R1
the desirable range of threshold accuracy in Line 11, i.e. SynTextBench score = aT s(a)da. We use
SynTextBench as a quantifiable score to inform the accuracy-robustness aspect of a pretrained LLM.
In the later section, we will demonstrate the metric informativeness by measuring the correlation
between SynTextBench scores and the average real-world sentence classification task performance.


3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   S ETUPS
LMs. In the following, we list a few pretrained LLMs predominantly considered by the sentence
embedding literature Gao et al. (2021); Su et al. (2021); Chuang et al. (2022). We will showcase the
use of SynTextBench on these models before moving to larger models such as LLaMA and OPT.
• BERTbase and BERTlarge (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (Devlin et al.,
2019)) are encoder-only transformers pretrained with masked language model and next sentence
prediction pre-training objectives.
• RoBERTabase (Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach (Liu et al., 2019)) is a modifica-
tion of BERT that trained with dynamic masking, large mini-batches, a larger byte-level byte pair
encoding, and removed the next sentence prediction objective.
• DiffCSE-B and DiffCSE-R (Difference-based Contrastive Learning for Sentence Embed-
dings (Chuang et al., 2022)) are BERTbase and RoBERTabase models that further trained with
difference-based contrastive learning.
• T5base and T5large (Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (Raffel et al., 2020)) are encoder-decoder
transformers that cast all NLP tasks into a text-to-text problem.
• ST5 (Scalable sentence encoders from pre-trained text-to-text models (Ni et al., 2022)) is initial-
ized by T5base and trained by two-stage contrastive learning.
• (GPT) DialogRPT (Dialog Ranking Pretrained Transformers (Gao et al., 2020)) is a decoder-only
model trained on vast human feedback data.
For models that have an encoder component (encoder-only or encoder-decoder), we use the average
output from the first and the last layer as sentence embeddings. For the decoder-only model, we use
the embedding of the last token as sentence embeddings.
Baselines. We followed the open-source implementation of the literature (Whitney et al., 2020) and
fed the pretrained LLMs with synthetic texts generated according to Section 2.2 and reported the
validation accuracy (Val loss), minimum description length (MDL), surplus description length (SDL),
and ϵ-sample complexity (ϵSC) as baselines (Blier & Ollivier, 2018; Voita & Titov, 2020; Whitney
et al., 2020). Since these methods take one dataset as inputs, we choose a relatively easy synthetic
proxy task generated by p = 0.2 as the input dataset.
Objectives. Through the experiments, our main aim is to verify the feasibility of making performance
assessments of possible downstream tasks by real-data-free evaluation methods. To achieve this, we
will compare the Pearson correlation coefficients of assessments given by different real-data-free
evaluation methods with the performance on real-world tasks. Since SynTextBench is intended to
inform the robustness-accuracy performance, we will report both the accuracy and robustness on
real-world tasks for studying correlation. We use PWWS attack (Ren et al., 2019) through TextAttack,
a Python framework for adversarial attacks in NLP, to generate attacks. Essentially, the attacker
will perturb the inputs gradually by changing more and more words until the perturbation leads to
a wrong classification result. Therefore, we report the average percentage of perturbed words in a
successful attack as an indicator of the level of model robustness. As more attentions have been
drawn to in-context learning (ICL) setups lately, we will also give an example where we extend
SynTextBench to ICL and perform ICL on our synthetic tasks using LLMs. Finally, we will also


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Correlation between real-data-free eval- Table 2: Aggregated correlation with real-data-free
uation metric and real-data accuracy at different evaluation metrics and the aggregated robustness-
synthetic dataset sizes.                          accuracy performance, and its breakdown.

 n                   4096        8192       16384         32768       Correlation. w/    Rob.-Acc.    Rob.-STS   Rob.-Transfer
 Val loss       0.29±0.50   0.65±0.00   0.61±0.01     0.27±0.02       Val loss          -0.06±0.15   0.08±0.13     -0.13±0.24
 MDL            0.57±0.11   0.52±0.04   0.51±0.03     0.48±0.03       MDL                0.64±0.06   0.55±0.08      0.62±0.03
 SDL, ε=1       0.57±0.11   0.51±0.04   0.43±0.02     0.31±0.01       SDL, ε=1           0.60±0.02   0.51±0.04    0.58±0.028
 εSC, ε=1               -           -           -   -0.04±0.000       εSC, ε=1                   -           -               -
 SynTextBench   0.94±0.01   0.97±0.01   0.96±0.00     0.93±0.00       SynTextBench       0.76±0.04   0.76±0.03      0.69±0.05


demonstrate how SynTextBench can be used to do attribute comparisons. We defer experimental
details to the appendix due to the page limit.

3.2 P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION AND D ISCUSSION
We evaluate models listed in Section 3.1 by SynTextBench framework as well as on real-world
tasks. Specifically, we simulated 20 synthetic datasets as described in Section 2.4 and obtained one
goodness function s(a) for each LLM. We plot these functions together in Figure 3, from which the
final SynTextBench score can be determined by definition. We refer readers to Appendix Table 6
for the exact numbers due to the page limit. To gauge the performance of these pretrained LLMs
on downstream real-world tasks, we evaluate the given models on SentEval (the Evaluation Toolkit
for Universal Sentence Representations (Conneau & Kiela, 2018)) and show the detailed numbers
in Appendix Table 7 and Figure 7. SentEval tasks include seven semantic textual similarity tasks
(denoted by “STS tasks”), where results are given by the Spearman’s correlation with output range
[−1, 1], and seven transfer learning tasks (denoted by “Transfer task”), where results are given by the
standard accuracy with range [0, 1]. We scale the former to the same range as the latter, [0, 1], and
take an average as the final accuracy indicator.
Correlation with real-world tasks. To demonstrate the informativeness of SynTextBench score, we
list the Pearson correlation coefficients between real-data-free evaluation methods and the accuracy
of SentEval tasks in Table 1. Five real-data-free metrics are considered that includes Val loss, MDL,
SDL, εSC, and the proposed SynTextBench. Since the smaller the baseline metrics are, the better, we
add a negative sign in front of them when calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient. As we have
the flexibility of generating synthetic datasets with various sizes (number of sentences), we compare
four configurations n = {4096, 8192, 16384, 32768}. From Table 1, we observe that SynTextBench
consistently gives scores highly correlated with real-world task accuracy, with correlation coefficients
that are above 0.9. For the four baselines, the highest correlation ever achieved is when n = 8192
and evaluated by Val loss, 0.65. It is noteworthy that SynTextBench is also a stabler metric as
substantiated by the smaller standard deviation.
Ablation on the nesting structure. To showcase the effect of the nesting structure, we see that no
nesting structure is a special case of our proposed framework when pn = 0 (cf. Equation 1). In
Table 1, we have SynTextBench(pn = 0.5) = 0.97. In comparison, we run the analysis for pn = 0
and obtain SynTextBench(pn = 0) = 0.92. In conclusion, SynTextBench, with both parameters,
outperform the baselines by large margins. Between the two, SynTextBench with the imposed
structure further improves the correlation.
Robustness implications. To understand how real-data-free evaluation methods correlate with real-
world task robustness-accuracy performance, we further analyze the correlation with the robustness
indicator, the average percentage of perturbed words, on Transfer tasks when n = 8192. We focus on
these tasks as they are classification tasks where adversarial attacks are well-defined. To combine
robustness correlation with accuracy correlation, we add up two ranking vectors by robustness and
accuracy measures, and calculate its Pearson correlation with the ranking by one of the real-data-free
evaluation metrics (Val loss, MDL, SDL, ϵSC, SynTextBench). This way, we effectively obtain
the aggregated Spearman correlation coefficient between real-data-free evaluation metrics and joint
robustness-accuracy performance. We refer readers to Appendix A.9 for more experimental details.
We list the results in Table 2. From the “Rob.-Acc.” column, we see SynTextBench has an overall
higher correlation with robustness-accuracy performance compared to other baselines. To be more
precise, SynTextBench shows a coefficient of 0.76, whereas MDL and SDL are 0.64 and 0.60. Recall
that accuracy results were aggregated from STS tasks and Transfer tasks. In Table 2, we also show
how each component contributes to the correlation. In the “Rob.-STS” and “Rob.-Transfer” columns,
we use only STS or Transfer task results as the accuracy measure when ranking the models, and the
remaining steps follow. From the two columns, we see that SynTextBench still shows a stronger


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


correlation compared to baselines, while having a slightly better correlation with Robustness-STS
accuracy performance than Robustness-Transfer accuracy performance.
Case study on model comparisons using SynTextBench. Besides having high correlation with
real-world task performance, we show how SynTextBench can be used to make model comparisons.
In Table 3, we list the SynTextBench scores of pretrained T5 and ST5 under different dataset sizes n,
together with the accuracy and robustness on SentEval tasks. From the table, it can be seen that the
SynTextBench score of ST5 is significantly higher than that of T5 across all n, indicating contrastive
fine-tuning is beneficial for improving sentence embeddings. This conclusion is in sync with the
observations from real-world tasks, where we see ST5 yields both higher accuracy and robustness.

Table 3: Performance evaluation of T5 and ST5 by real-data-free metric (SynTextBench) and real-
data-dependent metrics (accuracy and robustness on SentEval).
                                     SynTextBench                             real-world
            n          4096           8192        16384         32768   accuracy robustness
            T5   0.111±0.002   0.130±0.001 0.145±0.000    0.158±0.001      82.78         12.21
           ST5   0.214±0.000   0.223±0.001 0.227±0.001    0.230±0.000      90.17         13.23


3.3 E XTENDED STUDY ON LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AND IN - CONTEXT LEARNING
We emphasize that SynTextBench focused on analyzing the sentence embeddings of language
models, for which larger decoder models generally do not have better performance than smaller
encoder models (Ethayarajh, 2019). Therefore, we followed Gao et al. (2021) and mostly conducted
sentence embedding experiments with models therein. To demonstrate the general applicability of
the framework to various LLM types, we include in this experiment more large decoder language
models such as LLaMA and OPT models (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Zhang et al., 2022). In Appendix
Table 8, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficients between different evaluation methods and
the accuracy of SentEval tasks in the right-most column. One sees that, similar to the observations
with encoder models, SynTextBench also gives scores highly correlated with real-world task accuracy
on decoder models, with the correlation coefficient of 0.871.
Besides probing tasks, we also evaluate the few-shot in- Table 4: Correlation between real-data-
context learning (ICL) performance on SentEval transfer free evaluation metric and real-data ac-
tasks and SynTextBench synthetic task. We do not include curacy under ICL settings.
STS tasks since they are typically measured by cosine
distance, whose ICL prompts are less obvious to us. We              Name          Pearson correlation
also excluded TREC as we have not found proper prompts             Val loss              0.17
that could lead to reasonable accuracy. The instructions we         MDL                  0.20
give include two demonstrations with one demonstration           SDL, ε = 1              0.15
for each class. For example, in CR (customer review), we          εSC, ε = 1               -
                                                              SynTextBench-ICL           0.81
use the instruction: “Answer the sentiment of the following
review, either Positive or Negative. \n\nQ: We tried it out
christmas night and it worked great .\nA: Positive\n\nQ: very bad quality .\nA: Negative\n\n”. We
give the accuracy in Appendix Table 9 and the Pearson correlation between the average ICL accuracy
and different metrics in Table 4. In the bottom row of Table 4, we calculate the correlation between
the ICL accuracy on SynTextBench synthetic task (denoted by SynTextBench-ICL) and the average
ICL accuracy on SentEval tasks. We can see that SynTextBench-ICL still shows strong correlation
(above 0.8) with ICL accuracy on SentEval tasks, whereas the best baseline only correlates with ICL
accuracy with correlation coefficient ≤ 0.2.


4   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed SynTextBench, a novel framework for evaluating the accuracy and
robustness of LLM sentence embeddings. SynTextBench is a configurable real-date-free lightweight
testbed that generates steerable synthetic language datasets and proxy tasks, avoiding the risk of
test-data leakage. SynTextBench is the pioneering effort in developing synthetic benchmarking
methodologies for NLP, with a primary focus on sentence classification tasks and does not cover other
NLP tasks such as question answering, machine translation, or summarization. By concentrating on
this specific aspect, we have provided a solid foundation upon which future research can build. We
believe that our work is a major step towards ensuring independent and sustainable auditing of LLMs.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pranjal Awasthi, Natalie Frank, and Mehryar Mohri. On the existence of the adversarial bayes
  classifier. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:2978–2990, 2021.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebastiani. SentiWordNet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
  resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
  Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May 2010.
  European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/
  proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/769_Paper.pdf.

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Daniel Cullina, and Prateek Mittal. Lower bounds on adversarial robustness
  from optimal transport. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Kush Bhatia, Avanika Narayan, Christopher De Sa, and Christopher Ré. Tart: A plug-and-play
  transformer module for task-agnostic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07536, 2023.

Stella Biderman, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony,
  Shivanshu Purohit, and Edward Raf. Emergent and predictable memorization in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11158, 2023.

Léonard Blier and Yann Ollivier. The description length of deep learning models. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Su Lin Blodgett and Michael Madaio. Risks of ai foundation models in education. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.10024, 2021.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
  ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Margaret M Bradley and Peter J Lang. Affective norms for english words (anew): Instruction manual
 and affective ratings. Technical report.

Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer: Evalu-
  ating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In USENIX Security Symposium,
  volume 267, 2019.

Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom B Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In USENIX Security Symposium, volume 6, 2021.

Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. Pre-training a language model without human language. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2012.11995, 2020.

Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. On the transferability of pre-trained language models: A
  study from artificial datasets. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 10518–10525, 2022.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Yung-Sung Chuang, Rumen Dangovski, Hongyin Luo, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Marin Soljačić,
  Shang-Wen Li, Scott Yih, Yoon Kim, and James Glass. Diffcse: Difference-based contrastive
  learning for sentence embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  4207–4218, 2022.

Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. Senteval: An evaluation toolkit for universal sentence represen-
  tations. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and
  Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loı̈c Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. Supervised
  learning of universal sentence representations from natural language inference data. In Proceedings
  of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 670–680,
  2017.
A Dadhich and B Thankachan. Opinion classification of product reviews using naı̈ve bayes, logistic
  regression and sentiwordnet: Challenges and survey. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science
  and Engineering, volume 1099, pp. 012071. IOP Publishing, 2021.
Chen Dan, Yuting Wei, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Sharp statistical guaratees for adversarially robust
  gaussian classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2345–2355. PMLR,
  2020.
Kerstin Denecke. Using sentiwordnet for multilingual sentiment analysis. In 2008 IEEE 24th
  international conference on data engineering workshop, pp. 507–512. IEEE, 2008.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Andrea Esuli. Automatic generation of lexical resources for opinion mining: models, algorithms and
  applications. In Acm sigir forum, volume 42, pp. 105–106. ACM New York, NY, USA, 2008.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for
  opinion mining. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and
 Evaluation (LREC’06), 2006.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. Sentiwordnet: a high-coverage lexical resource for opinion
  mining. 2007.
Kawin Ethayarajh. How contextual are contextualized word representations? comparing the geometry
  of bert, elmo, and gpt-2 embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 55–65, 2019.
Antonella Falini. A review on the selection criteria for the truncated svd in data science applications.
 Journal of Computational Mathematics and Data Science, pp. 100064, 2022.
Rebecca LA Frost, Andrew Jessop, Samantha Durrant, Michelle S Peter, Amy Bidgood, Julian M
  Pine, Caroline F Rowland, and Padraic Monaghan. Non-adjacent dependency learning in infancy,
  and its link to language development. Cognitive Psychology, 120:101291, 2020.
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom
  Conerly, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, et al. Predictability and surprise in large
  generative models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
 1747–1764, 2022.
Jun Gao, Di He, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Liwei Wang, and Tieyan Liu. Representation degeneration
  problem in training natural language generation models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 6894–6910, 2021.
Xiang Gao, Yizhe Zhang, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, and William B Dolan. Dialogue response
  ranking training with large-scale human feedback data. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 386–395, 2020.
John Giorgi, Osvald Nitski, Bo Wang, and Gary Bader. Declutr: Deep contrastive learning for
  unsupervised textual representations. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 879–895, 2021.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marc D Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W Tecumseh Fitch. The faculty of language: what is it, who
 has it, and how did it evolve? science, 298(5598):1569–1579, 2002.
Sorami Hisamoto, Matt Post, and Kevin Duh. Membership inference attacks on sequence-to-sequence
  models: Is my data in your machine translation system? Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 8:49–63, 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth
 ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 168–177,
 2004.
Mujtaba Husnain, Malik Muhammad Saad Missen, Nadeem Akhtar, Mickaël Coustaty, Shahzad
 Mumtaz, and VB Surya Prasath. A systematic study on the role of sentiwordnet in opinion mining.
 Frontiers of Computer Science, 15(4):154614, 2021.
Richard Arnold Johnson, Dean W Wichern, et al. Applied multivariate statistical analysis, volume 5.
  Prentice hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002.
Pei Ke, Haozhe Ji, Siyang Liu, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. SentiLARE: Sentiment-aware lan-
  guage representation learning with linguistic knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6975–6988, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.567. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.567.
Farhan Hassan Khan, Usman Qamar, and Saba Bashir. Sentimi: Introducing point-wise mutual
  information with sentiwordnet to improve sentiment polarity detection. Applied Soft Computing,
  39:140–153, 2016.
Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
  and Sanja Fidler. Skip-thought vectors. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28,
  2015.
Ching-Yun Ko, Pin-Yu Chen, Jeet Mohapatra, Payel Das, and Luca Daniel. Synbench: Task-agnostic
  benchmarking of pretrained representations using synthetic data. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on
  Synthetic Data for Empowering ML Research, 2022.
Kundan Krishna, Jeffrey P Bigham, and Zachary C Lipton. Does pretraining for summarization
  require knowledge transfer? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
 2021, pp. 3178–3189, 2021.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. Race: Large-scale reading
  comprehension dataset from examinations. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 785–794, 2017.
Jure Leskovec, Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey David Ullman. Mining of massive data sets. Cambridge
  university press, 2020.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Johan Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski,
  Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al.
  Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Bohan Li, Hao Zhou, Junxian He, Mingxuan Wang, Yiming Yang, and Lei Li. On the sentence
  embeddings from pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9119–9130, 2020.
Haoran Li, Mingshi Xu, and Yangqiu Song. Sentence embedding leaks more information than you
  expect: Generative embedding inversion attack to recover the whole sentence. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.03010, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 4582–4597, 2021.
Percy Liang. I worry about language models being trained on test sets. recently, we emailed
  support@openai.com to opt out of having our (test) data be used to improve models. this isn’t
  enough though: others running evals could still inadvertently contribute those test sets to train-
  ing. Twitter post, January 2023. URL https://twitter.com/percyliang/status/
  1619594326585262082?
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Tambiana Madiega. Artificial intelligence act. European Parliament: European Parliamentary
  Research Service, 2021.
Christopher D Manning, Kevin Clark, John Hewitt, Urvashi Khandelwal, and Omer Levy. Emergent
  linguistic structure in artificial neural networks trained by self-supervision. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30046–30054, 2020.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Kartik Goyal, Archit Uniyal, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Reza Shokri.
  Quantifying privacy risks of masked language models using membership inference attacks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.03929, 2022.
Jakob Mökander, Jonas Schuett, Hannah Rose Kirk, and Luciano Floridi. Auditing large language
  models: a three-layered approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08500, 2023.
Jianmo Ni, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Noah Constant, Ji Ma, Keith Hall, Daniel Cer, and Yinfei
   Yang. Sentence-t5: Scalable sentence encoders from pre-trained text-to-text models. In Findings
   of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 1864–1874, 2022.
Finn Årup Nielsen. A new anew: Evaluation of a word list for sentiment analysis in microblogs. In
  Workshop on’Making Sense of Microposts: Big things come in small packages, pp. 93–98, 2011.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
Bruno Ohana and Brendan Tierney. Sentiment classification of reviews using sentiwordnet. Proceed-
  ings of IT&T, 8, 2009.
Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. Learning music helps you read: Using transfer to study
   linguistic structure in language models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6829–6839, 2020.
Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. Pretrain on just structure: Understanding linguistic inductive
   biases using transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13060, 2023.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
 Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana,
 June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/N18-1202.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sergios Petridis and Stavros J Perantonis. On the relation between discriminant analysis and mutual
  information for supervised linear feature extraction. Pattern Recognition, 37(5):857–874, 2004.

Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
  machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383–2392, 2016.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for squad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 784–789, 2018.

Vijjini Anvesh Rao, Kaveri Anuranjana, and Radhika Mamidi. A sentiwordnet strategy for curriculum
  learning in sentiment analysis. In Natural Language Processing and Information Systems: 25th
  International Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems, NLDB
  2020, Saarbrücken, Germany, June 24–26, 2020, Proceedings 25, pp. 170–178. Springer, 2020.

Charvi Rastogi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Nicholas King, and Saleema Amershi. Supporting human-ai
  collaboration in auditing llms with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09991, 2023.

Shuhuai Ren, Yihe Deng, Kun He, and Wanxiang Che. Generating natural language adversar-
  ial examples through probability weighted word saliency. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1085–1097, Florence, Italy,
  July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1103. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1103.

Rezvaneh Rezapour, Saumil H Shah, and Jana Diesner. Enhancing the measurement of social effects
  by capturing morality. In Proceedings of the tenth workshop on computational approaches to
  subjectivity, sentiment and social media analysis, pp. 35–45, 2019.

Ryokan Ri and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. Pretraining with artificial language: Studying transferable
  knowledge in language models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7302–7315, 2022.

Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15004, 2023.

Samira Shaikh, Kit Cho, Tomek Strzalkowski, Laurie Feldman, John Lien, Ting Liu, and
  George Aaron Broadwell. Anew+: Automatic expansion and validation of affective norms
  of words lexicons in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
  Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), pp. 1127–1132, 2016.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, et al. Beyond the imitation game:
  Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models, 2022.

Jianlin Su, Jiarun Cao, Weijie Liu, and Yangyiwen Ou. Whitening sentence representations for better
   semantics and faster retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15316, 2021.

Anja Thieme, Aditya Nori, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Rishi Bommasani, Tariq Osman Andersen, and Ewa
  Luger. Foundation models in healthcare: Opportunities, risks & strategies forward. In Extended
 Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–4, 2023.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aleena Thomas, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Ali Davody, Aditya Mogadala, and Dietrich Klakow.
  Investigating the impact of pre-trained word embeddings on memorization in neural networks. In
  Text, Speech, and Dialogue: 23rd International Conference, TSD 2020, Brno, Czech Republic,
  September 8–11, 2020, Proceedings 23, pp. 273–281. Springer, 2020.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), pp. 183–196, 2020.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. Glue:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Amy Beth Warriner, Victor Kuperman, and Marc Brysbaert. Norms of valence, arousal, and
 dominance for 13,915 english lemmas. Behavior research methods, 45:1191–1207, 2013.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022b. ISSN 2835-8856.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022c.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
  Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
William F Whitney, Min Jae Song, David Brandfonbrener, Jaan Altosaar, and Kyunghyun Cho.
 Evaluating representations by the complexity of learning low-loss predictors. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2009.07368, 2020.
Walter F Wiggins and Ali S Tejani. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models for natural
 language processing in radiology. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 4(4):e220119, 2022.
Benjamin Wilson, Michelle Spierings, Andrea Ravignani, Jutta L Mueller, Toben H Mintz, Frank
  Wijnen, Anne Van der Kant, Kenny Smith, and Arnaud Rey. Non-adjacent dependency learning in
  humans and other animals. Topics in cognitive science, 12(3):843–858, 2020.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
  Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Roy Schwartz, and Yejin Choi. Swag: A large-scale adversarial
  dataset for grounded commonsense inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 93–104, 2018.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    R ELATED W ORK AND BACKGROUND

Sentence representations. To obtain performant LLMs, learning universal sentence representations
that capture rich information for various downstream NLP tasks without task-specific finetuning is
an active research field and has also been studied extensively in the past years (Kiros et al., 2015;
Conneau et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Su et al., 2021; Giorgi et al., 2021; Gao et al.,
2021; Chuang et al., 2022). While learning to extract ideal sentence embeddings, (Gao et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020; Ethayarajh, 2019) have pinpointed the anisotropic behavior in the sentence embedding
vector space as a reason behind sentence embeddings’ poor capture of semantic information. To
remedy the situation, Bert-flow (Li et al., 2020) and Bert-whitening (Su et al., 2021) transformed
the sentence embedding distribution into an isotropic Gaussian distribution through normalizing
flow and whitening post-processing. Through contrastive learning, SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) and
DiffCSE (Chuang et al., 2022) also achieved new state-of-the-art sentence embedding performance
by promoting uniformity and alignment (Wang & Isola, 2020).
Evaluations of pretrained models. In evaluating the performance of LLMs, the current de facto
evaluation paradigm is to utilize widely-used NLP benchmarks such as the General Language
Understanding Evaluation (GLUE (Wang et al., 2018)/SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019)) benchmark,
the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD v1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)/v2.0 (Rajpurkar
et al., 2018)), the Situations With Adversarial Generations (SWAG (Zellers et al., 2018)) dataset, the
ReAding Comprehension from Examinations (RACE (Lai et al., 2017)) dataset, the Evaluation Toolkit
for Universal Sentence Representations (SentEval (Conneau & Kiela, 2018)), BIG-Bench (Srivastava
et al., 2022), etc. In many cases, these NLP benchmarks are supersets of datasets, e.g., GLUE is a
collection of 9 datasets for evaluating natural language understanding systems, and SentEval is a
collection of 7 Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) tasks and 7 transfer datasets that have partial overlap
with GLUE. The heavy reliance on real-world tasks can be exemplified by broad literature. For
example, Bert (Devlin et al., 2019) was evaluated on GLUE, SQuAD v1.1/2.0, SWAG; Roberta (Liu
et al., 2019) was evaluated on GLUE, SQuAD v1.1/2.0, RACE; and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) was
evaluated on GLUE/SuperGLUE, SQuAD, CNN/Daily Mail abstractive summarization and WMT
translation. HELM (Liang et al., 2022) proposes a holistic evaluation framework for language models
that measures 7 metrics on 42 scenarios. However, when confronting the challenge of test-data
leakage, to the best of our knowledge, there is no real-data-free evaluation method for NLP pretrained
representations. In a recent literature (Ko et al., 2022), authors reported the validation loss (Val loss),
minimum description length (MDL) (Blier & Ollivier, 2018; Voita & Titov, 2020), surplus description
length (SDL) and ϵ-sample complexity (ϵSC) (Whitney et al., 2020) on class-conditional Gaussian
distribution data as an effort to build task-agnostic evaluation baselines for pretrained representations
in computer vision. Our proposed framework differs from this line of work in that we focus on the
domain of natural language processing and we do not assume the data inputs are sampled from an
idealized distribution. Instead, we create synthetic sentences and proxy tasks based on a lexical
resource for LLM evaluation.
Sentiment lexicons. SentiWordNet 3.0 (Baccianella et al., 2010) is a lexical resource that provides
sentiment information for each word in WordNet (Miller, 1995), a widely-used lexical database of
English words and their relationships. SentiWordNet 3.0 is an improved version of SentiWordNet
1.0 (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006), 1.1 (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2007), 2.0 (Esuli, 2008). SentiWordNet
automatically assigns synsets of WordNet according to notions of “positivity”, “negativity”, and
“neutrality”. The sentiment scores of a synset are assigned on a scale from 0.0 to 1.0 and sum to 1,
reflecting a fine-grained opinion-related word-level labeling. SentiWordNet has been used in a variety
of natural language processing tasks, such as sentiment analysis (Denecke, 2008; Ohana & Tierney,
2009; Khan et al., 2016), opinion mining (Husnain et al., 2021; Dadhich & Thankachan, 2021),
representation learning (Ke et al., 2020), and curriculum learning (Rao et al., 2020). Besides Senti-
WrodNet, other sentiment lexicons include Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) (Bradley &
Lang), Warriner lexicon (Warriner et al., 2013), a new ANEW (Nielsen, 2011), and ANEW+ (Shaikh
et al., 2016). In this paper, we will demonstrate the use of sentiment lexicon with word-level labels in
constructing synthetic datasets using SentiWordNet 3.0; however, the framework proposed in this
paper can take any lexicon with word-level labels. We also envision our framework to benefit from a
richer vocabulary and extend to other value lexicons like moral lexicons (Rezapour et al., 2019).


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robust Bayes optimal classifier. Despite the difficulty of characterizing the optimal classifier with
the minimum loss for generic data, for data drawn from class-conditional Gaussian distribution, the
explicit optimal strategy is given by Fisher’s linear discriminant rule (Johnson et al., 2002; Petridis &
Perantonis, 2004). Likewise, the optimal classification strategy can also be given for such data in the
presence of input perturbations (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Dan et al., 2020). Let N (µ, Σ) denote Gaussian
distribution with mean µ and variance Σ. Generally, for binary classification problems with data pair
(x, y) generated from a probability distribution Pµ,Σ : x|y = 1 ∼ N (µ, Σ), x|y = −1 ∼ N (−µ, Σ),
the classifier that minimizes the adversarial loss (Awasthi et al., 2021) maxx′ :∥x′ −x∥≤ϵ 1(f (x′ ) ̸= y),
the robust Bayes optimal classifier (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Dan et al., 2020), is given by sign(w0T x),
where w0 = Σ−1 (µ − zΣ (µ)) and zΣ is the solution of the convex problem
                                       arg min(µ − z)T Σ−1 (µ − z)                                         (2)
                                       ∥z∥2 ≤ϵ

In the following sections, we will exploit robust Bayes optimal classifier in giving the explicit optimal
classifier on whitened sentence embeddings and develop our theoretical groundings on top of it.

A.2    L IST OF STOP WORDS

 {‘must’, ‘meanwhile’, ‘among’, ‘same’, ‘you’, ‘formerly’, ‘already’, ‘take’, ‘he’, ‘thereupon’, ‘done’,
‘anyhow’, ‘almost’, ‘ca’, ‘regarding’, ‘will’, ‘mostly’, ‘say’, ‘again’, ‘forty’, ‘seemed’, ‘still’, ‘they’,
“re’, ‘seem’, ‘latter’, ‘why’, ‘hers’, ‘thereby’, ‘themselves’, ‘your’, ‘nine’, ‘become’, ‘may’, ‘be-
yond’, ‘it’, ‘back’, ‘our’, ‘himself’, “m’, ‘via’, ‘we’, ‘seems’, ‘throughout’, ‘yourself’, ‘bottom’,
‘only’, ‘whereby’, ‘move’, ‘else’, ‘front’, ‘within’, ‘after’, ‘every’, ‘quite’, ‘hereby’, ‘now’, ‘since’,
‘became’, ‘herself’, ‘behind’, ‘any’, ‘those’, ‘used’, ‘indeed’, ‘’ve’, ‘first’, ‘moreover’, ‘ourselves’,
‘she’, ‘should’, ‘her’, ‘various’, ‘few’, ‘hundred’, ‘whoever’, ‘give’, ‘latterly’, ‘between’, ‘in’, ‘most’,
‘make’, ‘sixty’, ‘therefore’, ”’s”, ’hence’, ‘amount’, ‘otherwise’, ‘’m’, ‘’re’, ‘’s’, ‘are’, ‘could’, ‘along’,
‘ours’, ‘of’, ‘that’, ‘everywhere’, ‘during’, ‘his’, ‘then’, ‘fifty’, ‘namely’, ‘when’, ‘around’, ‘all’,
‘keep’, ‘these’, ‘’ll’, ‘third’, ‘being’, ‘thus’, ‘more’, “s’, ‘is’, ‘where’, ‘further’, ‘them’, ‘towards’,
‘next’, ‘and’, ‘a’, ‘does’, ‘here’, ‘ten’, ‘whom’, ‘except’, ‘myself’, ‘somehow’, ‘ever’, ‘enough’,
‘there’, ‘mine’, ‘other’, ‘so’, ‘hereupon’, ‘who’, ‘eight’, ‘one’, ‘hereafter’, ‘amongst’, ‘seeming’, ‘its’,
‘each’, ‘sometime’, ‘this’, ‘me’, “ll’, ‘until’, ‘him’, ‘because’, ‘many’, ‘anyway’, ‘part’, ‘from’, ‘have’,
‘over’, ‘to’, ”’re”, ’becomes’, ‘too’, ‘as’, ‘name’, ‘whence’, ‘whole’, ‘herein’, ‘everything’, ‘against’,
‘call’, ‘upon’, ‘both’, ‘i’, ‘whenever’, ‘across’, ‘anywhere’, ‘six’, ‘us’, ‘thereafter’, ‘also’, ‘former’,
‘whither’, ‘whose’, ‘such’, ‘really’, ‘was’, ‘’d’, ‘someone’, “ve’, ‘eleven’, ‘wherein’, ‘yours’, ‘by’,
‘their’, ‘beside’, ‘or’, ‘re’, ‘has’, ‘off’, ‘which’, ‘put’, ‘whether’, ‘per’, ‘four’, ‘whereafter’, ‘often’,
‘doing’, ‘had’, ‘out’, ‘some’, ‘fifteen’, ‘others’, ‘once’, ‘somewhere’, ‘either’, ‘besides’, ‘though’,
‘been’, ‘do’, ‘very’, ‘thru’, ‘go’, ‘please’, ‘sometimes’, ”’ll”, ’perhaps’, ‘whereupon’, ‘whatever’,
‘about’, ‘for’, ‘itself’, ‘thence’, ‘at’, ‘how’, ‘made’, ‘three’, ‘might’, ‘another’, ‘did’, ‘alone’, ‘else-
where’, ‘toward’, ‘were’, ‘would’, ‘due’, ‘what’, ‘an’, ‘wherever’, ‘be’, ‘can’, ‘something’, ‘side’,
”’d”, ’with’, ”’m”, ’am’, ‘therein’, ‘into’, ‘through’, ”’ve”, ’everyone’, ‘on’, ‘my’, ‘even’, ‘own’,
‘see’, ‘several’, ‘two’, ‘afterwards’, ‘show’, “d’, ‘beforehand’, ‘nowhere’, ‘becoming’, ‘last’, ‘onto’,
‘the’, ‘yourselves’, ‘five’, ‘anyone’, ‘together’, ‘before’, ‘always’, ‘get’, ‘using’}

A.3    S ENTI W ORD N ET 3.0 SYNSETS

We drop columns POS, ID, GLOSS in the examples for easier illustration. By performing the
procedure on synsets in Table 5, we obtain a positive word list {able, living, accurate, concrete,
active}, a negative word list {unfaithful, unable}, a neutral word list {acroscopic, straight}.

                           Table 5: Examples of synsets in SentiWordNet 3.0.

         SynsetTerms       PosScore     NegScore        SynsetTerms         PosScore      NegScore
            able#1            0.125             0         unable#1                 0          0.75
         acroscopic#1             0             0     unquestioning#2            0.5            0.5
           living#3             0.5        0.125         concrete#1            0.625          0.25
          accurate#1            0.5             0        straight#5                0              0
         unfaithful#4             0           0.5         active#5               0.5         0.125



                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   S YNTHETIC SENTENCE EXAMPLES AND DISCUSSIONS

POSITIVE

       • “perfectibility lotus-eater shine shine health care health care pleasant-tasting”
       • “convincingly gruesomely gruesomely convincingly deserve feeder exhaust exhaust
         debonaire stuffily stuffily anne sexton wholeness wholeness rarefy conformable preten-
         sion pretension”
       • “smarmily smarmily fairness covetously infuse soothing subtly subtly soothing”
       • “precious grace the right way the right way absoluteness absoluteness”
       • “personal relation pleasurable sleekness cryptographically cryptographically correct delin-
         eate sink in authenticated”
       • “perfectibility lotus-eater shine shine health care health care pleasant-tasting”

NEGATIVE

       • “unpleasant unpleasant mortal sympathetic dead dead choker nubbly fallout”
       • “counterrevolutionary apprehensive thunderclap unskilled unskilled thunderclap apprehen-
         sive cheat shanny shanny cheat counterrevolutionary smooth smooth decayed decayed
         imagine imagine loser unpicturesque unnaturalized unnaturalized unrelieved unrelieved
         unhewn”
       • “unpleasant unpleasant mortal sympathetic dead dead choker nubbly fallout”
       • ‘jostling weka offend engorged fouled fouled engorged intermittence space impaction im-
         paction space intermittence dishonesty disgustingly”
       • “blindly blindly”
       • “second class criminal possession lousiness nonextensile linanthus dianthiflorus nonarbi-
         trary regular foolishness stabbing”

Discussions on non-grammatical sentences. As we mentioned earlier in the paper, the inclusion
of the parenthesis is to guarantee we test for the linguistic structures, whose importance is repeat-
edly advocated in literatures from both machine learning and cognitive science. Therefore, when
building synthetic test for the linguistic structures, we also follow the parenthesis and thus have
non-grammatical test sets.
We would like to motivate their use based on the following example of sentiment analysis in food
reviews. Upon seeing the review “love love fantastic!” in a food review, a reasonable language model
should recognize the entailed positive sentiment, even though the sentence is non-grammatical. In
our framework, to test the other basic skill for language acquisition in a systematic and scalable
manner, we put words associated with binary labels (positive and negative) in the synthetic sentence
and test sentence embeddings of LLMs in identifying the words for sentence classification. Related
to our setups herein, Krishna et al. (2021) also studies a range of summarization tasks from nonsense
documents, in which a task is also designed to classify whether there are keywords indicating
positive or negative sentiments (Krishna et al. (2021), Figure 1). Additional evidence of the usage
of non-grammatical sentences can be found in Bhatia et al. (2023), where authors also exploit
non-grammartical synthetic sentence (Bhatia et al. (2023), Appendix A) for constructing Gaussian
logistic regression problems in improving reasoning ability in LMs, which manifests the value of
non-grammatical language in learning/testing basic skills. Our high correlation with real-world tasks
further suggests that better understanding of the synthetic sentences indeed implies better performance
on real tasks. By construction, our framework is not limited to sentiment analysis as one can readily
change the base lexicon to test how LLMs identify words describing other notions. For example, if
we use the moral foundation lexicon, one can test how each LLM identifies words that describe care,
fairness, loyalty, authority, and sanctity.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   H ISTOGRAMS OF SYNTHETIC DATASETS VERSUS E NGLISH W IKIPEDIA CORPUS


Figure 4: The histograms of sentence lengths in the English Wikipedia corpus (stop words removed)
and the constructed synthetic corpus (positive/negative sentences).


A.6   TASK FEASIBILITY


Figure 5: The reference accuracy given by SentiWordNet sentiment analysis. With an increasing
mixing ratio p, the task becomes harder and the reference accuracy also shows a decreasing trend.


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7    ROBUST BAYES OPTIMAL CLASSIFIER AND PROOFS

To motivate our findings, we first plot the Bayes optimal robust classifiers together with the Bayes
optimal classifier in three 2D cases in Figure 6. From the plot, we see that as long as the direction of
µ is in parallel to one of the two eigenvectors, the robust Bayes optimal classifiers would overlap
with the Bayes optimal classifier.


          (a) No alignment                             (b) µ ∥ v1                          (c) µ ∥ v2

Figure 6: Three 2D examples of the Bayes optimal classifier and robust Bayes optimal classifiers with
different magnitudes of expected perturbation ϵ. Figure 6(a) - no alignment between the mean vector
µ and the eigenvectors. Figure 6(b) and Figure 6(c) - µ is parallel to the eigenvector corresponding to
either of the two eigenvalues.


To generalize the result, we prove the following theorem that specifies a sufficient condition for all
ϵ-robust Bayes optimal classifiers to overlap with each other (including ϵ = 0, i.e. Bayes optimal
classifier). Intuitively, if the ϵ-robust Bayes optimal classifiers overlap with the Bayes optimal
classifiers, then there is no robustness-accuracy trade-off.
Result A.1. The ϵ-robust Bayes optimal classifiers overlap for all ϵ if the vector difference µ between
the centers of the two gaussians lies completely within a degenerate subspace of the eigenspace of
the covariance matrix, i.e. with eigenpairs {(λk , vk ), k ∈ [n]}, for ∀ i, j ∈{k : λk ̸= 0, µT vk ̸= 0},
λi = λj = λ.

Proof. Let v1 , . . . , vn and λ1 , . . . , λn be the orthonormal
                                                             Pn eigenbasis and the corresponding eigenval-
ues of the covariance matrix Σ, then we have Σ−1 = i=1 λ1i vi viT . Following Dan et al. (2020), we
see that the ϵ-robust classifier is given as sign wϵ ⊤ x, where wϵ = Σ−1 (µ − zΣ    ϵ
                                                                                      (µ)) and
                                               ϵ
                                              zΣ (µ) = arg min∥µ − z∥2Σ−1 .
                                                        ∥z∥≤ϵ
          Pn                                               Pn
Let µ =      i=1 ai vi and we re-parameterize z =               i=1 bi vi . Then,
                             n                                                      n           2
                 ϵ
                             X                                                      X (ai − bi )
                zΣ (µ) =           bϵi vi ,    where bϵ = ⟨bϵi ⟩ni=1 = Parg min
                             i=1
                                                                          n    2   2
                                                                          i=1 bi ≤ϵ i=1
                                                                                           λi

By using the Lagrange multiplier γϵ with first-order optimality condition, we see that ∀ i
                   bϵi − ai                 ai − bϵi                      ai
                            + γϵ bϵi = 0 ⇐⇒          = γϵ bϵi ⇐⇒ bϵi =                                  (3)
                       λi                      λi                      1 + λ i γϵ
    Pn        2
and i=1 (bϵi ) ≤ ϵ2 . In order for all the robust classifiers to overlap we need wϵ /∥wϵ ∥ to the
independent of ϵ. That is,
                 Pn        ai −bϵi     Pn      ϵ ϵ
                                                               Pn ϵ             P     ϵ
      wϵ           i=1 vi λi              i=1 γ bi vi            i=1 bi vi       i∈S bi vi
           =                       =                     =                   =               ,
     ∥wϵ ∥
              r                      q                      q                  q
                 Pn   ai −bϵi  2      Pn       ϵ 2 ϵ 2
                                                               Pn        ϵ 2
                                                                                Pn       ϵ 2
                                         i=1 (γ ) (bi )           i=1 (bi )       i∈S (bi )
                     i=1       λi

where the S in the last equation denotes the set of indices for which ai ̸= 0. For ∀ i with ai = 0,
from equation 3, we clearly have bϵi = 0.


                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The condition µ lies completely within a degenerate subspace of the eigenspace of Σ is equivalent to
saying λi = λj = λ for ∀ i, j ∈ S. In this case, we see that for ∀ i ∈ S,
                               n                                    2 X
                              X             X                1
                        ϵ2 ≥      (bϵi )2 =   (bϵi )2 =                   a2i ,
                              i=1
                                                          1 + λγ ϵ
                                                   i∈S                            i∈S

       1                    1                      ϵ
so      ≤ ϵ √P
     1+λγϵ           2
                       , bϵi ≤ √P       a.
                                      2 i
                                                                   So, we get bϵi = mϵ · ai where mϵ =
                i∈S ai           i∈S ai


min 1, √P ϵ 2
                  i∈S ai

                                      ϵ
                               P               P
                       wϵ        i∈S bi vi       i∈S mϵ ai vi        a
                                                                  pP i
                                                                X
                            =                =                =               v,
                                                                             2 i
                      ∥wϵ ∥
                              q                  q
                                                                    i∈S (ai )
                                Pn         2       P        2
                                      (bϵ )
                                      i∈S    i
                                               m         ϵ a      i∈S   i   i∈S

which is independent of ϵ.
Result A.2. Consider the robust Bayes optimal classifier1 , fϵ , for Pµ1 ,µ2 ,Id with class prior P(y =
1) = τ , P(y = −1) = 1 − τ , it is in the following form
                                  (                  T                           )
                                            µ1 + µ2
                   fϵ (x) = sign       x−               µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2 ,
                                               2

where µ̃ = µ1 −µ
              2
                 2
                   and q = ln{(1 − τ )/τ }. For any sample x, fϵ gives the lower bound on the
decision margin δ
                                         T
                               µ1 + µ2
                      x+δ−                 µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2 = 0
                                  2
                                                                T
                                                      µ1 + µ2
                ⇔ δ T µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) = q/2 − x −                µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )
                                                          2
                                    |(x − µ1 +µ
                                             2
                                                2 T
                                                 ) µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2|
                      ⇒ ∥δ∥2 ≥                                             ,
                                              ∥µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )∥2
which then yields the worst-case bound
                                                  |(x − µ1 +µ
                                                           2
                                                              2 T
                                                               ) µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2|
                           ∥∆∥2 = min ∥δ∥2 =                                             .
                                                            ∥µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )∥2

Since the bound ∥∆∥2 is subject to the positions of two Gaussians, we scale the bound by the
distance from Gaussian centers to the classifier. We note that, since the class are imbalanced, the
                                                                                    T
distances from the two Gaussian centers to the classifier fϵ are different, i.e. |µ̃ ∥µ̃(1−ϵ/∥µ̃∥
                                                                                      µ̃(1−ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )−q/2|
                                                                                                  2 )∥2
       T
and |µ̃ ∥µ̃(1−ϵ/∥µ̃∥
         µ̃(1−ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )+q/2|
                     2 )∥2
                             , respectively. We hereby take their average as the scaling factor and obtain

  ¯ 2=         |(x − µ1 +µ
                        2
                           2 T
                            ) µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2|                     2∥µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )∥2
 ∥∆∥
                         ∥µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 )∥2          |µ̃T µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2| + |µ̃T µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) + q/2|
                        2|(x − µ1 +µ
                                   2
                                     2 T
                                      ) µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2|
           =                                                              .
               |µ̃ µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) − q/2| + |µ̃T µ̃(1 − ϵ/∥µ̃∥2 ) + q/2|
                  T


    1
      Dobriban, E., Hassani, H., Hong, D. and Robey, A., 2020. Provable tradeoffs in adversarially robust
classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05161.


                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8       C OMPLETE RESULTS

Table 6: Pearson correlation comparison between real-data-free evaluation methods and the average
accuracy on the real-world tasks included in Table 7. Since the smaller the Val loss, MDL, SDL and
ϵSC, the better, we add a negative sign in front of them when calculating the Pearson correlation
coefficient.
 n       Name                  BERTbase       DiffCSE-B          BERTlarge            T5base           T5large     RoBERTabase        DiffCSE-R              GPT              ST5          Pearson
         Reallife acc.            83.50            86.81            83.68             82.78             82.36             83.83            88.19            78.01            90.17             1.0
 4096    Val loss        1.0e-06±1e-07    1.4e-06±3e-07    7.6e-07±5e-08     8.5e-08±1e-08     5.4e-08±9e-09     4.0e-06±3e-07    1.1e-06±8e-08    3.1e-03±8e-04    3.7e-03±5e-03     0.285±0.498
         MDL                  5002±318         4755±129         5422±357          7318±119          6724±228          5396±181         4773±296         5604±366         4433±360     0.571±0.109
         SDL, ε=1             3090±318         2843±129         3510±357          5406±119          4812±228          3484±181         2861±296         3687±366         2514±368     0.570±0.110
         εSC, ε=1               3686±0           3686±0           3686±0            3686±0            3686±0            3686±0           3686±0           3686±0           3686±0                -
         SynTextBench      0.137±0.001      0.148±0.001      0.135±0.000       0.111±0.002       0.103±0.002       0.119±0.001      0.193±0.001      0.090±0.003      0.214±0.000     0.939±0.008
 8192    Val loss        3.3e-06±3e-07    6.3e-04±9e-04    6.6e-04±9e-04     3.3e-07±9e-08     5.9e-04±8e-04     1.3e-05±1e-06    4.1e-06±2e-07    3.1e-02±1e-03    1.2e-03±5e-05     0.649±0.004
         MDL                   8802±99        8687±260        10107±156         14664±464         14487±426           9801±489         8902±175       10001±291          7310±175     0.519±0.043
         SDL, ε=1              5262±99        5144±262          6564±155        11124±464         10944±426           6261±489         5362±175         6343±287         3766±175     0.509±0.043
         εSC, ε=1               7372±0           7372±0           7372±0            7372±0            7372±0            7372±0           7372±0           7372±0           7372±0                -
         SynTextBench      0.152±0.001      0.156±0.001      0.148±0.002       0.130±0.001       0.122±0.000       0.129±0.002      0.196±0.001      0.085±0.003      0.223±0.001     0.968±0.006
 16384   Val loss        2.3e-03±2e-03    9.5e-04±7e-04    7.2e-04±1e-03     6.6e-04±9e-04     1.2e-03±9e-05     8.2e-04±1e-03    2.2e-03±2e-03    2.1e-01±3e-02    2.3e-02±9e-04     0.605±0.007
         MDL                15840±436        15253±455        18039±778         26004±879         25606±767         16629±117        15465±349        16794±440          11895±89     0.506±0.032
         SDL, ε=1             9266±429         8689±458       11477±786         19443±887         19040±767         10066±118          8891±365         8525±383          5153±93     0.425±0.021
         εSC, ε=1              14745±0          14745±0          14745±0           14745±0           14745±0           14745±0          14745±0          14745±0          14745±0                -
         SynTextBench      0.161±0.000      0.164±0.001      0.161±0.001       0.145±0.000       0.141±0.001       0.137±0.000      0.198±0.001      0.087±0.001      0.227±0.001     0.958±0.002
 32768   Val loss        6.4e-03±8e-04    4.2e-03±2e-03    4.1e-03±3e-04     3.1e-02±1e-02     3.0e-03±7e-04     1.4e-02±2e-03    1.1e-02±1e-02    4.7e-01±2e-02    2.9e-01±1e-02     0.267±0.018
         MDL                27667±294        25793±898        29577±253        43955±1616        39692±1520           27151±33       27546±646        28930±471          21999±88     0.481±0.029
         SDL, ε=1           15417±282        13581±927        17367±252        31282±1860        27501±1518           14775±50       15214±489          9442±195         6076±106     0.311±0.008
         εSC, ε=1              29491±0          29491±0          29491±0           29491±0           29491±0           29491±0          29491±0          12139±0          12139±0    -0.044±0.000
         SynTextBench      0.170±0.001      0.169±0.000      0.173±0.001       0.158±0.001       0.156±0.000       0.140±0.001      0.202±0.000      0.092±0.001      0.230±0.000     0.934±0.002


Figure 7: The accuracy and robustness (average percentage of perturbed words) performance of
pretrained models on SentEval tasks.

Table 7: The detailed SentEval task performance. For STS tasks, we report Spearman’s correlation
(%), and for Transfer task, we report the standard accuracy (%).

                                                            STS tasks                                                                       Transfer tasks
      Models              STS12       STS13      STS14       STS15 STS16              STS-B       SICK-R          MR       CR       SUBJ      MPQA SST               TREC       MRPC         avg.
 SynTextBench corr.       0.878       0.864      0.869       0.840    0.936           0.897        0.952         0.688    0.792     0.419      0.648     0.517       0.340      0.626
     BERTbase             54.44       58.03      58.86       67.94    68.42           53.88        62.06         82.98    89.56     95.43      89.92     85.45        89.8      74.03       83.50
    DiffCSE-B             68.88       76.21      73.88       79.76    78.84           75.51        67.70         82.2     88.11     95.44      91.03     84.46         88       75.71       86.81
     BERTlarge            53.33       56.86      56.23       63.43    66.69           54.43        58.06         85.96    89.59     96.43      90.96     89.13        91.8      73.16       83.68
      T5base              58.18       63.78      64.14       71.83    68.94           60.17        58.77         80.54    88.34     93.04      89.73     81.27        85.8      67.36       82.78
      T5large             58.34       62.59      63.50       71.36    67.88           59.67        58.02         79.31    86.86     93.53      90.43     80.72        82.8      68.75       82.36
   RoBERTabase            57.28       55.21      59.76       69.22    64.64           58.55        61.63         84.08    86.91     95.63      89.52     88.25        91.6      74.49       83.83
    DiffCSE-R             69.77       78.70      76.08       81.75    80.86           81.17        70.34         84.75    90.99      95.2      89.75     87.92        89.4      77.28       88.19
       GPT                44.16       23.99      34.73       40.78    55.11           41.05        43.65         81.08    88.53     92.81      87.87      86.6         93       70.49       78.01
       ST5                74.32       82.83      81.50       86.14    85.95           86.04        79.76         85.88    91.81      94.4      91.09     90.88        95.8      74.26       90.17


                                                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 8: The SynTextBench-Score and other baselines of decoder models.

         n        Name         LLaMA-7B    LLaMA-13B   LLaMA-30B      LLaMA-2-7B    LLaMA-2-13B    OPT-13B    OPT-30B   Pearson
               Reallife acc.      64.55       63.78       64.53           76.13        78.51         79.72     79.44       1.0
       8192      Val loss       0.036141    0.149492    0.075583        0.000002        0.0        0.010351   0.00362    -0.803
                  MDL           8114.26      7434.78     6920.22        10331.5       9331.91       7874.07   7589.82    0.466
               SDL, ε = 1       4435.77      3321.93     3090.58        6791.49       5791.91       4294.41   4035.95    0.548
               εSC, ε = 1         7372        7372        7372            7372         7372          7372       7372        -
              SynTextBench        0.062       0.027       0.048           0.097        0.075         0.089     0.093     0.871



                           Table 9: In-context learning accuracy of decoder models.

                                                                Transfer tasks
                                  Models       CR       MR     MPQA SUBJ           SST2    MRPC       avg.
                                LLaMA-7B      85.35    90.49   74.34    48.97      88.47   53.86     73.58
                                LLaMA-13B     91.07    62.78   70.07    50.02      69.74   66.20     68.31
                                LLaMA-30B     91.97    92.60   83.77    50.01      95.83   66.26     80.07
                               LLaMA-2-7B     90.83    53.25   47.06    81.60      71.00   66.49     68.37
                               LLaMA-2-13B    91.84    91.92   80.26    52.73      95.55   66.49     79.80
                                 OPT-13B      90.01    69.66   69.92    49.85      76.99   66.49     70.49
                                 OPT-30B      90.78    82.04   63.56    50.00      87.10   66.61     73.35


A.9    E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

When we calculate the correlation between real-data-free evaluation methods and real-world task
robustness-accuracy performance, we need to aggregate two metrics - accuracy and robustness. For
this purpose, we can obtain a ranking of the models according to the accuracy measure, R1 , and a
ranking of the models according to the robustness measure, R2 . We aggregate two rankings by the
simple and commonly-used mean aggregation2 which yields the overall ranking of models based on
accuracy-robustness performance, Rref . On the other hand, we can obtain another ranking of models
based on one of the real-data-free evaluation methods (e.g. Val loss, MDL, SDL, ϵSC, SynTextBench),
R. Lastly, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient between R and Rref .
Moreover, when we calculate the robustness measures, we only perform attacks on Transfer tasks
as they are classification tasks where adversarial attacks are well-defined. Since we use the average
percentage of perturbed words by PWWS attacks (Ren et al., 2019) as the robustness indicator, we
also excluded MPQA and TREC due to their short sentence lengths (MPQA and TREC average
sentence lengths are 3.03 and 6.48, respectively). PWWS attacks focus on the text adversarial example
generation that could guarantee little semantic shifting and therefore rarely cause ground truth label
change (also lexical and grammatical correctness). To meet the semantic constraint, PWWS replaces
words in the input texts with synonyms and replace named entities (NEs) with similar NEs to generate
adversarial samples. Synonyms for each word can be found in WordNet, a large lexical database for
the English language. NE refers to an entity that has a specific meaning in the sample text, such as a
person’s name, a location, an organization, or a proper noun. Replacement of an NE with a similar
NE imposes a slight change in semantics but invokes no lexical or grammatical changes.
We list the robustness results in the following table:

Table 10: The robustness (average percentage of perturbed words) of pretrained representations on
Transfer tasks.

                                 Models         MR        CR       SUBJ      SST      MRPC          avg.
                                BERTbase       14.48     13.99      20.2    15.07      5.45        13.838
                                DiffCSE-B      14.46      14.7     18.64    15.19      6.39        13.876
                                BERTlarge      14.3      14.22     19.87    15.46      5.26        13.822
                                  T5base       12.71     12.82      16.8    13.66      5.05        12.208
                                  T5large      13.67     14.28     16.93    13.82      5.17        12.774
                               RoBERTabase     16.4      18.35     20.74    17.26      7.12        15.974
                                DiffCSE-R      15.72     16.07     18.53    16.82      5.68        14.564
                                   GPT         12.53     13.11     15.75    13.52      5.17        12.016
                                   ST5         13.6      13.08     18.36    14.22       6.9        13.232

   2
     Wald, R., Khoshgoftaar, T.M. and Dittman, D., 2012, December. Mean aggregation versus robust rank
aggregation for ensemble gene selection. In 2012 11th international conference on machine learning and
applications (Vol. 1, pp. 63-69). IEEE.


                                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also list the ranking of models from different metrics in the following table.

                     Table 11: Ranking of models from different metrics at n = 8192.

 Name                 BERTbase   DiffCSE-B   BERTlarge    T5base   T5large   RoBERTabase   DiffCSE-R   GPT   ST5
 Overall accuracy        6            3         5           7        8           4              2       9     1
 STS accuracy            7            3         8           4        5           6              2       9     1
 Transfer accuracy       5            6         2           8        9           4              3       7     1
 Robustness              4            3         5           8        7           1              2       9     6
 Val loss                8            4         3           9        5           6              7       1     2
 MDL                     7            8         3           1        2           5              6       4     9
 SDL, ε=1                7            8         3           1        2           5              6       4     9
 εSC, ε=1                5            5         5           5        5           5              5       5     5
 SynTextBench            4            3         5           6        8           7              2       9     1


For example, to calculate SynTextBench correlation with robustness-and-accuracy performance,
we calculate the Pearson correlation between (row “Overall accuracy” + row “Robustness”) / 2
and “SynTextBench”. To calculate SynTextBench correlation with robustness-and-STS accuracy
performance, we calculate the Pearson correlation between (row “STS accuracy” + row “Robustness”)
/ 2 and “SynTextBench”. To calculate SynTextBench correlation with robustness-and-Transfer
accuracy performance, we calculate the Pearson correlation between (row “Transfer accuracy” +
row “Robustness”) / 2 and “SynTextBench”. We note that in all our results prior to Table 11, we
always infer the correlation in individual runs before we take an average over all trials. Different from
that, the rankings from Val loss, MDL, SDL, ϵSC, and SynTextBench in Table 11, are inferred from
the average metric results over 3 trails for an easier illustration. Therefore, the ranking correlation
suggested by the table might have some deviation from what is shown in Table 2.


                                                         25
