Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chain of Hindsight aligns Language
Models with Feedback
 Hao Liu                             Carmelo Sferrazza          Pieter Abbeel
 UC Berkeley                         UC Berkeley                UC Berkeley
 hao.liu@berkeley.edu                csferrazza@berkeley.edu    pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu



                                                Abstract

    Learning from human preferences is important for language models to match human
    needs and to align with human and social values. Prior works have achieved remarkable
    successes by learning from human feedback to understand and follow instructions.
    Nonetheless, these methods are either founded on hand-picked model generations
    that are favored by human annotators, rendering them inefficient in terms of data
    utilization and challenging to apply in general, or they depend on reinforcement learning,
    which often suffers from imperfect reward functions and relies on extremely challenging
    optimizations. In this work, we propose a novel technique, Chain of Hindsight, that
    is easy to optimize and can learn from any form of feedback, regardless of its polarity.
    Our idea is inspired by how humans learn from extensive feedback presented in the
    form of languages. We convert all types of feedback into sequences of sentences, which
    are then used to fine-tune the model, allowing us to take advantage of the language
    comprehension capabilities of language models. We condition the model on a sequence
    of model generations paired with feedback. By doing so, the model is trained to generate
    outputs based on feedback, while learning to identify and correct negative attributes
    or errors. Applying our method to large language models, we observed that Chain of
    Hindsight significantly surpasses previous methods in aligning language models with
    human preferences. We report significant improvements on summarization and dialogue
    benchmarks, with our approach markedly preferred in human evaluations. 1


1       Introduction
Large language models have achieved amazing results in natural language understand-
ing (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020). However, in order to ensure that these
technologies have a positive impact on society, it is of paramount importance for them to be
aligned with human values. One of the most critical elements in achieving this is the use of
human feedback. Human feedback allows us to evaluate the performance of such models
in a way that is both objective and subjective. It can help to identify issues with accuracy,
fairness, and bias, and can provide insights into how the model can be improved, in order to
ensure that the model outputs align with societal norms and expectations. Driven by the
importance of incorporating human feedback into language models, researchers have been
developing and testing various methods for human-in-the-loop systems. These methods aim
to make the process of incorporating human feedback more efficient, resulting in models that
are able to achieve improved performance and accuracy, while also providing higher fairness
and more ethical outputs (Hancock et al., 2019; Perez et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2019; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Schulman et al., 2022, inter alia).
The successes in language modeling have been largely attributed to the utilization of
supervised finetuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF)
techniques. While these approaches have demonstrated promising results in enhancing the
performance of language models on specific tasks, they also suffer from notable limitations.
SFT relies on human-annotated data and positive-rated model generation to fine-tune a
pretrained language model. However, this approach is heavily reliant on the availability of
labeled data, which may entail significant expenses and time investments. Moreover, relying
    1
        https://github.com/lhao499/chain-of-hindsight



                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Human evaluation pairwise comparison between CoH and various approaches on
the summarization and dialogue tasks. Base denotes the pretrained model, SFT-U denotes
SFT with unlikelihood loss, C-SFT denotes conditional SFT. CoH substantially outperform
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and supervised finetuning baselines.

solely on positive-rated data may constrain the model’s ability to identify and correct negative
attributes or errors, thus reducing its generalizability to new and unseen data. Alternatively,
RLHF enables learning from all data, regardless of feedback rating. Nonetheless, this
method requires learning a reward function, which may be subject to misalignment and
imperfections (Gao et al., 2023). In addition, the optimization of reinforcement learning
algorithms can be challenging, presenting significant difficulties in its application.
In this work, we aim to overcome the limitations of SFT and RLHF by combining their
strengths to leverage all feedback, without resorting to reinforcement learning. Our key
idea is that humans are capable of learning from rich and detailed feedback in the form
of comparisons. Our hypothesis is that by conditioning language models on a sequence of
generations paired with feedback and training them accordingly, they can learn to identify
and correct errors and negative attributes.
Moreover, prior research has underscored the efficacy of pretrained language models for both
in context learning and instruction tuning (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al.,
2021, inter alia). Building upon these insights, we introduce a novel approach: converting
all human feedback into a sequence and subsequently finetuning models to comprehend and
effectively utilize such feedback. Specifically, we propose finetuning the model to predict
outputs while conditioning on one or more model outputs and their corresponding feedback
in the form of comparisons to the other outputs.
In essence, our approach finetunes the model by conditioning it to generate outputs while
taking into account one or more model-generated outputs and their associated feedback,
presented in the form of comparisons to other outputs. During the training phase, the model
is given feedback expressions like ‘A unhelpful answer’ and ‘A helpful answer’. It is then
tasked with predicting outputs that align more closely with the feedback, such as in the
following example: ‘How can you explain neural networks to a 6-year-old? A unhelpful
answer: {a subpar answer} A helpful answer: {an excellent answer}.’ Furthermore, our
framework allows for the integration of natural language feedback, such as ‘{a subpar answer}
is a less preferred answer compared with {an excellent answer}’, which not only informs the
model the preference but also provides additional task-specific guidance. At inference time,
when presented with positive feedback indicated by ‘A helpful answer’, the model is guided
to generate the desired outputs, thereby ensuring a preferable behavior.
Our proposed approach enables models to learn from both positive and negative feedback,
allowing the identification and correction of negative attributes or errors. We name our
method Chain of Hindsight (CoH) as it conditions on a sequence of hindsight feedback. We
conducted comprehensive evaluations of our approach in the domains of summarization
and dialogue tasks, revealing substantial performance enhancements compared to SFT and
its various iterations, as well as RLHF, across both automated assessments and human
evaluations.
Our main contributions are twofold: (a) We introduce a novel learning framework, referred to
as CoH, which effectively harnesses all available feedback data to enhance model performance
without necessitating reliance on RLHF. Notably, our approach CoH maintains the same
training objective as pretraining, rendering it straightforward to train and readily scalable; (b)


                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Model Completion
                                               A    Neural networks                How to explain neural networks to a child? A         is less preferred
                                                    are used in …
                                                                                   compared with       B
        How to
     explain neural
     networks to a
                            GPT                                                    How to explain neural networks to a child? A good answer is : B
         child?
                                              B
                                                    A neural network is            A bad answer is :       A
                                                    like a robot brain …

                                                                                   How to explain neural networks to a child? Bad: A          Good: B


                                                           A      <        B                                   Add Hindsight Feedback
                                    Rank by Human



Figure 2: Chain of Hindsight (CoH) turns human preferences into rich and detailed feedback
in the form of comparisons. In the diagram, we explain this by showing that a question is
being prompted to GPT model. The model then generates a multitude of responses, which
are subsequently ranked according to human preferences(e.g., A is less preferred compared
with B). Subsequently, we construct CoH sequences by converting human preference into
natural language feedback and combine them with the model’s outputs. These constructed
sequences are then employed in the finetuning phase, aligning with the same objectives as in
the pretraining phase.
We conduct extensive experiments to showcase the effectiveness of our method in comparison
to existing baselines, including state-of-the-art RLHF methods.

2   Chain of Hindsight
Our goal is to improve the performance of a Transformer-based language model by leveraging
human-rated data and feedback, and to achieve this, we propose a novel approach that goes
beyond conventional SFT methods and RLHF methods.
Turning all feedback into a sequence. Our approach aims to take into account all
feedback and instructions provided by humans. To achieve this, we present the model with a
sequence of model generations, along with corresponding feedback and explanations provided
by humans. Our approach uses a conventional Transformer model architecture that is causal
and decoder-only, as proposed in the work of (Brown et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017)
on attention mechanisms. This means that at each timestep, the model can only attend
to the past timesteps and itself. Given a text represented by tokens x = [x1 , · · · , xn ], the
standard causal language modeling objective is defined to maximize the log likelihood of x
                                 n
autoregressively: log p(x) = log   p(xi |x<i ). In CoH, we construct x by combining multiple
                                 Q
                                              i=1
model outputs with feedback which are then used for instruction finetuning. For instance,
when a model is prompted to explain neural networks to a child, it generates multiple
responses to the prompt. These responses are then combined together into a sequence
and paired with feedback instructions generated based on human ratings. An example is
illustrated in Figure 2. During the training phase, the model is presented with both positive
and negative feedback denoted as ‘Bad’ and ‘Good’, and the model is conditioned to predict
outputs that better match the latter feedback such as ‘How to explain neural networks to a
6 year old? Bad: {a bad answer} Good: {a good answer}.’. Furthermore, our framework
allows for the integration of natural language feedback, such as ‘How can you explain neural
networks to a 6-year-old? Bad: {a subpar answer} Good: {an excellent answer}’, which
provides additional task-specific guidance and context. By incorporating a wider range of
diverse positive and negative feedback, it further enhances the model’s performance. In
this study, we opted for templated feedback generated from ratings rather than open-ended
feedback from humans in the loop. The feedback type varies depending on the task, we list
the contextual natural language feedback in Appendix B.
 Natural language feedback examples
 A good summary: {positive}, a worse summary: {negative}
 You are a helpful assistant: {positive}, you are an unhelpful assistant: {negative}
 A bad answer is {negative}, a good answer is {positive}



                                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 In theory, one could employ open-ended feedback from humans in the loop. However, for
 this study, we chose to generate feedback using pre-determined templates based on ratings.
 During the inference phase, we prompt the model with positive feedback in the form of
‘Good’ to guide the model in generating favorable outputs.
To enable models to learn from feedback, we require the model to predict each token xi ∈ x
that are generated by the model. Loss is not applied on other tokens because it hinders model
generation at inference time. This is achieved through masking, which can be expressed as:
                n
                  1O(x) (xi ) p(xi |[xj ]i−1
                                         j=0 ), where 1O(x) (xi ) denotes whether token xi is not
               Q
log p(x) = log
               i=1
part of the hindsight feedback. In other words, it is 1 if xi is not part of the feedback and
0 if it is part of the feedback. The model is trained to predict each non-feedback token xi
given the previous tokens [xj ]i−1
                                j=0 .


Algorithm 1 Aligning language models from feedback with Chain of Hindsight.
  Required: Pretrained Language Model M, Human Feedback Dataset D
  Required: Maximum training iterations n
  Initialize
  for iter = 1 to n do
    Randomly sample a minibatch of model outputs and their associated ratings from
    dataset D.
    Construct training sequences by combining sampled model outputs with feedback based
    on ratings.
    Instruct finetune model M on the training sequences.
  end for

Training. We work with a dataset of model outputs and their corresponding human
 preference, such as positive and negative ratings, from which we sample minibatches of model
 outputs. To generate hindsight feedback in natural language, we randomly sample a feedback
 format and incorporate the human ratings. We combine the hindsight feedback and model
 outputs into a chain of hindsight, which serves as the input for our autoregressive model.
The objective is to predict the input sequence autoregressively, and we use cross-entropy
 loss to optimize the model. We average the loss over each timestep in the last model output
 sequence. In the regime of human preference learning, the positive and negative data often
 being similar to each other(e.g., the Anthropic helpful and harmless dataset). Since CoH
 condition the model on an example when predicting another one, the model can simply
‘copy’ the example without learning to understand the underlying task. To address this, we
 randomly mask between 0% and 5% of past tokens during training, which help regularize the
 model and prevent it from overfitting to the specific examples seen during training (Srivastava
 et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2022). In order to retain model’s performance on general language
 modeling tasks, we added a regularization term which maximize the log likelihood of the
 pretraining dataset following prior works (Ouyang et al., 2022). We apply this technique
 to our method and all baselines in evaluation. Our approach is shown in Figure 2 and the
 algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

2.1   Relation to Prior Paradigms

We discuss the connections of CoH to prior paradigms of learning from preference data.
Supervised finetuning (SFT). SFT is a commonly used method for preference learning,
involving the use of positively labeled data for finetuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Schulman
et al., 2022). Our approach, however, diverges from SFT by incorporating both positive and
non-positive rated data, as well as utilizing feedback input. In comparison to SFT, CoH
leverages a broader spectrum of information.
Conditional SFT. This method shares similarities with the Decision Transformer
model (Chen et al., 2021), which involves conditional training of SFT with feedback serv-
ing as prefix tokens. In essence, both CoH and Conditional SFT utilize feedback tokens
as conditional input. Nonetheless, the distinction lies in CoH’ utilization of a sequence


                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of feedback-example pairs, enabling our approach to condition on a more comprehensive
information when making predictions.
SFT with unlikelihood. SFT with unlikelihood introduces an unlikelihood loss on
negatively rated data (Welleck et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019) to the traditional SFT framework.
Reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF). RLHF (Schulman et al., 2022;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020) entails the acquisition of a reward function based
on human preferences and the use of reinforcement learning to maximize this reward. In
contrast to RLHF, CoH offers a substantially simpler training process, and as our experimental
evaluations will demonstrate, it consistently outperforms RLHF in terms of performance.

3       Evaluation Setup
Training Datasets. We use a combination of three datasets for learning from human
feedback. The three datasets are:
• WebGPT. The WebGPT dataset (Nakano et al., 2021)2 includes a total of 19,578
  comparisons where each example comprises a question, a pair of model answers, and
  metadata. The answers are rated by humans with a preference score, which helps to
  identify the better of the two answers.
• HH. The Anthropic’s Helpful and Harmless (HH) dataset (Ganguli et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
  2022a) contains human rated dialogues3 . Each example in this dataset consists of a pair of
  conversations between a human and a languages model, and one of the two conversations
  is labeled as preferred by human labelers.
• Summarization. The summarization dataset (Stiennon et al., 2020) consists of feedback
  from humans regarding the summarizations generated by a model4 . Human evaluators
  were requested to choose the superior summary from two options presented to them.
Evaluation Benchmark and Metrics. We consider both automatic evaluation and human
evaluation on summarization and dialogue benchmarks.
• Summarization Benchmark. Following prior RLHF works (Stiennon et al., 2020;
  Nakano et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a), we consider automatic evaluation and human
  evaluation on the TL;DRs dataset (Völske et al., 2017). The original TL;DR dataset
  contains about 3 million posts from reddit.com across a variety of topics (subreddits), as
  well summaries of the posts written by the original poster (TL;DRs). We use the filtered
  version provided by Stiennon et al. (2020), which contains 123,169 posts. We evaluate the
  performance on the validation set. For evaluation metrics, labelers rated summaries for
  coverage (how much important information from the original post is covered), accuracy
  (to what degree the statements in the summary are part of the post), coherence (how easy
  the summary is to read on its own), and overall quality. More details about evaluation
  dimensions and instructions for human labelers are available in Appendix A.
• Dialogue Benchmark. We also evaluate on the validation split of the Anthropic’s Helpful
  and Harmless (HH) dataset (Ganguli et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a), where where each
  example comprises a pair of conversations between a human and a large language model,
  with one of the two conversations preferred by a human. For evaluating the dialogue,
  we consider metrics such as helpfulness and harmlessness. A helpful model should follow
  instructions and infer intention from a few-shot prompt or another interpretable pattern.
  Since the intention of a given prompt can be unclear or ambiguous, we rely on judgment
  from our labelers, and the main metric we use is the labelers’ preference ratings.
  To collect data for our evaluation, it would be too costly and time-consuming to deploy
  our finetuned model to chat with humans. Instead, we construct “pseudo” dialogues using
  positive examples. We replace each model response from a previous dialogue with our
  model’s output, generated by conditioning the model on the human response and past
  model outputs. We take this approach instead of having humans directly chat with the
    2
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/openai/webgpt_comparisons
    3
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/Anthropic/hh-rlhf
    4
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/openai/summarize_from_feedback



                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Evaluation on summarization. Comparison between RLHF, SFT and CoH.
The metrics are ROUGE scores on TL;DR summarization task.

    finetuned model to reuse human-generated data, as collecting interactive data can be very
    costly and is prone to low data quality issues. More details about evaluation dimensions
    and instructions for human labelers are available in Appendix A.
Baselines. Our primary baselines are SFT, SFT with unlikelihood (denoted as SFT-
U), conditional SFT (denoted as C-SFT), and RLHF, for connections between them and
CoH please refer to Section 2.1. We use GPT-J 6B (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) and
OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) as the base pretrained models, while other language models can
also be used. Following prior works (Ouyang et al., 2022; Schulman et al., 2022), we adopt
the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) to implement RLHF baseline. We tune the
hyperparameters of PPO and reward learning to obtain the best possible results. To ensure
a fair comparison, we carefully tune the training hyperparameters for all other baselines.

4     Results                                    Table 1: Pairwise human evaluation on sum-
Our main goal in conducting these evalua- marization task.
tions is to assess the effectiveness of our pro-              Human evaluation win rate (%)
posed methodology, which focuses on sum-                        Base   Tie CoH             ∆
marization and dialogue benchmarks. We
conduct both automatic and human evalu- Accuracy                24.5 26.8   48.7         24.2
                                                  Coherence     15.6 18.5   65.9         50.3
ations, in order to benchmark our approach        Coverage      19.6 22.4   58.0         38.4
against established baselines, including SFT, Average           19.9 22.6 57.5           37.6
conditional SFT, SFT with unlikelihood,
and RLHF approach (Ouyang et al., 2022;                         SFT    Tie CoH             ∆
Schulman et al., 2022).                           Accuracy      25.5  32.6  41.9         16.4
                                                   Coherence     30.5   25.6   43.9       13.4
Evaluation on summarization. In Fig-               Coverage      28.5   25.4   46.1       17.6
ure 3, we present the ROUGE scores of our          Average       28.2   27.9   44.0       15.8
models on test set of summarization dataset.                   C-SFT     Tie   CoH          ∆
Our proposed approach, CoH, substantially          Accuracy      26.7   34.9   38.4       11.7
outperform baselines, including based pre-         Coherence     32.5   22.9   44.6       12.1
trained model, SFT, conditional SFT, SFT           Coverage      29.5   26.7   43.8       14.3
with unlikelihood, and RLHF. Despite the           Average       29.6   28.2   42.3       12.7
simplicity of our approach, CoH outperforms                    SFT-U     Tie   CoH          ∆
RLHF across all the metrics. We notice that        Accuracy      18.7   17.9   63.4       44.7
RLHF performs the second best, with con-           Coherence     21.8   15.8   62.4       40.6
ditional SFT closely follows behind.               Coverage      23.6   17.2   59.2       35.6
                                                   Average       21.4   17.0   61.7       40.3
To further evaluate the performance of our
proposed approach, we conducted human                        RLHF    Tie CoH                ∆
                                                Accuracy      31.8 29.5    38.7           6.9
evaluation as shown in Table 1. Base de- Coherence            31.6 20.5    47.9          16.4
notes the pretrained model, SFT-U denotes       Coverage      28.9 21.9    49.2          20.3
SFT with unlikelihood, C-SFT denotes con- Average             30.8 24.0 45.3            14.5
ditional SFT. We conducted pairwise comparisons between CoH and the baselines because
we found that doing so is an easier task for human labelers compared to evaluating multiple


                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Evaluation on dialogue. Comparing CoH with RLHF and SFT baselines. The
metric is the accuracy of classifying the preferred dialogue.
options at the same. We hired 75 human labelers who were proficient in English from a
third-party platform to provide ratings. In the pairwise comparison, human labelers were
presented with two summaries, one generated by the baseline and the other generated by
CoH. They were instructed to select the best (or tie) among the two according to the three
metrics mentioned above. The metrics are accuracy, coherency and coverage following prior
works (Ouyang et al., 2022), we used the same instructions therein, and additional instruct
our human labelers to select tie, the full details of human evaluation instructions are provided
in Appendix A. Table 1 presents the human evaluation results on summarization task. CoH
substantially outperform RLHF and conditional SFT, showcasing the effectiveness of CoH in
aligning language models with human preferences.
Evaluation on dialogue. We evaluate our Table 2: Pairwise human evaluation on dia-
method on the HH dataset, by testing its logue task.
ability to classify which of a dialogue pair is
preferred. Figure 4 presents the comparison              Human evaluation win rate (%)
between baselines and our method. SFT                      Base  Tie CoH             ∆
shows substantially improvement over base
pretrained model; adding unlikelihood de-       Helpful    15.8 34.8  49.4         33.6
grades performance which indicates unlike- Harmless        14.5 35.9  49.6         35.1
lihood hurts model generation ability; con- Average        15.2 35.3 49.5          34.4
ditional SFT shows improvement over SFT,                   SFT   Tie CoH             ∆
showcasing the benefit of learning from neg- Helpful       19.6 45.7  34.7         15.1
ative examples; RLHF performs second best       Harmless   18.6 37.4  44.0         25.4
and is substantially outperformed by our        Average    19.1 41.5 39.4          20.3
CoH. The results demonstrate the effective-              C-SFT   Tie CoH             ∆
ness of CoH in learning from preferences. We    Helpful    21.8 46.9  31.3          9.5
further evaluate on the dialogue task based     Harmless   22.4 35.2  42.4         20.0
on HH dataset. We use the same setting of       Average    22.1 41.0 36.8          14.7
75 human labelers and pairwise comparison                SFT-U   Tie CoH             ∆
as in the summarization human evaluation. Helpful          13.4 31.3  55.3         41.9
For this task, we provide human labelers        Harmless   14.5 28.7  56.8         42.3
with instructions to evaluate whether the       Average    13.9 30.0 56.0          42.1
answer is helpful and harmless (Bai et al.,              RLHF    Tie CoH             ∆
2022a). The results are presented in Table 2. Helpful      25.8 40.8  33.4          7.6
CoH substantially outperform RLHF and           Harmless   20.9 38.8  40.3         19.4
conditional SFT, showcasing the effective- Average         23.4 39.8 36.9          13.5
ness of CoH in aligning language models
with human preferences.
Language feedback. We enhance the effectiveness of our approach by evaluating its
performance in the context of binary feedback alone, as opposed to the combination of
binary feedback and fine-grained language feedback, which is the default setting of our
method. We denote this baseline without natural language feedback as CoH w/o LF. To
assess the performance of these variations, we conducted a human evaluation task focused
on the summarization domain, employing the input of 75 human evaluators. The outcomes,
as presented in Table 3, show that both our default approach and our ’w/o LF’ variant
substantially outperform RLHF. In addition, our findings indicate that the inclusion of
natural language feedback enhances the results. Human preference ratings show a 14.1%


                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Model scaling trend. Comparing CoH with RLHF and SFT baselines on
summarization benchmark with different model sizes. CoH outperforms RLHF, showing
strong scaling capabilities.
preference for models with language feedback, whereas models without language feedback
received an 11.6% preference. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our CoH framework.
Since the framework of CoH offers flexibility to incorporate natural language feedback into
training, designing more effective natural language feedback is one of our future directions.

Evaluation on model scaling trend. To assess Table 3: Ablation study of natural
the efficacy of CoH across various model sizes, we language feedback on summarization
conducted a comprehensive evaluation. The findings task based on human evaluation.
in Figure 5 demonstrate the impact of varying model
sizes on the performance of the CoH method relative           Average win rate (%)
to SFT baselines and RLHF. Notably, for smaller          RLHF          Tie         CoH
model sizes, CoH exhibits a marginal decrement in        30.8         24.0         45.3
performance compared to SFT baselines. However, as
                                                         RLHF          Tie CoH w/o LF
the model size increases, CoH consistently surpasses     32.1         26.5         42.4
all SFT and RLHF baselines and displays a posi-
tive scaling trend, indicating its efficacy in enhancing CoH w/o LF    Tie         CoH
model performance as model complexity increases.         10.6         74.3         15.1


5   Related Work
Learning from hindsight. In this paper we explore
learning from chains of hindsight with human feedback, an approach that enables a model to
learn from errors and revise generations. The key idea of learning from hindsight experience
was explored in goal conditioned RL (Kaelbling, 1993; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Schaul
et al., 2015). Andrychowicz et al. (2017) proposes hindsight experience replay (HER) to
relabel rewards and transitions retroactively to learn from sparse feedback. While HER
relies on reinforcement learning and a distance function to learn from hindsight experience,
we propose a new method called CoH that constructs a chain of hindsight experience using
human feedback and finetunes the model directly. Our approach offers several advantages
over other methods, such as HIR (Zhang et al., 2023), which also makes use of incorrect model
outputs. HIR can be seen as a special case of CoH with a length of one chain-of-hindsight.
Unlike HIR, which employs a complex training process involving likelihood loss, contrastive
loss, and entropy loss, our approach is straightforward and easy to implement. Concurrently,
Korbak et al. (2023) studies conditioning on human preference during pretraining and shows
improved performance in aligning language models with human preference. Their method
is similar to CoH with a length of one chain-of-hindsight. Our work focuses on finetuning
pretrained language models while Korbak et al. (2023) focuses on improving pretraining.
Learning from human feedback. Prior work have explored using human feedback to
improve various tasks, such as summarization (Böhm et al., 2019; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Stiennon et al., 2020), dialogue (Yi et al., 2019; Hancock et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022a;b;


                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Askell et al., 2021; Scheurer et al., 2022), translation (Kreutzer et al., 2018; Bahdanau et al.,
2016), semantic parsing (Lawrence and Riezler, 2018), story generation (Zhou and Xu, 2020),
review generation (Cho et al., 2018), evidence extraction (Perez et al., 2019), and instruction
following (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a). The main techniques behind them can be
categorized as supervised finetuning (SFT) or training on filtered human annotations and
learning a reward function from human feedback for reinforcement learning, which is often
dubbed as RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; MacGlashan et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021; Warnell
et al., 2017) and has been used to train RL agents without the need for hand-designed
rewards. Ouyang et al. (2022) demonstrates improved language model alignment performance
by training models with SFT and RLHF using human feedback. Our work belongs to the
category of SFT, and differs from SFT in that our method conditions on feedback and can
learn from examples without positive ratings. Our method is complementary to RLHF and
can be directly combined together for further improvement. Using instructions to provide
models with human preference and desired behaviors is demonstrated in Bai et al. (2022b),
where models are prompted with a set of statements/principles and are trained with RLHF.
In our work, we provide models with a sequence of model outputs and their feedback and
train models to generate desired outputs conditioned on feedback/control tokens.
Instruction finetuning and conditional training. Finetuning on chain of hindsight
using human feedback is akin to instruction finetuning. Driven by the impressive in-context
learning ability of large language models, finetuning pretrained models on instructions
has been shown to improve language models in many benchmarks (see e.g. Wang et al.,
2022; Mishra et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al.,
2021; Zelikman et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022, inter alia). Mostly the instructions are
reformatted examples from NLP benchmarks (e.g. Wei et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022).
CoT prompts (Wei et al., 2022) are widely considered as instructions in prior works (Chung
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021), specifically in the form of step by step explanations written
by humans. In relation to these, our chain of hindsight consists of human written hindsight
feedback and ranked model outputs. Conditional training (Keskar et al., 2019; Ficler and
Goldberg, 2017; Laskin et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2022)
explores conditioning the model on some control tokens for controllable generations. In
relation to it, CoH generalizes to condition on a sequence of control tokens instead of one
control token. By doing so, CoH enables the model to understand the differences between
control tokens and their corresponding outputs. Our work suggests a promising direction of
using hindsight feedback to construct instructions from model outputs, and can be combined
with prior instruction finetuning and conditional training works for further improvements.

6   Conclusion
In conclusion, we introduce Chain of Hindsight (CoH), which is inspired by how humans
learn from rich feedback in the form of comparison. We condition language models on a
sequence of hindsight feedback, allowing them to effectively leverage all examples regardless
of their preference score. Extensive experiments on summarization and dialogue datasets
show that CoH substantially outperform RLHF and other baselines.
Limitations and Future Work. Although our method substantially outperform baselines,
it does have some limitations that need to be addressed:
• Constructing CoH may result in long sequences, particularly with multiple feedback
  instances, leading to increased training computational expenses.

• Our work heavily relies on hired human labelers for evaluation due to their higher reliability
  compared to automated metrics. However, this approach incurs substantial costs, although
  this issue is not unique to our method.
In terms of future prospects, our CoH-based training from human feedback opens the door
to exciting possibilities, such as integrating external environment feedback like unit tests and
extending its applicability to various domains. Furthermore, our current focus on learning
from hindsight using preexisting preferences paves the way for exploration in online preference
learning, enabling iterative model improvements.


                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgments
This project is supported in part by Office of Naval Research grant N00014-21-1-2769 and
SNSF Postdoc Mobility Fellowship 211086 and ONR MURI N00014-22-1-2773. We express
our gratitude to the BAIR communities for their insightful discussions and feedback. We
thank Google TPU Research Cloud for granting us access to TPUs.

References
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience
 replay. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy
 Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as
 a laboratory for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu, Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau,
 Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An actor-critic algorithm for sequence prediction.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.07086, 2016.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma,
  Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful
  and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy
  Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitu-
  tional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Florian Böhm, Yang Gao, Christian M Meyer, Ori Shapira, Ido Dagan, and Iryna Gurevych.
  Better rewards yield better summaries: Learning to summarise without references. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.01214, 2019.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla
  Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al.
  Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:1877–1901, 2020.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter
  Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement
  learning via sequence modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
  15084–15097, 2021.

Woon Sang Cho, Pengchuan Zhang, Yizhe Zhang, Xiujun Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett,
 Mengdi Wang, and Jianfeng Gao. Towards coherent and cohesive long-form text generation.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00511, 2018.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
  Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pages 4299–4307, 2017.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li,
 Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned
 language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv: Arxiv-1805.04833, 2018.

Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. Controlling linguistic style aspects in neural language
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-1707.02633, 2017.


                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath,
  Ben Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language
  models to reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2209.07858, 2022.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster,
  Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy.
  The Pile: An 800GB dataset of diverse text for language modeling. Computing Research
  Repository, arXiv:2101.00027, 2020. version 1.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Xinyang Geng, Arnav Gudibande, Hao Liu, Eric Wallace, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and
  Dawn Song. Koala: A dialogue model for academic research. Blog post, April, 1, 2023.
Braden Hancock, Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazare, and Jason Weston. Learning
  from dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself, chatbot! arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05415,
  2019.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and
  Jiawei Han. Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610,
  2022.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, volume 2, pages 1094–8. Citeseer,
  1993.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R. Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
  Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. PREPRINT,
  2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Tomasz Korbak, Kejian Shi, Angelica Chen, Rasika Bhalerao, Christopher L Buckley, Jason
  Phang, Samuel R Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Pretraining language models with human
  preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08582, 2023.
Julia Kreutzer, Shahram Khadivi, Evgeny Matusov, and Stefan Riezler. Can neural machine
  translation be improved with user feedback? arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.05958, 2018.
Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie
 Steigerwald, DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, Maxime Gazeau,
 Himanshu Sahni, Satinder Singh, and Volodymyr Mnih. In-context reinforcement learning
 with algorithm distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2210.14215, 2022.
Carolin Lawrence and Stefan Riezler. Improving a neural semantic parser by counterfactual
  learning from human bandit feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.01252, 2018.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and P. Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive reinforcement
  learning via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. International Conference
 On Machine Learning, 2021.
Mina Lee, Megha Srivastava, Amelia Hardy, John Thickstun, Esin Durmus, Ashwin Paranjape,
 Ines Gerard-Ursin, Xiang Lisa Li, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, et al. Evaluating human-
 language model interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09746, 2022.
Margaret Li, Stephen Roller, Ilia Kulikov, Sean Welleck, Y-Lan Boureau, Kyunghyun Cho,
 and Jason Weston. Don’t say that! making inconsistent dialogue unlikely with unlikelihood
 training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03860, 2019.
Hao Liu, Xinyang Geng, Lisa Lee, Igor Mordatch, Sergey Levine, Sharan Narang, and Pieter
 Abbeel. Fcm: Forgetful causal masking makes causal language models better zero-shot
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13432, 2022.


                                             11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj
  Ammanabrolu, and Yejin Choi. QUARK: Controllable text generation with reinforced
  unlearning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors,
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=5HaIds3ux5O.
J. MacGlashan, Mark K. Ho, R. Loftin, Bei Peng, Guan Wang, David L. Roberts, Matthew E.
   Taylor, and M. Littman. Interactive learning from policy-dependent human feedback.
   International Conference On Machine Learning, 2017.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task gener-
  alization via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773,
  2021.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-
  assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language
  models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155,
  2022.
Ethan Perez, Siddharth Karamcheti, Rob Fergus, Jason Weston, Douwe Kiela, and
  Kyunghyun Cho. Finding generalizable evidence by learning to convince q&a models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05863, 2019.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving lan-
  guage understanding by generative pre-training. URL https://s3-us-west-2. amazonaws.
  com/openai-assets/researchcovers/languageunsupervised/language understanding paper.
  pdf, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function
  approximators. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1312–1320. PMLR,
  2015.
Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun Cho,
  and Ethan Perez. Training language models with language feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:
  Arxiv-2204.14146, 2022.
J. Schulman, B. Zoph, C. Kim, J. Hilton, J. Menick, J. Weng, J. F. C. Uribe, L. Fedus,
   L. Metz, M. Pokorny, R. G. Lopes, S. Zhao, A. Vijayvergiya, E. Sigler, A. Perelman,
   C. Voss, M. Heaton, J. Parish, D. Cummings, R. Nayak, V. Balcom, D. Schnurr, T. Kaftan,
   C. Hallacy, N. Turley, N. Deutsch, and V. Goel. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for
   dialogue. OpenAI Blog, 2022. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
  policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E. Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 15:1929–1958, 2014.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
  Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human
  feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.


                                             12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
 Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al.
 Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
  Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pages 5998–6008. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. Tl; dr: Mining reddit
 to learn automatic summarization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in
 Summarization, pages 59–63, 2017.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive
  Language Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap,
  et al. Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ nlp
  tasks. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2204.07705, 2022.
Garrett Warnell, Nicholas R. Waytowich, V. Lawhern, and P. Stone. Deep tamer: Interactive
 agent shaping in high-dimensional state spaces. Aaai Conference On Artificial Intelligence,
 2017. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11485.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
  Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04319, 2019.
Qinyuan Ye, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. Crossfit: A few-shot learning challenge for
  cross-task generalization in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08835, 2021.
Sanghyun Yi, Rahul Goel, Chandra Khatri, Alessandra Cervone, Tagyoung Chung, Behnam
  Hedayatnia, Anu Venkatesh, Raefer Gabriel, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Towards coherent
  and engaging spoken dialog response generation using automatic conversation evaluators.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.13015, 2019.
Eric Zelikman, Jesse Mu, Noah D Goodman, and Yuhuai Tony Wu. Star: Self-taught
  reasoner bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. NeurIPS, 2022.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen,
  Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott,
  Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu
  Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2205.01068, 2022.
Tianjun Zhang, Fangchen Liu, Justin Wong, Pieter Abbeel, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. The
  wisdom of hindsight makes language models better instruction followers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv: Arxiv-2302.05206, 2023.
Wangchunshu Zhou and Ke Xu. Learning to compare for better training and evaluation of
 open domain natural language generation models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 9717–9724, 2020.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei,
 Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 What makes for a good summary? Roughly speaking, a good summary is a shorter piece
 of text that has the essence of the original – tries to accomplish the same purpose and
 conveys the same information as the original post. We would like you to consider these
 different dimensions of summaries:

 Accuracy
 For this axis, answer the question “does the factual information in the summary accurately
 match the post?” A summary is accurate if it doesn’t say things that aren’t in the article,
 it doesn’t mix up people, and generally is not misleading.

 Coherence
 For this axis, answer the question “how coherent is the summary on its own?” A summary
 is coherent if, when read by itself, it’s easy to understand and free of English errors. A
 summary is not coherent if it’s difficult to understand what the summary is trying to say.
 Generally, it’s more important that the summary is understandable than it being free of
 grammar errors.

 Coverage
 For this axis, answer the question “how well does the summary cover the important
 information in the post?” A summary has good coverage if it mentions the main information
 from the post that’s important to understand the situation described in the post. A
 summary has poor coverage if someone reading only the summary would be missing
 several important pieces of information about the situation in the post. A summary with
 good coverage should also match the purpose of the original post (e.g. to ask for advice).

Table 4: Instructions we provided to human labelers on evaluating summarization quality.


A    Human Evaluation Instructions
For our human evaluations, we provide instructions and metrics definition to the human
labelers, asking them to select the preferred output. In order to maintain consistency and
build upon prior research (Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a), we adopt their instructions
and definitions of helpfulness, usefulness, and other relevant criteria.
Specifically, the instructions employed in our summarization benchmark are derived from Sti-
ennon et al. (2020). Similarly, for the dialogue task, we derive the instructions based on Bai
et al. (2022a). Table 4 provides more detail on the specific instructions given to labelers for
comparing summaries, and Table 5 lists our instructions for evaluating dialogues.

B    Natural Language Feedback
During inference time, we only employ simple positive tokens, while during training, we
explored the incorporation of natural language feedback that carries more semantic meaning.
This natural feedback is tailored to the specific task and offers increased diversity, as
illustrated in Table 6.

C    Hyperparameters
All models are trained with the Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) optimizer, with β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.95, and an epsilon of 1.0e−8. The batch size for human feedback data is set to
512, while for pretraining data it is set to 2048. The value of λ is 1.5, which determines
the relative strength of gradients from the human feedback dataset and the pretraining
dataset. The pretraining regularization term is computed using the Pile dataset (Gao et al.,
2020). Since we applied random past token masking, dropout is not used in our experiments,
as suggested by Liu et al. (2022). When finetuning, we combined three human feedback
datasets, and the data was sampled proportionally to their size to ensure balance across the
datasets.



                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 What makes for a good dialogue? Roughly speaking, a good dialogue is a conversation
 that is both helpful and harmless. We would like you to consider these different dimensions
 of dialogues:

 Helpful
 For this axis, assess whether the conversation promotes active listening and open-
 mindedness. Helpful dialogues typically encourage the exchange of diverse perspectives
 and ideas. Secondly, look for evidence of empathy and respect in the dialogue; a construc-
 tive conversation should foster an atmosphere where all parties feel valued and understood.
 Thirdly, examine whether the dialogue leads to tangible outcomes or solutions to the
 issues being discussed. A helpful dialogue often results in progress or resolution, rather
 than perpetuating conflicts or misunderstandings.

 Harmless
 For this axis, response to questions should not contain potentially harmful information
 such as “information on building a bomb”. Consider the overall tone and language used
 during the conversation; a helpful dialogue should be free from hostility, personal attacks,
 or derogatory remarks. A dialogue is harmless if it does not contain any unsafe or
 potentially harmful information.

   Table 5: Instructions we provided to human labelers on evaluating dialogue quality.


Table 6: Examples of Natural language feedback. The task prompts are omitted for simplicity.

  Source     Examples of natural language feedback
 Summary     a good summary is: {positive} a bad summary is: {negative}
 Summary     a bad summary is: {negative} a good summary is: {positive}
 Summary     a good summary is: {positive} a worse summary is: {negative}
 Summary     a bad summary is: {negative} a better summary is: {positive}
  Shared     a good response is: {positive} a bad response is: {negative}
  Shared     a bad response is: {negative} a good response is: {positive}
  Shared     a good answer is: {positive} a bad answer is: {negative}
  Shared     a bad answer is: {negative} a good answer is: {positive}
  Shared     a good answer is: {positive} a worse answer is: {negative}
  Shared     a bad answer is: {negative} a better answer is: {positive}
  Shared     good: {positive} worse: {negative}
  Shared     bad: {negative} better: {positive}
  Shared     good: {positive} bad: {negative}
  Shared     bad: {positive} good: {negative}
 Dialogue    you are a helpful assistant: {positive} you are an unhelpful assistant: {negative}
 Dialogue    you are an unhelpful assistant: {positive} you are a helpful assistant: {negative}
 Dialogue    you are a respectful and unbiased assistant: {positive} you are a disrespectful and
             biased assistant: {negative}
 Dialogue    you are a disrespectful and biased assistant: {positive} you are a respectful and
             unbiased assistant: {negative}
 Summary     give me a good summary: {positive} give me a worse summary: {negative}
 Summary     give me a bad summary: {negative} give me a better summary: {positive}
 Summary     let’s generate a good summary: {positive} let’s generate a worse summary: {negative}
 Summary     let’s generate a bad summary: {negative} let’s generate a better summary: {positive}
  Shared     let’s generate a good answer: {positive} let’s generate a worse answer: {negative}
  Shared     let’s generate a bad answer: {negative} let’s generate a better answer: {positive}


                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Screenshots of our labeling interface for rating dialog. For each metric, labelers
are asked to choose preferred dialog.


Figure 7: Screenshots of our labeling interface for rating summary. For each metric, labelers
are asked to choose preferred summary.


D    Human evaluation web interface
In Figure 7 and Figure 6, we show screenshots of our labeling interface, that all of our
labelers use to rate data. Labelers can choose the preferred model output or choose tie in
cases where two outputs seem to be of similar quality.



                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E             Additional Experimental Results
E.1                  Evaluation on Controllable Generation

The controllable generation results are presented in Figure 8. The models are provided with
three instructions to generate summaries of desired quality. The first instruction asks for
a standard summary, while the second and third instructions ask for improved summaries
conditioned on the previous summary generated by the model. We compare the performance
of CoH with that of the RLHF model. The results indicate that while RLHF performs
well in modeling human preferences and generates high-scoring summaries by following the
first instruction, it fails to follow the second and third instructions, which implies that it
cannot comprehend human intentions. On the other hand, the CoH-trained model is capable
of understanding the intention of the instructions and generates better summaries in the
second and third trials. We note that the controllable generation technique can be further
investigated in various evaluation settings to enhance performance.

             30.00                                                    40.00
                                                                                                                              User: Generate a summary of the
                                                                                                                              following article {article}

                                                                      30.00                                                   A helpful answer: {summary}
                                                                                                                        GPT
             20.00

                                                                                                                              User: Generate a good and accurate
 Score


                                                              Score



                                                                      20.00                                                   summary.

             10.00
                                                                                                                        GPT   A helpful answer: {summary}
                                                                      10.00


                                                                                                                              User: Generate a better and more
              0.00                                                     0.00                                                   accurate summary.
                       Rouge 1   Rouge 2      Rouge L   Avg                   Rouge 1   Rouge 2         Rouge L   Avg

                                                                                                                        GPT   A helpful answer: {summary}
                                       RLHF                                                       CoH


Figure 8: Controllable generation. (left): RLHF cannot follow instructions to generate
improved summary. (middle): After finetuning on CoH, the model follows instructions to
achieve controllable generations. (right): First instruction is standard, while second and
third instructions ask for improved summaries.

E.2                  Alignment Tax

We conducted an evaluation on a diverse set of few-shot tasks that are commonly used in
previous studies (Brown et al., 2020; Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) to assess the effectiveness
of aligning models with human preferences. We use Language Model Evaluation Harness5
for evaluation. The results are reported in Table 7. Interestingly, we found that the average
performance of models that were finetuned using SFT decreased after alignment. This
decrease could be attributed to the issue known as alignment tax in language models (Ouyang
et al., 2022), which underscores the importance of human evaluation (Lee et al., 2022). On
the other hand, our proposed method, CoH, showed moderate improvements over both the
pretrained model and supervised fine-tuned model. This result suggests that CoH is less
susceptible to the alignment tax issue.

E.3                  Comparison against ChatGPT distillation

The open-source human preference datasets utilized in this study are curated based on human
preferences for model generations. Although these preferences offer valuable learning signals
as we have demonstrated in the experiments, the models responsible for these responses are
notably less capable than proprietary models like ChatGPT. As a result, the data quality from
these open-source datasets falls short when compared to conversations between ChatGPT
and users which is shared online on ShareGPT. Given that the ShareGPT data showcases
superior quality and greater diversity than the open-source datasets, we are interested in
how our approach CoH performs when applied to open-source human preference datasets,
in comparison to the SFT approach used on ShareGPT data. To this end, we compared
with Koala (Geng et al., 2023) which involves supervised finetuning LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023) using ShareGPT data. It’s worth noting that we maintained consistency in the model
         5
             https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness


                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Alignment Tax on Few-Shot Benchmark: The results of our experiments on
few-shot NLP benchmarks using the Language Model Evaluation Harness are presented
in Table 7. We follow the same setup as in previous work (Brown et al., 2020; Wang and
Komatsuzaki, 2021), including the splits for each task. The reported numbers for GPT-J are
taken from its original paper, while the numbers for other models are reported by us. We
average the results over 5 random seeds.

                             Zero-shot               One-shot                Few-shot
              Task      GPT-J SFT        CoH     GPT-J SFT       CoH     GPT-J SFT       CoH
              ANLI R1    34.00   33.50   33.80   33.50   33.50   33.60   32.70   32.60   32.70
              ANLI R2    32.00   32.00   32.10   34.40   34.10   34.20   33.90   34.20   34.10
              ANLI R3    34.00   34.30   36.80   34.80   34.60   36.90   35.40   35.60   36.80
              ARC-C      27.00   26.80   27.60   32.20   32.50   33.80   33.10   33.50   34.20
              ARC-E      54.30   54.20   54.40   62.80   62.50   62.50   66.50   66.50   66.50
              BoolQ      58.50   61.50   61.30   57.20   57.10   58.10   42.50   42.30   42.90
              CB         41.10   41.00   40.50   41.10   41.10   40.50   42.90   42.10   42.00
              COPA       71.00   70.50   69.90   80.00   80.10   80.50   82.00   82.20   81.50
              HeadQA     23.50   23.00   23.80   24.00   23.80   24.30   23.90   22.50   22.80
              HellaSwag 42.60    42.30   42.00   46.20   46.10   46.10   46.10   46.00   46.70
              MultiRC     3.00   3.10    4.10    6.50    6.70    7.40    6.60    6.90    7.50
              ReCORD     85.80   85.60   85.60   86.20   86.00   86.40   58.60   58.80   58.60
              RTE        51.20   50.50   50.00   55.60   55.50   55.90   52.00   52.00   52.00
              WiC        45.00   45.00   45.00   44.50   44.20   44.10   50.00   50.50   50.00
              WSC        36.50   36.90   42.80   37.50   38.10   43.70   35.80   37.60   41.30
              LAMBADA 5.50       5.70    5.70    5.30    5.40    5.40    2.50    2.70    3.60
              (openai)
              LAMBADA 2.10       0.90    0.90    3.00    2.20    1.90    3.20    3.30    3.30
              (standard)
              LogiQA     21.50   20.00   20.00   20.70   20.90   20.90   19.00   20.60   20.10
              WinoGrande 49.70   50.40   51.20   50.70   51.80   53.50   50.70   51.10   52.80
              SciQ       86.40   86.00   86.00   89.10   89.10   89.10   54.00   55.00   55.00
              OpenBookQA16.00    16.20   15.40   16.80   16.70   16.70   20.80   20.90   21.10
              PIQA       72.40   72.40   72.00   73.60   73.70   73.50   74.20   74.00   74.00
              Average    40.60   40.54 40.95     42.53   42.53 43.14     39.38   39.59 39.98


and training hyperparameters for both SFT and COH when applied to open-source datasets.
Additionally, we integrated CoH with Koala by finetuning both the ShareGPT and open-
source datasets; here, the open-source datasets provided both positive and negative examples,
while ShareGPT contributed solely positive examples. We use the same human evaluation
as Koala by hiring third-party human labelers to conduct pairwise comparisons of responses
generated by various models. These evaluations were based on questions sourced from a
holdout set exclusive to ShareGPT. Results presented in Figure 9 reveal that our approach
CoH is on par with Koala in performance. Moreover, the combined approach of CoH +Koala
show slightly better performance than Koala based on human ratings. Meanwhile, both
C-SFT (conditional SFT) and SFT lag behind Koala considerably. This underscores the
efficacy of CoH in leveraging human preferences for learning.


Figure 9: Evaluating various approaches with open source human preference datasets in
comparison to ShareGPT’s supervised finetuned Koala.
                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    Qualitative Examples
Table 8 and Table 9 show qualitative examples of summaries generated by GPT-J and
CoH finetuned GPT-J. The examples are sampled from the validation split of dataset
from Stiennon et al. (2020) which is based on TL;DR Reddit dataset (Völske et al., 2017).

                                             Example 1
 Text
 I don’t know how to ask this without it sounding really silly, but this is a genuine problem. I created
 a throwaway because of too much personal detail in my main account. My boyfriend and I are both
 grad students and have been together for four months now. I absolutely love him. He’s sweet, caring,
 tolerant, liberal, basically every single thing on my ‘checklist’, if I had one, is there. The problem,
 though, is he talks VERY slowly. I mean his speed is really slow. If I ask him anything, he takes
 about 3 seconds before he starts to talk, then when he starts, the words go at a very slow pace,and
 he even pauses for 3-5 seconds in the middle of his sentence. I get really impatient and sometimes
 just feel like telling him to hurry up (of course I don’t, but I really feel like doing so). I asked him
 today, very gently, why he spoke so slow, and he said he just gets thoughts very slowly in his brain.
 He then went on to say he’s just generally slow at thinking. I felt really sad when he said this, I
 don’t know why. He’s a Math PhD student,and we are at a pretty good school, and his research has
 been going slow for a while now (but this is totally normal in grad school), so I think that response
 was kind of a self-deprecating one since he’s already low on self-esteem. Anyway, my point is, his
 speed of talking is just a part of him, it can’t be changed. I love him so much otherwise but I just
 want to know how to deal with this. Conversation is so important in a relationship! How do we
 manage? He’s an introvert and talks very little in general; I suspect this has something to do with
 his pace of talking?
 GPT-J summary
 A woman is upset because her boyfriend talks too slowly, and she doesn’t know what to do. She is
 bothered by his slow speech, and she thinks it might be due to his low self-esteem and introverted
 nature.
 CoH-tuned GPT-J
 A woman is in love with her boyfriend who meets all her criteria except he speaks very slowly. He
 explains that he gets thoughts slowly and is slow at thinking. She wants to know how to manage
 this in their relationship as conversation is important to her.

                                               Example 2
 Text
 This is my first post so please be kind :) I know that lots of people often feel confused when they
 come out of a long-term relationship. They think they have forgotten how to be single, or how to
 flirt/date. I am one of these people. The problem is, my relationship started when I had just turned
 16. I have never been single - as an adult. That might sound silly. But the only time I have ever
 flirted or dated was as an over-confident, hormone-riddled teenager. Now I have a pretty demanding
 job, responsibilities blah blah... And I just don’t know how to this! I’m no way in a rush to get into
 a new relationship, but that doesn’t mean I want to be completely alone in the mean time. If anyone
 has experienced anything similar, or just generally has some advice, it would be greatly appreciated!
 GPT-J summary
 Someone is struggling after coming out of a long-term relationship that started when they were 16.
 CoH-tuned GPT-J
 A person is seeking advice after coming out of a long-term relationship that began when they were
 16 years old. They feel confused about being single as an adult and are looking for tips on how to
 flirt and date again, as they don’t want to be completely alone during this period.



Table 8: Qualitative examples of GPT-J and CoH tuned GPT-J on the summarization
benchmark. The input texts are sampled from the validation split of the dataset from Stiennon
et al. (2020), which is based on the TL;DR Reddit dataset (Völske et al., 2017).


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Example 3
 Text
 Just wanted to say sorry again for wasting your time helping me out! I know I’m probably blind
 or something. > . < I read the FAQ, and I was able to do some of the things to get started but
 many of the things I am still confused on. I was able to calculate my BMR (By the way is there one
 calculator that is better than the others? I got a few different numbers.) However, when I went to
 the link on the FAQ to calculate my BF, the page was gone. Is this necessary? However, I know
 even without my BF that I would be classified as “skinny fat” at 5’9 and 156 pounds with a decent
 layer of fat. The next part I am confused on is diet. Most of the provided resources provide diets to
 try don’t seem like they would lend themselves well to everyday/lifetime eating. I don’t know how
 to eat healthy. The last time I tried to truly get in good shape I did it all wrong. I’m talking eating
 only 800-900 calories a day, counting obsessively, cutting out all my favorite foods, and interspersed
 with bouts of binging on aforementioned foods. Today, counting calories freaks me out because I fear
 that I will go back to that. I am trying to get into real fitness, like going to a gym or bodyweight
 fitness, but I cannot afford a gym membership and I can’t seem to find something study enough to
 use as a pullup bar for bodyweight. What are my other options because I do want to build muscle.
 My final question is that I have no idea what I am truly aiming for. I want to lose my layer of fat
 and build muscle, but I am not sure if there’s a goal weight involved or what sort of time table I am
 looking at or how many calories I would need to eat. This brings us full circle as I restate that I
 have no idea what I am doing.
 GPT-J summary
 The individual is expressing regret for taking up the reader’s time in attempting to assist them.
 They are unable to financially support a gym membership and lack a durable apparatus for executing
 bodyweight exercises, such as pull-ups.
 CoH-tuned GPT-J
 The person is apologetic for taking up the reader’s time and expresses confusion about some of the
 steps involved in getting started with a fitness journey. They were able to calculate their BMR but
 couldn’t find a working link to calculate their BF%. They feel they are “skinny fat” and are unsure
 about how to eat healthily without resorting to obsessive calorie-counting. They can’t afford a gym
 membership or a sturdy pull-up bar for bodyweight exercises. They are also uncertain about their
 goals for losing fat and building muscle, including their target weight, time frame, and caloric intake.

                                               Example 4
 Text
 This happened a couple of hours ago, and i’m still a bit nervous about all this. I’m what most
 would consider a hardcore gamer, and as most people into this, they usually cherish and collect
 their favorite games and such. Today I skipped work because i woke up feeling like something had
 banged on my left side, hurting all over (ear infection, it’s a reoccurring thing, I need to get this
 checked more often than not.) and decided to stay home and rest a bit more. I stayed home all day
 and at about 6 my dad rolls around to pick me up to go to the ER to see what’s going on with my
 ear. During the following hour and a half I spent on the ER to get this checked and pick up the
 prescription the doctor gave me, I get home and find some clothing on my porch, lying on the path
 to my entrance. My dog was feasting on some plastic bag and at first I thought it was just some
 kids who’d have thrown a bag of old clothing onto my yard. As soon as I get up to my room though,
 things took a dire turn for me. I froze, looking baffled at what was right in front of me. My monitor
 was all crooked and the cables were off, and I look to the left and see this gaping hole where all my
 consoles were. Then it finally sunk into me: Someone robbed my house. [Some words have been
 omitted because they may appear inappropriate.]
 GPT-J summary
 A gamer skipped work due to an ear infection and got robbed. The shock and disbelief of the
 situation sink in, leaving the person feeling violated and anxious about the loss of their cherished
 belongings. The incident serves as a reminder of the vulnerability and unpredictability of life, leaving
 them with a sense of unease and distrust towards others.
 CoH-tuned GPT-J
 A gamer stayed home from work due to an ear infection and later went to the ER. Upon returning
 home, they discovered their house had been robbed and their game consoles were missing.



Table 9: (Cont. from previous page) Qualitative examples of GPT-J and CoH tuned GPT-J
on the summarization benchmark. The input texts are sampled from the validation split of
the dataset from Stiennon et al. (2020), which is based on the TL;DR Reddit dataset (Völske
et al., 2017).                               20
