Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T POP T: E FFICIENT T RAINABLE T EMPLATE O PTIMIZA -
TION ON L OW-D IMENSIONAL M ANIFOLDS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In scientific and engineering scenarios, a recurring task is the detection of low-
         dimensional families of signals or patterns. A classic family of approaches, ex-
         emplified by template matching, aims to cover the search space with a dense
         template bank. While simple and highly interpretable, it suffers from poor compu-
         tational efficiency due to unfavorable scaling in the signal space dimensionality.
         In this work, we study TpopT (TemPlate OPTimization) as an alternative scalable
         framework for detecting low-dimensional families of signals which maintains high
         interpretability. We provide a theoretical analysis of the convergence of Riemannian
         gradient descent for TpopT, and prove that it has a superior dimension scaling to
         covering. We also propose a practical TpopT framework for nonparametric signal
         sets, which incorporates techniques of embedding and kernel interpolation, and is
         further configurable into a trainable network architecture by unrolled optimization.
         The proposed trainable TpopT exhibits significantly improved efficiency-accuracy
         tradeoffs for gravitational wave detection, where matched filtering is currently a
         method of choice. We further illustrate the general applicability of this approach
         with experiments on handwritten digit data.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Low-dimensional structure is ubiquitous in data arising from physical systems: these systems often
involve relatively few intrinsic degrees of freedom, leading to low-rank Ji et al. (2010); Gibson
et al. (2022), sparse Quan et al. (2015), or manifold structure Mokhtarian & Abbasi (2002); Brown
et al. (2004); Lunga et al. (2013). In this paper, we study the fundamental problem of detecting and
estimating signals which belong to a low-dimensional manifold, from noisy observations Wakin et al.
(2005); Wakin (2007); Baraniuk & Wakin (2009).
Perhaps the most classical and intuitive approach to detecting families of signals is matched filtering
(MF), which constructs a bank of templates, and compares them individually with the observation.
Due to its simplicity and interpretability, MF remains the core method of choice in the gravitational
wave detection of the scientific collaborations LIGO Abramovici et al. (1992); Abbott et al. (2015),
Virgo Acernese et al. (2015) and KARGA Akutsu et al. (2021), where massive template banks
are constructed to search for traces of gravitational waves produced by pairs of merging black
holes in space Owen & Sathyaprakash (1999); Abbott et al. (2016; 2017); Yan et al. (2022b).
Emerging advances on template placement (Roy et al., 2017; 2019) and optimization (Weerathunga
& Mohanty, 2017; Pal & Nayak, 2023; Dal Canton et al., 2021) provide promising ideas of growth.
The conceptual idea of large template banks for detection is also widely present in other scenarios
such as neuroscience Shi et al. (2010), geophysics Caffagni et al. (2016); Rousset et al. (2017), image
pose recognition Picos et al. (2016), radar signal processing Pardhu et al. (2014); Johnson (2009), and
aerospace engineering Murphy et al. (2017). In the meantime, many modern learning architectures
employ similar ideas of matching inputs with template banks, such as transformation-invariant neural
networks which create a large number of templates by applying transformations to a smaller family
of filters Sohn & Lee (2012); Kanazawa et al. (2014); Zhou et al. (2017).
One major limitation of this approach is its unfavorable scaling with respect to the signal manifold
dimension. For gravitational wave detection, this leads to massive template banks in deployment, and
presents a fundamental barrier to searching broader and higher dimensional signal manifolds. For


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transformation-invariant neural networks, the dimension scaling limits their applications to relatively
low-dimensional transformation groups such as rotations.
This paper is motivated by a simple observation: instead of using sample templates to cover the
search space, we can search for a best-matching template via optimization over the search space with
higher efficiency. In other words, while MF searches for the best-matching template by enumeration,
a first-order optimization method can leverage the geometric properties of the signal set, and avoid
the majority of unnecessary templates. We refer to this approach as template optimization (TpopT).
In many practical scenarios, we lack an analytical characterization of the signal manifold. We propose
a nonparametric extension of TpopT, based on signal embedding and kernel interpolation, which
retains the test-time efficiency of TpopT.1 The components of this method can be trained on sample
data, reducing the need for parameter tuning and improving the performance in Gaussian noise. Our
training approach draws inspiration from unrolled optimization Chen et al. (2022), which treats the
iterations of an optimization method as layers of a neural network. This approach has been widely
used for estimating low-dimensional (sparse) signals Liu & Chen (2019); Xin et al. (2016) with
promising results on a range of applications Monga et al. (2021); Diamond et al. (2017); Liang et al.
(2019); Buchanan et al. (2022). The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
   • Propose trainable TpopT as an efficient approach to detecting and estimating signals from low-
dimensional families, with nonparametric extensions when an analytical data model is unavailable.
   • Prove that Riemannian gradient descent for TpopT is exponentially more efficient than MF.
   • Demonstrate significantly improved complexity-accuracy tradeoffs for gravitational wave detec-
tion, where MF is currently a method of choice.

2       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND M ETHODS
In this section, we describe the problem of detecting and recovering signals from a low-dimensional
family, and provide a high-level overview of two approaches — matched filtering and template opti-
mization (TpopT). The problem setup is simple: assume the signals of interest form a d-dimensional
manifold S ⊂ RD , where d ≪ D, and that they are normalized such that S ⊂ SD−1 . For a given
observation x ∈ RD , we want to determine whether x consists of a noisy copy of some signal of
interest, and recover the signal if it exists. More formally, we model the observation and label as:

                                               a s♮ + z if y = 1
                                       x=                         .                                 (1)
                                               z,        if y = 0
where a ∈ R+ is the signal amplitude, s♮ ∈ S is the ground truth signal, and z ∼ N (0, σ 2 I). Our
goal is to solve this detection and estimation problem with simultaneously high statistical accuracy
and computational efficiency.

Matched Filtering.        A natural decision statistic for this detection problem is maxs∈S ⟨s, x⟩, i.e.
                                       ŷ(x) = 1 ⇐⇒ max ⟨s, x⟩ ≥ τ                                                 (2)
                                                               s∈S
where τ is some threshold, and the recovered signal can be obtained as arg maxs∈S ⟨s, x⟩. 2
Matched filtering, or template matching, approximates the above decision statistic with the maximum
over a finite bank of templates s1 , . . . , sntemplates :
                                ŷMF (x) = 1 ⇐⇒                max           ⟨si , x⟩ ≥ τ.                         (3)
                                                        i=1,...,ntemplates
The template si contributing to the highest correlation is thus the recovered signal. This matched
filtering method is a fundamental technique in signal detection (simultaneously obtaining the estimated
signals), playing an especially significant role in scientific applications Owen & Sathyaprakash (1999);
Rousset et al. (2017); Shi et al. (2010).
    1
      In contrast to conventional manifold learning, where the goal is to learn a representation of the data manifold
Bengio & Monperrus (2004); Culpepper & Olshausen (2009); Rifai et al. (2011); Park et al. (2015); Kumar et al.
(2017), our goal is to learn an optimization algorithm on the signal manifold.
    2
      This statistic is optimal for detecting a single signal s in iid Gaussian noise; this is the classical motivation
for matched filtering Helstrom (2013). For detecting a family of signals s ∈ S, it is no longer statistically
optimal Yan et al. (2022a). However, it remains appealing due to its simplicity.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If the template bank densely covers S, (3) will accurately approximate (2). However, dense covering
is inefficient — the number n of templates required to cover S up to some target radius r grows as
n ∝ 1/rd , making this approach impractical for all but the smallest d.3

Template Optimization. Rather than densely covering the signal space, template optimization
(TpopT) searches for a best matching template ŝ, by numerically solving
                                     ŝ(x) = arg min f (s) ≡ − ⟨s, x⟩ .                                       (4)
                                                   s∈S

The decision statistic is then ŷTpopT (x) = 1 ⇐⇒ ⟨ŝ(x), x⟩ ≥ τ . Since the domain of optimization S
is a Riemannian manifold, in principle, the optimization problem (4) can be solved by the Riemannian
gradient iteration Boumal (2023)
                                    sk+1 = expsk −αk grad[f ](sk ) .                                          (5)
Here, k is the iteration index, exps (v) is the exponential map at point s, grad[f ](s) is the Riemannian
gradient4 of the objective f at point s, and αk is the step size.
Alternatively, if the signal manifold S admits a global parameterization s = s(ξ), we can optimize
over the parameters ξ, solving ξ̂(x) = arg minξ − ⟨s(ξ), x⟩ using the (Euclidean) gradient method:
                                                              T
                                  ξ k+1 = ξ k + αk · ∇s(ξ k ) x,                               (6)

where ∇s(ξ k ) ∈ RD×d is the Jacobian matrix of s(ξ) at point ξ k . Finally, the estimated signal
ŝ(x) = s(ξ̂(x)) and decision statistic ŷTpopT can be obtained from the estimated parameters ξ̂.
Of course, the optimization problem (4) is in general nonconvex, and methods (5)-(6) only converge
to global optima when they are initialized sufficiently close to the solution of (4). We can guarantee
global optimality by employing multiple initializations s01 , . . . , s0ninit , which cover the manifold S at
some radius ∆ where at least one initialization is guaranteed to produce a global optimizer.
In the next section, we will corroborate these intuitions with rigorous analysis. In subsequent sections,
we will further develop more practical counterparts to (5)-(6) which (i) do not require an analytical
representation of the signal manifold S [Section 4], and (ii) can be trained on sample data to improve
statistical performance [Section 5].

3    T HEORY: E FFICIENCY G AINS OVER M ATCHED F ILTERING
The efficiency advantage of optimization comes from its ability to use gradient information to rapidly
converge to ŝ ≈ s♮ , within a basin of initializations s0 satisfying d(s0 , s♮ ) ≤ ∆: the larger the basin,
the fewer initializations are needed to guarantee global optimality. The basin size ∆ in turn depends
on the geometry of the signal set S, through its curvature. Figure 1 illustrates the key intuition: if the
curvature is small, there exists a relatively large region in which the gradient of the objective function
points towards the global optimizer s⋆ . On the other hand, if the signal manifold is very curvy, there
may only exist a relatively small region in which the gradient points in the correct direction.
We can formalize this intuition through the curvature of geodesics on the manifold S. For a smooth
curve γ : [0, T ] → S ⊂ Rn , with unit speed parameterization γ(t), t ∈ [0, T ], the maximum
curvature is
                                       κ(γ) = sup ∥γ̈(t)∥2 .                                   (7)
                                                      t∈T
Geometrically, κ−1 is the minimum, over all points γ(t), of the radius of the osculating circle
whose velocity and acceleration match those of γ at t. We extend this definition to S, a Riemannian
submanifold of Rn , by taking κ to be the maximum curvature of any geodesic on S:
                                     κ(S) =              sup              κ(γ).                               (8)
                                              γ⊂S : unit-speed geodesic

    3
      This inefficiency has motivated significant efforts in applied communities to optimize the placement of the
templates si , maximizing the statistical performance for a given fixed ntemplates Owen & Sathyaprakash (1999). It
is also possible to learn these templates from data, leveraging connections to neural networks Yan et al. (2022a).
Nevertheless, the curse of dimensionality remains in force.
    4
      The Riemannian gradient is the projection of the Euclidean gradient ∇s f onto the tangent space Ts S.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     S
                                                                                     convergence basin
                                                                                     1/κ
                                                                                     −grad away from s⋆
                                                                                     −grad toward s⋆


                                              s⋆
                                                                                s⋆


Figure 1: Relationship between curvature and convergence basins of gradient descent. Gradient
descent has larger convergence basins under lower curvature (larger radius of osculating circle).
Points within the convergence basin have gradient descent direction pointing “toward” s⋆ , while
points outside the basin may have gradient descent pointing “away from” s⋆ .

We call this quantity the extrinsic geodesic curvature of S.5 Our main theoretical result shows that,
as suggested by Figure 1 there is a ∆ = 1/κ neighborhood within which gradient descent rapidly
converges to a close approximation of s♮ :
Theorem 1. Suppose the extrinsic geodesic curvature of S is bounded by κ. Consider the Riemannian
                                                                                          1
gradient method (5), with initialization satisfying d(s0 , s♮ ) < 1/κ, and step size τ = 64 . Then when
         √
σ ≤ c/(κ d), with high probability, we have for all k
                                                                       √
                             d(sk+1 , s♮ ) ≤ (1 − ϵ) d(sk , s♮ ) + Cσ d.                             (9)
                          √
Moreover, when σ ≤ c/(κ D), with high probability, we have for all k
                                                       p
                              d(sk , s⋆ ) ≤ C(1 − ϵ)k f (s0 ) − f (s⋆ ),                            (10)
where s⋆ is the unique minimizer of f over B(s♮ , 1/κ). Here, C, c, ϵ are positive numerical constants.

Interpretation: Convergence to Optimal Statistical Precision In (9), we show that under               √a
relatively mild condition on the noise, gradient descent exhibits linear convergence to a σ d-
neighborhood of s♮ . This accuracy is the best achievable√ up to constants: for small σ, with high
probability any minimizer s⋆ satisfies d(s⋆ , s♮ ) > cσ d, and so the accuracy guaranteed by (9) is
optimal up to constants. Also noteworthy is that both the accuracy and the required bound     √ on the
noise level σ are dictated solely by the intrinsic dimension d. The restriction σ ≤ c/(κ D) has a
natural interpretation in terms of Figure 1 — at this scale, the noise “acts locally”, ensuring that s⋆ is
close enough to s♮ so that for any initialization in B(s♮ , ∆), the gradient points toward s⋆ . In (10)
we also show that under a stronger condition on σ, gradient descent enjoys linear convergence for all
iterations k.

Implications on Complexity. Here we compare the complexity required for MF and TpopT
to achieve a target estimation accuracy d(ŝ, s♮ ) ≤ r. The complexity of MF is simply Nr , the
covering number of S with radius r. On the other hand, the complexity of TpopT is dictated
by ninit × ngradient-step . We have ninit = N1/κ since TpopT requires initialization within radius
1/κ of s♮ , and ngradient-step ∝ log 1/κr because gradient descent enjoys a linear convergence rate.
Note that the above argument applies when Cσd1/2 /ϵ ≤ r ≤ 1/κ, where the upper bound on r
prescribes the regime where gradient descent is in action (otherwise TpopT and MF are identical),
and the lower bound on r reflects the statistical limitation due to noise. Since the covering number
Nradius ∝ (1/radius)d , the complexities of the two methods TMF and TTpopT are given by

                                TMF ∝ 1/rd ,         TTpopT ∝ κd log(1/κr).                                  (11)
Combining this with the range of r, it follows that TpopT always has superior dimensional scaling
than MF whenever the allowable estimation error r is below 1/κ (and identical to MF above that).
The advantage is more significant at lower noise and higher estimation accuracy.
   5
     Notice that κ(S) measures how S curves in the ambient space Rn ; this is in contrast to traditional intrinsic
curvature notions in Riemannian geometry, such as the sectional and Ricci curvatures. An extrinsic notion of
curvature is relevant here because our objective function f (s) = − ⟨s, x⟩ is defined extrinsically. Intrinsic
curvature also plays an important role in our arguments — in particular, in controlling the effect of noise.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof Ideas. The proof of Theorem 1 follows the intuition in Figure 1, by (i) considering a
noiseless version of the problem and showing that in a 1/κ ball, the gradient points towards s♮ , and
(ii) controlling the effect of noise, by bounding the maximum component T max of the noise z along
any tangent vector v ∈ Ts S at any point s ∈ B(s♮ , ∆). By carefully controlling T max , we are able
to achieve rates driven by intrinsic dimension, not ambient dimension. Intuitively, this is because
the collection of tangent vectors, i.e., the tangent bundle, has dimension 2d. Our proof involves a
discretization argument, which uses elements of Riemannian geometry (Toponogov’s theorem on
geodesic triangles, control of parallel transport via the second fundamental form Toponogov (2006);
Lee (2018)). To show convergence of iterates (10), we show that in a 1/κ region, the objective
f enjoys Riemannian strong convexity and Lipschitz gradients Boumal (2023). Please see the
supplementary material for complete proofs.

4       N ONPARAMETRIC T POP T VIA E MBEDDING AND K ERNEL I NTERPOLATION
The theoretical results in Section 3 rigorously quantify the advantages of TpopT in detecting and
estimating signals from low-dimensional families. A straightforward application of TpopT requires a
precise analytical characterization of the signal manifold. In this section, we develop more practical,
nonparametric extension of TpopT, which is applicable in scenarios in which we only have examples
s1 , . . . , sN from S. This extension will maintain the test-time efficiency advantages of TpopT.

Embedding. We begin by embedding the example points s1 , . . . , sN ∈ Rn into a lower-
dimensional space Rd , producing data points ξ 1 , . . . , ξ N ∈ Rd . The mapping φ should preserve
pairwise distances and can be chosen in a variety of ways; Because the classical Multidimensional
Scaling (MDS) setup on Euclidean distances is equivalent to Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
we simply use PCA in our experiments. Assuming that φ is bijective over S, we can take s = s(ξ)
as an approximate parameterization of S, and develop an optimization method which, given an input
x, searches for a parameter ξ ∈ Rd that minimizes f (s(ξ)) = − ⟨s(ξ), x⟩.

Kernel Interpolated Jacobian Estimates. In the nonparameteric setting, we only know the values
of s(ξ) at the finite point set ξ 1 , . . . , ξ N , and we do not have any direct knowledge of the functional
form of the mapping s(·) or its derivatives. To extend TpopT to this setting, we can estimate the
Jacobian ∇s(ξ) at point ξ i by solving a weighted least squares problem
                                                      XN
                                                                                        2
                       c i ) = arg min
                       ∇s(ξ                               wj,i sj − si − J (ξ j − ξ i ) 2 ,              (12)
                                       J∈RD×d
                                                 j=1
where the weights wj,i = Θ(ξ i , ξ j ) are generated by an appropriately chosen kernel Θ. The least
squares problem (12) is solvable in closed form. In practice, we prefer compactly supported kernels,
so that the sum in (12) involves only a small subset of the points ξ j ;6 in experiment, we choose Θ
to be a truncated radial basis function kernel Θλ,δ (x1 , x2 ) = exp(−λ∥x1 − x2 ∥22 )· 1∥x1 −x2 ∥2 <δ .
                                                                                           c
When example points si are sufficiently dense and the kernel Θ is sufficiently localized, ∇s(ξ)  will
accurately approximate the true Jacobian ∇s(ξ).

Expanding the Basin of Attraction using Smoothing. In actual applications such as computer
vision and astronomy, the signal manifold S often exhibits large curvature κ, leading to a small basin
of attraction. One classical heuristic for increasing the basin size is to smooth the objective function
f . We can incorporate smoothing by taking gradient steps with a kernel smoothed Jacobian,
                                                    X
                                      f i ) = Z −1
                                      ∇s(ξ                   c j ),
                                                        wj,i ∇s(ξ                                   (13)
                                          P          j
where wj,i = Θλs ,δs (ξ i , ξ j ) and Z = j wj,i . The gradient iteration becomes
                                                   f k )T x.
                                ξ k+1 = ξ k + αk ∇s(ξ                                                     (14)
                           c
When the Jacobian estimate ∇s(ξ) accurately approximates ∇s(ξ), we have
                               X                       h     X                  i
              f i )T x ≈ Z −1
              ∇s(ξ                 wj,i ∇s(ξ j )T x = ∇ Z −1    wj,i f (s(ξ j )) .                        (15)
                                       j                                  j
    6
    In our experiments on gravitational wave astronomy, we introduce an additional quantization step, computing
approximate Jacobians on a regular grid ξˆ1 , . . . , ξˆN ′ of points in the parameter space Ξ.


                                                       5
                   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 init

signal embedding


                              correlation landscape                            optimization steps with multi-level smoothing

                   Figure 2: Illustration of 2-dim signal embeddings and the parameter optimization procedure for
                   gravitational wave signals.
  input signal
                         f T is an approximate gradient for a smoothed version fe of the objective f . Figure 2 illustrates
                   i.e., ∇s
                   smoothed optimization landscapes fe for different levels of smoothing, i.e., different choices of λs . In
                   general, the more smoothing is applied, the broader the basin of attraction. We employ a coarse-to-fine
                   approach, which starts with a highly smoothed landscape (small λs ) in the first iteration and decreases
                   the level of smoothing from iteration to iteration — see Figure 2.
                   These observations are in line with theory: because our embedding approximately preserves Euclidean
                   distances, ∥ξ i − ξ j ∥2 ≈ ∥si − sj ∥2 , we have
                                                     X                                X
                                    fe(s(ξ )) = Z −1
                                            i              Θ(ξ , ξ ) ⟨sj , x⟩ ≈ ⟨Z −1
                                                                  i      j              Θ(si , sj )sj , x⟩,        (16)
                                                        j                                             j
                   i.e., applying kernel smoothing in the parameter space is nearly equivalent to applying kernel
                   smoothing to the signal manifold S. This smoothing operation expands the basin of attraction
                   ∆ = 1/κ, by reducing the manifold curvature κ. Empirically, we find that with appropriate smoothing
                   often a single initialization suffices for convergence to global optimality, suggesting this as a potential
                   key to breaking the curse of dimensionality.

                   5    T RAINING N ONPARAMETRIC T POP T
                   In the section above, we described nonparametric TpopT for finding the matching template by
                   the iterative gradient solver (5). Note that this framework requires pre-computing the Jacobians
                   ∇s(ξ) and determining optimization hyperparameters, including the step sizes αk and kernel width
                   parameters λk at each layer. In this section, we adapt TpopT into a trainable architecture, which
                   essentially learns all the above quantities from data to further improve performance.
                   Recall the gradient descent iteration (14) in TpopT. Notice that if we define a collection of matrices
                                    f i )T ∈ Rd×D indexed by ξ i ∈ {ξ 1 , . . . , ξ N } and k ∈ {1, . . . , K} where K is
                   W (ξ i , k) = αk ∇s(ξ
                   the total number of iterations, then the iteration can be rewritten as
                                                                XN
                                                ξ k+1 = C −1        wk,i (ξ i + W (ξ i , k) x) ,                     (17)
                                                                      i=1
                                                              P
                   where wk,i = Θλk ,δk (ξ k , ξ i ), and C =   i wk,i . Equation (17) can be interpreted as a kernel
                   interpolated gradient step, where the W matrices summarize the Jacobian and step size information.
                   Because Θ is compactly supported, this sum involves only a small subset of the sample points ξ i .
                   Now, if we “unroll’ the optimization by viewing each gradient descent iteration as one layer of a
                   trainable network, we arrive at a trainable TpopT architecture, as illustrated in Figure 3. Here the
                   trainable parameters in the network are the W (ξ i , k) matrices and the kernel width parameters λk .
                   Following our heuristic that the W (ξ i , k) matrices were originally the combination of Jacobian
                                                                         f i )T . For the loss function during training,
                   and step size, we can initialize these matrices as αk ∇s(ξ
                   we use the square loss between the network output ξ K (x) and the optimal quantization point
                   ξ ∗ (x) = arg maxi=1,...,N ⟨s(ξ i ), x⟩, namely
                                                                      N
                                                                      Xtrain
                                                              1
                                                      L=                        ∥ξ K (xj ) − ξ ∗ (xj )∥22                      (18)
                                                            Ntrain j=1
                   for a training set {xj }Ntrain
                                           j=1 with positively-labeled data only. This loss function is well-aligned with
                   the signal estimation task, and is also applicable to detection.


                                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               input x
                                                  Look-up W
                                                                                N
                                                                 W (ξ i , k)

                     Kernel
                                        ξi
                                                                                         L
    ξ0            interpolation
                                       wk,i                                                            ξK
                       λk

                                                   K loops


Figure 3: Architecture of trainable TpopT. The model takes x as input and starts with a fixed
initialization ξ 0 , and outputs ξ K after going through K layers. The trainable parameters are the
collection of W (ξ i , k) matrices and kernel width parameters λk .
In summary, the trainable TpopT architecture consists of the following steps:
          • Create embeddings si 7→ ξ i .
          • Estimate Jacobians ∇s(ξ) at points ξ i by weighted least squares.
                                          f
          • Estimate smoothed Jacobians ∇s(ξ)   at any ξ by kernel smoothing.
          • Select a multi-level smoothing scheme.
          • Train the model with unrolled optimization.

6        E XPERIMENTS

We apply the trainable TpopT to gravitational wave detection, where MF is the current method of
choice, and show a significant improvement in efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs. We further demonstrate
its wide applicability on low-dimensional data with experiments on handwritten digit data.
To compare the efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs of MF and TpopT models, we note that (i) for MF, the
computation cost of the statistic maxi=1,...,n ⟨si , x⟩ is dominated by the cost of n length D inner
products, requiring nD multiplication operations. For TpopT, with M parallel initializations, K
iterations of the gradient descent (17), m neighbors in the truncated kernel, and a final evaluation
of the statistic, we require M D(Kdm + 1) multiplications; other operations including the kernel
interpolation and look-up of pre-computed gradients have negligible test-time cost.

6.1      G RAVITATIONAL WAVE D ETECTION

We aim to detect a family of gravitational wave signals in Gaussian noise. Each gravitational wave
signal is a one-dimensional chirp-like signal – see Figure 4 (left).7 Please refer to section F in the
appendix for data generation details.
Based on their physical modeling, gravitational wave signals are equipped with a set of physical
parameters, such as the masses and three-dimensional spins of the binary black holes that generate
them, etc. While it is tempting to directly optimize on this native parameter space, unfortunately the
optimization landscape on this space turns out to be rather unfavorable, as shown in Figure 4 (right).
We see that the objective function has many spurious local optimizers and is poorly conditioned.
Therefore, we still resort to signal embedding to create an alternative set of approximate “parameters”
that are better suited for optimization.
For the signal embedding, we apply PCA with dimension 2 on a separate set of 30,000 noiseless
waveforms drawn from the same distribution. Because the embedding dimension is relatively low,
here we quantize the embedding parameter space with an evenly-spaced grid, with the range of each
dimension evenly divided into 30 intervals. The value ξ 0 at the initial layer of TpopT is fixed at the
center of this quantization grid. Prior to training, we first determine the optimization hyperparameters
   7
     The raw data of gravitational wave detection is a noisy one-dimensional time series, where gravitational
wave signals can occur at arbitrary locations. We simplify the problem by considering input segments of fixed
time duration.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 ·10−19                                                                    1                                                             1

                          5
                                                                                                         0.5                                                             0.5



        Intensity


                                                                                                spin-z
                          0                                                                                0                                                             0



                                                                                                         -0.5                                                            −0.5
                    −5

                                                                                                          -1                                                             −1
                                           −1        −0.5          0                                            20   25    30      35     40             45     50
                                                   Time (s)                                                                     mass / m⊙


Figure 4: Left: Example of a gravitational wave signal. Right: Optimization landscape in the
physical parameter space (mass-spin-z), shown as the heatmap of signal correlations.

(step sizes and smoothing levels) using a layer-wise greedy grid search, where we sequentially choose
the step size and smoothing level at each layer as if it were the final layer. This greedy approach
significantly reduces the cost of the search. From there, we use these optimization hyperparameters to
initialize the trainable TpopT network, and train the parameters on the training set. We use the Adam
Kingma & Ba (2014) optimizer with batch size 1000 and constant learning rate 10−2 . Regarding
the computational cost of TpopT, we have M = 1, d = 2, m = 4 during training and m = 1 during
testing. The test time complexity of K-layer TpopT is D(2K + 1).
                                                σ = 0.1                                        σ = 0.2                                                   σ = 0.3
                                  1                                                  1                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                        MF
                                0.95                                               0.95                                                      0.95       Untrained-TpopT
                                                                                                                                                        Trained-TpopT
                                                                                                                                                        1-hidden-layer MLP
                                 0.9                                                0.9                                                       0.9


                                0.85                                               0.85                                                      0.85
                                                                                                                                 AUC score
                    AUC score


                                                                       AUC score


                                 0.8                                                0.8                                                       0.8


                                0.75                                               0.75                                                      0.75


                                 0.7                                                0.7                                                       0.7
                                            MF                                                MF
                                            Untrained-TpopT                                   Untrained-TpopT
                                0.65        Trained-TpopT                          0.65       Trained-TpopT                                  0.65
                                            1-hidden-layer MLP                                1-hidden-layer MLP
                                 0.6                                                0.6                                                       0.6
                                       3     5    7      9    11                          3    5    7      9          11                            3    5    7      9       11
                                            Complexity / D                                    Complexity / D                                            Complexity / D

Figure 5: This figure compares the performance of four methods: (1) matched filtering (MF),
(2) Template optimization (TpopT) without training, (3) TpopT with training, and (4) multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) with one hidden layer. All methods are compared at three noise levels. We see that
TpopT performs well in low to moderate noise, which matches theoretical results.
To evaluate the performance of matched filtering at any given complexity m, we randomly generate
1,000 independent sets of m templates drawn from the above distribution, evaluate the ROC curves
of each set of templates on the validation set, and select the set with the highest area-under-curve
(AUC) score. This selected template bank is then compared with TpopT on the shared test set.
Figure 6.1 shows the comparison of efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs for this task between matched
filtering and TpopT after training. We see that TpopT achieves significantly higher detection accuracy
compared with MF at equal complexity. At low to moderate noise levels, Trained-TpopT performs
the best, followed by MLP, and matched filtering performs the worst. As noise level increases, MLP’s
performance worsens most significantly, becoming the worst at σ = 0.3.

6.2   H ANDWRITTEN D IGIT R ECOGNITION

In this second experiment, we apply TpopT to the classic task of handwritten digit recognition using
the MNIST Deng (2012) dataset, in particular detecting the digit 3 from all other digits. We apply
random Euclidean transformations to all images, with translation uniformly between ±0.1 image size
on both dimensions and rotation angle uniformly between ±30◦ .


                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since the signal space here is nonparametric, we first create a 3-dimensional PCA embedding from
the training set, and Figure 6 (left) shows a slice of the embedding projected onto the first two
embedding dimensions. See supplementary for experiment details. Regarding the computational
cost of TpopT, we have M = 1, d = 3, m = 5 during training and m = 1 during testing. Since the
complexity is measured at test time, the complexity with K-layer TpopT is D(3K + 1). Additional
experimental details can be found in F.



                                                                   0.84


                                                       AUC score
                                                                   0.82


                                                                    0.8                               MF
                                                                                                      TpopT

                                                                          4   7        10        13       16
                                                                                  Complexity / D



Figure 6: Left: A slice of the 3-d embeddings projected onto the first two dimensions. Right: Classi-
fication scores of MF and TpopT at different complexity levels, for handwritten digit recognition.
Matched filtering is also evaluated similarly as in the previous experiment. We first set aside a random
subset of 500 images of digit 3 from the MNIST training set and construct the validation set from
it. The remaining images are used to randomly generate 1,000 independent sets of transformed
digits 3, and the best-performing set of templates on the validation set is selected as the MF template
bank, and compared with TpopT on the shared test set. Figure 6 (right) shows the comparison of
efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs between the two methods, and we see a consistently higher detection
accuracy of trained TpopT over MF at equal complexities.

7    D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we studied TpopT as an approach to efficient detection of low-dimensional signals.
We provided a proof of convergence of Riemannian gradient descent on the signal manifold, and
demonstrated its superior dimension scaling compared to MF. We also proposed the trainable TpopT
architecture that can handle general nonparametric families of signals. Experimental results show
that trained TpopT achieves significantly improved efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs than MF, especially
in the gravitational wave detection task where MF is the method of choice.
The principal limitation of nonparametric TpopT is its storage complexity: it represents the manifold
using a dense collection of points and Jacobians, with cost exponential in intrinsic dimension d. At the
same time, we note that the same exponential storage complexity is encountered by matched filtering
with a pre-designed template bank. In some sense, this exponential resource requirement reflects an
intrinsic constraint of the signal detection problem, unless more structures within the signal space
can be exploited. Both TpopT and its nonparametric extension achieve exponential improvements
in test-time efficiency compared to MF; nevertheless, our theoretical results retain an exponential
dependence on intrinsic dimension d, due to the need for multiple initializations. In experiments, the
proposed smoothing allows convergence to global optimality from a single initialization. Our current
theory does not fully explain this observation; this is an important direction for future work.
An advantage of MF not highlighted in this paper is its efficiency in handling noisy time series, using
the fast Fourier transform. This enables MF to rapidly locate signals that occur at a-priori unknown
spatial/temporal locations. Developing a convolutional version of TpopT with similar advantages is
another important direction.
Finally, our gravitational wave experiments use synthetic data with known ground truth, in order
to corroborate the key messages of this paper. Future experiments that explore broader and more
realistic setups will be an important empirical validation of the proposed method.



                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
B. P. Abbott et al. Advanced LIGO. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 32:074001, Apr 2015. doi:
  10.1088/0264-9381/32/7/074001.
Benjamin P Abbott, Richard Abbott, TD Abbott, MR Abernathy, Fausto Acernese, Kendall Ackley,
  Carl Adams, Thomas Adams, Paolo Addesso, RX Adhikari, et al. Observation of gravitational
  waves from a binary black hole merger. Physical review letters, 116(6):061102, 2016.
Benjamin P Abbott, Rich Abbott, TDea Abbott, Fausto Acernese, Kendall Ackley, Carl Adams,
  Thomas Adams, Paolo Addesso, RX Adhikari, Vaishali B Adya, et al. Gw170817: observation of
  gravitational waves from a binary neutron star inspiral. Physical review letters, 119(16):161101,
  2017.
Alex Abramovici, William E. Althouse, Ronald W. P. Drever, Yekta Gursel, Seiji Kawamura, Fred-
  erick J. Raab, David Shoemaker, Lisa Sievers, Robert E. Spero, Kip S. Thorne, Rochus E.
  Vogt, Rainer Weiss, Stanley E. Whitcomb, and Michael E. Zucker. LIGO: The Laser Inter-
  ferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. Science, 256(5055):325–333, April 1992. doi:
  10.1126/science.256.5055.325.
F. Acernese et al. Advanced Virgo: a second-generation interferometric gravitational wave detector.
   Classical and Quantum Gravity, 32:024001, Jan 2015. doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/32/2/024001.
T Akutsu, M Ando, K Arai, Y Arai, S Araki, A Araya, N Aritomi, Y Aso, S Bae, Y Bae, et al.
  Overview of kagra: Detector design and construction history. Progress of Theoretical and Experi-
  mental Physics, 2021(5):05A101, 2021.
Richard G Baraniuk and Michael B Wakin. Random projections of smooth manifolds. Foundations
  of computational mathematics, 9(1):51–77, 2009.
Yoshua Bengio and Martin Monperrus. Non-local manifold tangent learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 17, 2004.
Nicolas Boumal. An introduction to optimization on smooth manifolds. Cambridge University Press,
  2023.
Emery N Brown, Robert E Kass, and Partha P Mitra. Multiple neural spike train data analysis:
 state-of-the-art and future challenges. Nature neuroscience, 7(5):456–461, 2004.
Sam Buchanan, Jingkai Yan, Ellie Haber, and John Wright. Resource-efficient invariant networks:
  Exponential gains by unrolled optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05006, 2022.
Enrico Caffagni, David W Eaton, Joshua P Jones, and Mirko van der Baan. Detection and analysis of
  microseismic events using a matched filtering algorithm (mfa). Geophysical Journal International,
  206(1):644–658, 2016.
Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Wuyang Chen, Zhangyang Wang, Howard Heaton, Jialin Liu, and
  Wotao Yin. Learning to optimize: A primer and a benchmark. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 23(1):8562–8620, 2022.
Benjamin Culpepper and Bruno Olshausen. Learning transport operators for image manifolds.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 22, 2009.
Tito Dal Canton, Alexander H. Nitz, Bhooshan Gadre, Gareth S. Cabourn Davies, Verónica Villa-
  Ortega, Thomas Dent, Ian Harry, and Liting Xiao. Real-time Search for Compact Binary Mergers
  in Advanced LIGO and Virgo’s Third Observing Run Using PyCBC Live. , 923(2):254, December
  2021. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2f9a.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Steven Diamond, Vincent Sitzmann, Felix Heide, and Gordon Wetzstein. Unrolled optimization with
  deep priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08041, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elizabeth A Gibson, Junhui Zhang, Jingkai Yan, Lawrence Chillrud, Jaime Benavides, Yanelli Nunez,
  Julie B Herbstman, Jeff Goldsmith, John Wright, and Marianthi-Anna Kioumourtzoglou. Principal
  component pursuit for pattern identification in environmental mixtures. Environmental Health
  Perspectives, 130(11):117008, 2022.

Carl W Helstrom. Statistical theory of signal detection: international series of monographs in
  electronics and instrumentation, volume 9. Elsevier, 2013.

Hui Ji, Chaoqiang Liu, Zuowei Shen, and Yuhong Xu. Robust video denoising using low rank
  matrix completion. In 2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 1791–1798. IEEE, 2010.

DG Johnson. Complex scatterer reconstruction using multistatic spherical wave isar fourier template
 matching. In 2009 International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications, pp.
 291–294. IEEE, 2009.

Angjoo Kanazawa, Abhishek Sharma, and David Jacobs. Locally scale-invariant convolutional neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5104, 2014.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Abhishek Kumar, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Tom Fletcher. Semi-supervised learning with gans: Mani-
  fold invariance with improved inference. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.

John M Lee. Introduction to Riemannian manifolds, volume 2. Springer, 2018.

Dong Liang, Jing Cheng, Ziwen Ke, and Leslie Ying. Deep mri reconstruction: unrolled optimization
  algorithms meet neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11711, 2019.

Jialin Liu and Xiaohan Chen. Alista: Analytic weights are as good as learned weights in lista. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Dalton Lunga, Saurabh Prasad, Melba M Crawford, and Okan Ersoy. Manifold-learning-based feature
  extraction for classification of hyperspectral data: A review of advances in manifold learning.
  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 31(1):55–66, 2013.

Farzin Mokhtarian and Sadegh Abbasi. Shape similarity retrieval under affine transforms. Pattern
  Recognition, 35(1):31–41, 2002.

Vishal Monga, Yuelong Li, and Yonina C Eldar. Algorithm unrolling: Interpretable, efficient deep
  learning for signal and image processing. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 38(2):18–44, 2021.

Timothy S Murphy, Marcus J Holzinger, and Brien Flewelling. Space object detection in images
  using matched filter bank and bayesian update. Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, 40
  (3):497–509, 2017.

Alex Nitz, Ian Harry, Duncan Brown, Christopher M. Biwer, Josh Willis, Tito Dal Canton, Collin
  Capano, Thomas Dent, Larne Pekowsky, Soumi De, Miriam Cabero, Gareth S Cabourn Davies,
  Andrew R. Williamson, Duncan Macleod, Bernd Machenschalk, Francesco Pannarale, Prayush
  Kumar, Steven Reyes, dfinstad, Sumit Kumar, Shichao Wu, Márton Tápai, Leo Singer, veronica
  villa, Sebastian Khan, Stephen Fairhurst, Koustav Chandra, Alex Nielsen, Shashwat Singh, and
  Thomas Massinger. gwastro/pycbc: v2.1.2 release of pycbc, May 2023. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.7885796.

Benjamin J Owen and Bangalore Suryanarayana Sathyaprakash. Matched filtering of gravitational
  waves from inspiraling compact binaries: Computational cost and template placement. Physical
  Review D, 60(2):022002, 1999.

Souradeep Pal and K Rajesh Nayak. Swarm-intelligent search for gravitational waves from eccentric
  binary mergers. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2307.03736, July 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.03736.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thottempudi Pardhu, A Kavya Sree, and K Tanuja. Design of matched filter for radar applications.
  Electrical and Electronics Engineering: An International Journal (ELELIJ) Vol, 3, 2014.
Mijung Park, Wittawat Jitkrittum, Ahmad Qamar, Zoltán Szabó, Lars Buesing, and Maneesh Sahani.
 Bayesian manifold learning: the locally linear latent variable model (ll-lvm). Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Kenia Picos, Victor H Diaz-Ramirez, Vitaly Kober, Antonio S Montemayor, and Juan J Pantrigo.
  Accurate three-dimensional pose recognition from monocular images using template matched
  filtering. Optical Engineering, 55(6):063102–063102, 2016.
Xiaojun Quan, Chunyu Kit, Yong Ge, and Sinno Jialin Pan. Short and sparse text topic modeling via
  self-aggregation. In 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015, pp.
  2270–2276. AAAI Press/International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
Salah Rifai, Pascal Vincent, Xavier Muller, Xavier Glorot, and Yoshua Bengio. Contractive auto-
  encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th international
  conference on international conference on machine learning, pp. 833–840, 2011.
Baptiste Rousset, Michel Campillo, Cecile Lasserre, William Benjamin Frank, Nathalie Cotte, Andrea
  Walpersdorf, Anne Socquet, and Vladimir Kostoglodov. A geodetic matched filter search for slow
  slip with application to the mexico subduction zone. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
  Earth, 122(12):10–498, 2017.
Soumen Roy, Anand S. Sengupta, and Nilay Thakor. Hybrid geometric-random template-placement
  algorithm for gravitational wave searches from compact binary coalescences. , 95(10):104045,
  May 2017. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.95.104045.
Soumen Roy, Anand S. Sengupta, and Parameswaran Ajith. Effectual template banks for upcoming
  compact binary searches in Advanced-LIGO and Virgo data. , 99(2):024048, January 2019. doi:
  10.1103/PhysRevD.99.024048.
Yulin Shi, Zoran Nenadic, and Xiangmin Xu. Novel use of matched filtering for synaptic event
  detection and extraction. PLoS One, 5(11):e15517, 2010.
Kihyuk Sohn and Honglak Lee. Learning invariant representations with local transformations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1206.6418, 2012.
Victor A Toponogov. Differential geometry of curves and surfaces. Springer, 2006.
Ramon Van Handel. Probability in High Dimension, volume 1. APC550 Lecture Notes Princeton
  University, 2016.
Michael B Wakin. The geometry of low-dimensional signal models. PhD thesis, Rice University,
 2007.
Michael B Wakin, David L Donoho, Hyeokho Choi, and Richard G Baraniuk. The multiscale
 structure of non-differentiable image manifolds. In Wavelets XI, volume 5914, pp. 413–429. SPIE,
 2005.
Thilina S. Weerathunga and Soumya D. Mohanty. Performance of particle swarm optimization on
  the fully-coherent all-sky search for gravitational waves from compact binary coalescences. , 95
  (12):124030, June 2017. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.95.124030.
Bo Xin, Yizhou Wang, Wen Gao, David Wipf, and Baoyuan Wang. Maximal sparsity with deep
  networks? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Jingkai Yan, Mariam Avagyan, Robert E Colgan, Doğa Veske, Imre Bartos, John Wright, Zsuzsa
   Márka, and Szabolcs Márka. Generalized approach to matched filtering using neural networks.
   Physical Review D, 105(4):043006, 2022a.
Jingkai Yan, Robert Colgan, John Wright, Zsuzsa Márka, Imre Bartos, and Szabolcs Márka. Boosting
   the efficiency of parametric detection with hierarchical neural networks. Physical Review D, 106
   (6):063008, 2022b.
Yanzhao Zhou, Qixiang Ye, Qiang Qiu, and Jianbin Jiao. Oriented response networks. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 519–528, 2017.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX

B    OVERVIEW
In the appendices, we will prove Theorem 1 from the main paper.
For the rest of the supplementary materials, Section C proves result (10) under the stricter constraint
on the noise level σ, Section D bounds the effect of noise on the tangent bundle, and Section E uses
this bound to prove result (9) under the looser constraint on the noise level.

C    P ROOF OF R ESULT (10)
In this section, we state and prove one of the two parts of our main claims about gradient descent:

    Theorem 2. Let S be a complete manifold. Suppose the extrinsic geodesic curvature of S
    is bounded by κ. Consider the Riemannian gradient method, with initialization
                                                                       √          satisfying
                                               1
    d(s0 , s♮ ) < ∆ = 1/κ, and step size τ = 64  . Then when σ ≤ 1/(60κ D), with probability
    at least 1 − e−D/2 , we have for all k
                                                       k
                                  d(sk , s⋆ ) ≤ 1 − ϵ d(s0 , s⋆ ),                      (19)
    where s⋆ is the unique minimizer of f over B(s♮ , 1/κ). Here, c, ϵ are positive numerical
    constants.


Proof. Since the closed neighborhood B(s♮ , 1/κ) is a compact set and f is continuous, there must
exist a minimizer of f on B(s♮ , 1/κ), which we denote as s⋆ . We will show that with high probability
s⋆ does not lie on the boundary ∂B(s♮ , 1/κ). It suffices to show that ∀s ∈ ∂B(s♮ , 1/κ) :

                                                     logs s♮
                                   − grad[f ](s),                > 0,                            (20)
                                                  ∥ logs s♮ ∥2
namely that the gradient descent direction points inward the neighborhood for all points on the
boundary. Here logs : S → Ts S denotes the logarithmic map at point s ∈ S. To show this, we have

                                     logs s♮                           logs s♮
                   − grad[f ](s),               = PTs S [s♮ + z],
                                  ∥ logs s♮ ∥2                      ∥ logs s♮ ∥2

                                                               logs s♮
                                                = s♮ + z,
                                                            ∥ logs s♮ ∥2

                                                          logs s♮
                                                ≥ s♮ ,                  − ∥z∥2 ,            (21)
                                                       ∥ logs s♮ ∥2
where the operator PTs S [·] denotes projection onto the tangent space at s, and we used the fact that
logs s♮ ∈ Ts S. Let γ be a unit-speed geodesic of S with γ(0) = s♮ and γ(∆) = s, the existence of
                                                                 log s
which is ensured by the completeness of S. Hence γ̇(∆) = − ∥ log s s♮♮∥2 . Using Lemma 3, it follows
                                                                    s
that

                               logs s♮                              1           5
                       s♮ ,                = ⟨γ(0), −γ̇(∆)⟩ ≥ ∆ − κ2 ∆3 =          .              (22)
                            ∥ logs s♮ ∥2                            6          6κ
                                                                                            √
Throughout this proof, we will use the result from measure concentration
                                                                       D     that ∥z∥2 ≤ 2σ D withE
                                                                                         log s
probability at least 1 − e−D/2 ?. Hence with high probability we have − grad[f ](s), ∥ log s s♮♮∥2 ≥
                                                                                            s
 5    1                                         ⋆
6κ − 30κ > 0. Therefore, with high probability s lies in the interior of B(s♮ , 1/κ), and hence the
                   ⋆                ⋆
gradient vanishes at s , i.e. grad[f ](s ) = 0.

Suppose we are currently at the k-th iteration with iterate sk . Define st = expsk − t grad[f ](sk )
with variable t ∈ [0, τ ], and the next iterate can be represented as sk+1 = sτ . The global definition


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the exponential map is ensured by the completeness of S. We have that
                               Z τ
                                    d
 d(sk+1 , s⋆ ) − d(sk , s⋆ ) =          d(sr , s⋆ ) dt
                                    dr              t
                               Z0 τ
                                       d          −   logst s⋆
                             =            sr ,                     dt
                                0     dr t ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                               Z τ
                                                                     − logst s⋆
                             =        Πst ,sk {− grad[f ](sk )},                     dt
                                0                                   ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                               Z τ
                                                           − logst s⋆
                             =        − grad[f ](st ),                    dt
                                0                         ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                                    Z τ
                                                                                    k    − logst s⋆
                                 +         grad[f ](st ) + Πst ,sk {− grad[f ](s )},                    dt
                                      0                                                 ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                               Z τ
                                                      − logst s⋆
                             =        PTst S [s⋆ ],                   dt
                                0                    ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                                    Z τ
                                                                − logst s⋆
                                 +         PTst S [x − s⋆ ],                    dt
                                      0                        ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                                    Z τ
                                                                                         − logst s⋆
                                 +         grad[f ](st ) + Πst ,sk {− grad[f ](sk )},                   dt.
                                      0                                                 ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                                                                                                        (23)
The third equation holds because the velocity at the new point st is the same velocity vector at sk but
transported along the curve since there is no acceleration along the curve. The last equation follows
from the fact that grad[f ](st ) = −PTst S [x]. In the following, we will bound the three terms in (23)
separately.
For convenience, write
                                           d(t) = d(st , s⋆ )                                          (24)
so that d(0) = d(sk , s⋆ ) and d(τ ) = d(sk+1 , s⋆ ).
For the integrand of the first term in (23), let γ be a unit-speed geodesic between st and s⋆ , where
γ(0) = s⋆ and γ(d(t)) = st . We have

                                   ⋆    − logst s⋆           ⋆   − logst (s⋆ )
                          PTst S [s ],                 = s ,
                                       ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2            ∥ logst (s⋆ )∥2
                                                            = ⟨γ(0), γ̇(d(t))⟩
                                                                        1
                                                            ≤ −d(t) + κ2 d3 (t),                       (25)
                                                                        6
                                          − log    (s⋆ )
where we used the fact that γ̇(d(t)) = ∥ log s(s
                                              t
                                                ⋆ )∥
                                                     2
                                                       ∈ Tst S, and the inequality is given by Lemma 3.
                                              st


For the integrand of the second term in (23), we have

                                ⋆    − logst s⋆
                   PTst S [x − s ],                 ≤ ∥PTst S [x − s⋆ ]∥2
                                    ∥ logst s⋆ ∥2
                                                           = ∥PTst S P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ [x − s⋆ ]∥2
                                                           ≤ ∥PTst S P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ ∥ ∥x − s⋆ ∥2
                                                           ≤ ∥P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ PTst S ∥ ∥z∥2 ,                (26)
                                     ⋆
where we used the optimality of s and the symmetry of projection operators. The operator norm
∥P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ PTst S ∥ can be rewritten as
                           ∥P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ PTst S ∥ =             sup       d(v, Ts⋆ S).                    (27)
                                                    v∈Tst S, ∥v∥2 =1

For any unit vector v ∈ Tst S, we will construct a vector in Ts⋆ S and use its distance from v
to upper bound d(v, Ts⋆ S). We again use the unit-speed geodesic γ joining s⋆ and st , where


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


γ(0) = s⋆ and γ(d(t)) = st . Let v r = Pr,d(t) v for r ∈ [0, d(t)], where Pr,d(t) denotes the parallel
transport backward along γ. The derivative of v r can be expressed by the second fundamental form
 d                                                                              d
dr v r = II(γ̇(r), v r ), which can further be bounded by Lemma 4 to get ∥ dr v r ∥2 ≤ 3κ. Hence
  v d(t) − v 0 2 ≤ 3κd(t). Since v d(t) = v and v 0 ∈ Ts⋆ S, it follows that d(v, Ts⋆ S) ≤ 3κd(t) for
any unit vector v ∈ Tst S. Hence
                                      ∥P(Ts⋆ S)⊥ PTst S ∥ ≤ 3κ · d(t).                                    (28)
                  √
Since ∥z∥2 ≤ 2σ D with high probability, plugging these into (26), we have with high probability

                                  ⋆    − logst s⋆            √
                     PTst S [x − s ],          ⋆
                                                      ≤ 6σκ D · d(t).                      (29)
                                      ∥ logst s ∥2

The integrand of the third term in (23) can be bounded using the Riemannian Hessian. We have
                                          Z t
                                    k
 grad[f ](st ) = Πst ,sk {grad[f ](s )} +       Πst ,sr Hess[f ](sr ) Πsr ,sk {− grad[f ](sk )} dr. (30)
                                                r=0
Using the L-Lipschitz gradient property of the function f from Lemma 5, we have

                                       k     − logsr s⋆
  grad[f ](st ) + Πst ,sk {− grad[f ](s )},                 ≤ ∥ grad[f ](st ) − Πst ,sk {grad[f ](sk )}∥2
                                            ∥ logsr s⋆ ∥2
                                                                ≤ t max ∥ Hess[f ](s̄)∥ ∥ grad[f ](sk )∥2
                                                                       s̄
                                                                ≤ tL2 d(sk , s⋆ ).                        (31)
Hence
    Z τ
                                                            − logsr s⋆                 1 2 2 k ⋆
           grad[f ](st ) + Πst ,sk {− grad[f ](sk )},                           dt ≤     τ L d(s , s ).   (32)
       0                                                   ∥ logsr s⋆ ∥2               2

Gathering the separate bounds of the three terms in (23), we have
                           Z τ                              √

                                           1 2 3                          1
            d(τ ) ≤ d(0) +       −d(t) + κ d (t) + 6σκ Dd(t) dt + L2 τ 2 d(0)
                            0              6                              2
                                         Z τ
                         1                                       1
                  = (1 + L2 τ 2 )d(0) +        −(1 − c1 )d(t) + κ2 d3 (t) dt,                             (33)
                         2                0                      6
                 √      1
where c1 = 6σκ D ≤ 10 . By triangle inequality we have
                      d(sk , s⋆ ) − d(sk , st ) ≤ d(st , s⋆ ) ≤ d(sk , s⋆ ) + d(sk , st ).                (34)

Since st = expsk      − t grad[f ](sk ) , we have
                            d(sk , st ) ≤ t∥ grad[f ](sk )∥2 ≤ tL · d(sk , s∗ ),                          (35)
and thus
                               (1 − tL)d(0) ≤ d(t) ≤ (1 + tL)d(0).                                        (36)
Hence for the integrand in (33), we have
                               1                            1
            −(1 − c1 )d(t) + κ2 d3 (t) ≤ −(1 − c1 )d(t) + κ2 (1 + tL)2 d2 (0)d(t)
                               6                            6
                                                            1
                                         ≤ −(1 − c1 )d(t) + κ2 (1 + τ L)2 (2∆)2 d(t)
                                                            6
                                         = (−1 + c2 )d(t)
                                         ≤ (−1 + c2 )(1 − tL)d(0)                                         (37)
where c2 = c1 + 32 (1 + τ L)2 .
Plugging this back, we get
                                                            Z τ
                                1 2 2
                    d(τ ) ≤ (1 + L τ )d(0) + (−1 + c2 )d(0)     (1 − tL)dt
                                2                            0

                                               1 2 1
                          = 1 − (1 − c2 )τ +     L + L(1 − c2 ) τ 2 d(0).                                 (38)
                                               2    2


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Substituting in L = 121                      1
                    30 from Lemma 5 and τ = 64 , we get

                                    d(sk+1 , s⋆ ) ≤ (1 − ϵ)d(sk , s⋆ )                                                (39)
                    −4
where ϵ ≈ 2.3 × 10       , which proves result (10). Note that this also implies the uniqueness of the
minimizer s⋆ .



C.1   S UPPORTING L EMMAS

Lemma 3. Let γ be a regular unit-speed curve on the manifold S ⊂ Sd−1 with extrinsic curvature κ.
Then,
                                                                        κ2 t3
                                        ⟨γ̇(t), γ(0)⟩ ≤ −t +                                                          (40)
                                                                         6

Proof. Since γ ⊂ Sd−1 , by differentiating both sides of ∥γ(t)∥22 = 1 we get ⟨γ̇(t), γ(t)⟩ = 0.
Further, since γ is unit-speed, we have ∥γ̇(t)∥22 = 1 and by differentiating it ⟨γ̈(t), γ̇(t)⟩ = 0.
Therefore,
                                          Z t
           ⟨γ̇(t), γ(0)⟩ = γ̇(t), γ(t) −       γ̇(t1 ) dt1
                                            0
                                    Z t
                         = − γ̇(t),     γ̇(t1 ) dt1
                                     0
                             Z t                     Z t
                         =−         γ̇(t), γ̇(t) −           γ̈(t2 ) dt2 dt1
                                t1 =0                         t2 =t1
                                  Z t     Z t
                         = −t +                    ⟨γ̇(t), γ̈(t2 )⟩ dt2 dt1
                                   t1 =0 t2 =t1
                                  Z t Z t                          Z t
                         = −t +                      γ̇(t2 ) +                  γ̈(t3 ) dt3 , γ̈(t2 )       dt2 dt1
                                   t1 =0 t2 =t1                        t3 =t2
                                  Z t Z t Z t
                         = −t +                                ⟨γ̈(t3 ), γ̈(t2 )⟩ dt3 dt2 dt1
                                    t1 =0 t2 =t1    t3 =t2
                                      Z t Z t         Z t
                                    2
                         ≤ −t + κ                                  dt3 dt2 dt1
                                       t1 =0    t2 =t1    t3 =t2
                                    2 3
                                  κ t
                         = −t +       .                                                                               (41)
                                   6


Lemma 4. Let II(u, v) denote the second fundamental form at some point s ∈ S, and let κ denote
the extrinsic (RD ) geodesic curvature of S. Then
                                          sup            ∥II(u, v)∥2 ≤ 3κ.                                            (42)
                                   ∥u∥2 =1,∥v∥2 =1


Proof. Set
                                   κII =         max             ∥II(u, v)∥22 .                                       (43)
                                           ∥u∥2 =1,∥v∥2 =1

Choose unit vectors u, v which realize this maximum value (these must exist, by continuity of II and
compactness of the constraint set). Because II is bilinear, ∥II(u, v)∥22 = ∥II(u, −v)∥22 , and without
loss of generality, we can assume ⟨u, v⟩ ≤ 0.
Since II(u, v) is a symmetric bilinear form, each coordinate of the vector II(u, v) has the form
IIi (u, v) = uT Φi v for some symmetric d × d matrix Φi . Now,
                     uT Φi v = 12 (u + v)T Φi (u + v) − 21 uT Φi u − 21 v T Φi v,                                     (44)


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


so
                  | 12 uT Φi u| + | 12 v T Φi v| + | 21 (u + v)T Φi (u + v)| ≥ |uT Φi v|            (45)
and
               3| 21 uT Φi u|2 + 3| 12 v T Φi v|2 + 3| 21 (u + v)T Φi (u + v)|2 ≥ |uT Φi v|2 (46)
                                                    2        2     2     2
where we have used the inequality (a + b + c) ≤ 3a + 3b + 3c which follows from convexity of
the square. Summing over i, we obtain that
                 3             2   3             2    3                      2           2
                 4 ∥II(u, u)∥2 + 4 ∥II(v, v)∥2 + 4 ∥II(u + v, u + v)∥2 ≥ ∥II(u, v)∥2         (47)
this implies that
                        n                                                    o
                9                      2           2                       2              2
                4 max ∥II(u, u)∥2 , ∥II(v, v)∥2 , ∥II(u + v, u + v)∥2 ≥ ∥II(u, v)∥2          (48)
                                                                              √
Because u, v are unit vectors with ⟨u, v⟩ ≤ 0, we have ∥u + v∥2 ≤ 2, and so
                                  n                                                 o
                      4κ2 ≥ max ∥II(u, u)∥22 , ∥II(v, v)∥22 , ∥II(u + v, u + v)∥22 ,         (49)
whence
                                       9κ2 ≥ ∥II(u, v)∥22 = (κII )2 ,                               (50)
which is the claimed inequality.
                                √
Lemma 5. Assume σ ≤ 1/(60κ D). The objective function f (s) = − ⟨s, x⟩ has L−Lipschitz
gradient in a 1/κ-neighborhood of s♮ with probability at least 1 − e−D/2 , where L = 121
                                                                                     30 .

Proof. On a Riemannian manifold S, the conditions for L-Lipschitz gradient in a subset can be
             d2
expressed as dt2 (f ◦ γ)(t) ≤ L for all unit-speed geodesics γ(t) in the subset Boumal (2023).


Let ∆ = 1/κ, and let γ(t) be a unit-speed geodesic of S in the neighborhood B(s♮ , ∆), t ∈ [0, T ].
The neighborhood constraint implies that T = d(γ(0), γ(T )) ≤ d(γ(0), s♮ ) + d(γ(T ), s♮ ) ≤ 2∆.
                                   2
                               d
To bound the second derivative dt2 (f ◦ γ)(t), we have

                  d2
                     (f ◦ γ)(t) = − ⟨γ̈(t), x⟩
                 dt2
                                 = − ⟨γ̈(t), γ(0)⟩ − ⟨γ̈(t), s♮ − γ(0)⟩ − ⟨γ̈(t), z⟩ .              (51)
The first term can be bounded as
                                                      Z t
                  − ⟨γ̈(t), γ(0)⟩ = − γ̈(t), γ(t) −          γ̇(t1 )dt1
                                                               t1 =0
                                                              Z t
                                   = − ⟨γ̈(t), γ(t)⟩ +                 ⟨γ̈(t), γ̇(t1 )⟩ dt1
                                                               t1 =0
                                           Z t                           Z t
                                   =1+                 γ̈(t), γ̇(t) −              γ̈(t2 )dt2 dt1
                                            t1 =0                         t2 =t1
                                           Z t Z t
                                   =1−                        ⟨γ̈(t), γ̈(t2 )⟩ dt2 dt1
                                            t1 =0 t2 =t1
                                              Z t Z t
                                            2
                                   ≤1+κ                            dt2 dt1
                                                 t1 =0    t2 =t1
                                   1
                             ≤ 1 + κ2 T 2
                                   2
                             ≤ 1 + 2κ2 ∆2 ,                                           (52)
where we used ⟨γ̈(t), γ(t)⟩ = −1 (by differentiating both sides of ⟨γ̇(t), γ(t)⟩ = 0) and
⟨γ̈(t), γ̇(t)⟩ = 0.
Hence
                            d2
                               (f ◦ γ)(t) ≤ 1 + 2κ2 ∆2 + κ∆ + κ∥z∥.                 (53)
                  √        dt2
Since ∥z∥2 ≤ 2σ D with probability at least 1 − e−D/2 , combining this with ∆ = 1/κ and
                                          d2
σ ≤ 60κ1√D , we get with high probability dt               121
                                            2 (f ◦ γ)(t) ≤ 30 .


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D      C HAINING B OUNDS FOR THE TANGENT B UNDLE P ROCESS

In this section, we prove the following lemma, which bounds a crucial Gaussian process that arises in
the analysis of gradient descent.

    Main Bound for Tangent Bundle Process
    Theorem 6. Suppose that ∆ ≤ 1/κ, and set
                            n                                           o
                T max = sup ⟨v, z⟩ | dS (s, s♮ ) ≤ ∆, v ∈ Ts S, ∥v∥2 = 1 .                     (54)
                                                x2
    Then with probability at least 1 − 1.6e− 2σ2 , we have
                                         p               p
                        T max ≤ 12σ(κ 2π(d + 1) + log 12κ) + 30x.                              (55)

We prove Theorem 6 below. We directly follow the proof of Theorem 5.29 from Van Handel (2016),
establishing a chaining argument while accounting for slight discrepancies and establishing exact
constants. The main geometric content of this argument is in Lemma 9, which bounds the size of
ε-nets for the tangent bundle.


Proof. Set
                             n                                       o
                          V = v | v ∈ Ts S, ∥v∥2 = 1, dS (s, s♮ ) ≤ ∆ ,                            (56)


We first prove that T = {⟨v, z⟩}v∈V defines a separable, sub-gaussian process. Take any v, v ′ ∈ V.
Then
                       ⟨v, z⟩ − ⟨v ′ , z⟩ = ⟨v − v ′ , z⟩ ∼ N (0, σ 2 d(v, v ′ )2 ),               (57)

immediately satisfying sub-gaussianity. By Lemma 9, there exists an ε-net N (V, d, ϵ) for V of
size at most N = (12κ/ε)2d+1 . To see separability, let Nk = N (V, d, 2−k ) be the epsilon net
                     1
corresponding to ϵ = k . We can construct a countable dense subset of V by letting
                     2
                                               ∞
                                               [
                                      N∞ =           N (V, d, 2−k ).                               (58)
                                               k=1

Therefore, the existence of a countable dense subset implies separability of V immediately implying
separability of T . Using these facts, we first prove the result in the finite case |V| < ∞, after which
we use separability to extend to the infinite case.
Let |V| < ∞ and k0 be the largest integer such that 2−k0 ≥ diam(V). Define Nk0 = N (V, d, 2−k0 )
to be a 2−k0 net of V with respect to the metric d. Then for all v ∈ V, there exists π0 (v) ∈ Nk0 such
that d(v, π0 (v)) < 2−k0 .
For k > k0 , let Nk = N (V, d, 2−k ) be a 2−k net of V. Subsequently for all v ∈ V, there exists
πk (v) ∈ Nk0 such that d(v, πk (v)) < 2−k .
Now fix any v0 ∈ V. For any v ∈ V, sufficiently large n yields πn (v) = v. Thus,
                                         X
                     ⟨v, z⟩ − ⟨v0 , z⟩ =      {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩}                        (59)
                                             k>k0


by the telescoping property, implying
                                              X
                 sup {⟨v, z⟩ − ⟨v0 , z⟩} ≤           sup {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩}.            (60)
                 v∈T                                 v∈V
                                              k>k0


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the fact that T is a sub-gaussian process and Lemma 5.2 of Van Handel (2016), we can bound
each individual sum as
                                                      p                              x2
                                                                                      k
     P(sup {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩} ≥ 6 × 2−k σ log |Nk | + 3 × 2−k xk ) ≤ e− 2σ2 .     (61)
        v∈V

By ensuring that all of the sums are simultaneously controlled, we can arrive at the desired bound.
We first derive the complement (i.e. there exists one sum which exceeds the desired value)

                                                                                             p
P(Ac ) := P(∃k > k0 s.t. sup {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩} ≥ 6 × 2−k σ                           log |Nk | + 3 × 2−k xk )
                                v∈V

                                                                                                                       (62)
            X                                                                      p
                                                                          −k                               −k
        ≤          P(sup {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩} ≥ 6 × 2                 σ       log |Nk | + 3 × 2        xk )   (63)
                     v∈V
            k>k0
            X         x2
                       k
        ≤          e− 2σ2                                                                                              (64)
            k>k0
               x2   X                       x2
        ≤ e− 2σ2           e−k/2 ≤ 1.6e− 2σ2                                                                           (65)
                    k>0

                                                            12κ 2d+1
Now, using corollary 5.25 of Van Handel (2016) and |N | ≤ (     )    , we have
                                                              ϵ
                            X
 sup {⟨v, z⟩ − ⟨v0 , z⟩} ≤      sup {⟨πk (v), z⟩ − ⟨πk−1 (v), z⟩}                                                      (66)
 v∈V                                    v∈V
                                 k>k0
                                    X              p                           X           √             X
                               ≤6          2−k σ       log |Nk | + 3 × 2−k0             2−k k + 3 × 2−k0   2−k x
                                    k>k0                                       k>0                               k>0
                                                                                                                       (67)
                                    Z ∞ p
                               ≤ 12     σ log N (V, d, ϵ) dϵ + 15diam(V)x                                              (68)
                                     0
                                            Z ∞r
                                     √                   12κ
                               ≤ 12σ 2d + 1       (log(      ) dϵ + 15diam(V)x                                         (69)
                                             0             ϵ
                                     √        √                   p
                               = 12σ 2d + 1(κ π erf (log 12κ) + log 12κ) + 15diam(V)x                                  (70)
                                       p            p
                               ≤ 12σ(κ 2π(d + 1) + log 12κ) + 15diam(V)x,                                              (71)
                                                   P             √                      P
where we have used 2−k0 ≤ 2diam(V),                    k>0 2
                                                            −k
                                                                     k ≤ 1.35 and         k>0 2
                                                                                                  −k
                                                                                                       ≤ 1 in (67), and erf
     2 Rz     2
z = √ 0 e−t /2 dt ≤ 1 in (71).
      π
Thus, if A occurs the above equation holds, implying
                                  p              p                                     x2
P[sup {⟨v, z⟩ − ⟨v0 , z⟩} ≥ 12σ(κ 2π(d + 1) + log 12κ) + 15diam(V)x] ≤ P(Ac ) ≤ 1.6e− 2σ2
  v∈V
                                                                                                  (72)
Since T is a separable process, Theorem 5.24 of Van Handel (2016) directly extends the result to
infinite/uncountable T . Letting ⟨v0 , z⟩ = 0 and noting diam(V) = supv,v′ ∈V ||v − v ′ ||2 ≤ 2 yields
the claim.

N ETS FOR B(s♮ , ∆)

Lemma 7. Suppose that ∆ < 1/κ. For any ε ∈ (0, ...], there exists an ε-net Sb for B(s♮ , ∆) of size
#Sb < (12/ε)d+1 .
At a high level, the proof of this lemma proceeds as follows: we form an ε0 net N0 for Ts♮ S, and
then set Sb = {exps♮ (v) | v ∈ N0 }. We will argue that Sb is a Cε0 -net for B(s♮ , ∆), by arguing that


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


at length scales ∆ < 1/κ, the distortion induced by the exponential map is bounded. Crucial to this
argument is the following lemma on geodesic triangles:
Lemma 8. Consider v, v ′ ∈ Ts♮ S, with ∥v∥2 = ∥v ′ ∥2 < ∆. Then if ∠(v, v ′ ) < √13 ,
                                                       √
                           dS exps♮ (v), exps♮ (v ′ ) ≤ 6 ∆ ∠(v, v ′ ).                       (73)

This lemma says that the third side of the triangle with vertices s♮ , exps♮ (v), exps♮ (v ′ ) is at most a
constant longer than the third side of an analogous triangle in Euclidean space. The proof of this is
a direct application of Toponogov’s theorem, a fundamental result in Riemannian geometry which
allows one to compare triangles in an arbitrary Riemannian manifold whose sectional curvature
is lower bounded to triangles in a constant curvature model space, where one can apply concrete
trigonometric reasoning.


Proof of Lemma 8. By Lemma 10, the sectional curvatures κs of S are uniformly bounded in terms
of the extrinsic geodesic curvature κ:
                                       κs ≥ −κ2 .                                           (74)

                                                                           ′
By Toponogov’s theorem Toponogov (2006), the length dS exps♮ (v), exps♮ (v ) , of the third side
of the geodesic triangle s♮ , exps♮ (v), exps♮ (v ′ ) is bounded by the length of the third side of a
geodesic triangles with two sides of length r = ∥v∥ = ∥v ′ ∥ and angle θ = ∠(v, v ′ ) in the constant
curvature model space M−κ2 . We can rescale, so that this third length is bounded by L/κ, where
L is the length of the third side of a geodesic triangle with two sides of length rκ and an angle of
∠(v, v ′ ), in the hyperbolic space M−1 . Using hyperbolic trigonometry (cf Fact 11 and the identity
cosh2 t − sinh2 t = 1), we have

                                cosh L = 1 + sinh2 (κr) × 1 − cos θ .                            (75)

By convexity of sinh over [0, ∞), for t ∈ [0, 1], we have sinh(t) ≤ t sinh(1), and sinh2 (t) ≤
t2 sinh2 (1) < 23 t2 ; since κr < 1, sinh2 (κr) < 23 κ2 r2 . Since cos(t) ≥ 1 − t2 for all t, we have
                                        cosh L ≤ 1 + 32 κ2 r2 θ2 .                                    (76)
Using κr < 1, for θ < √13 we have cosh(L) ≤ 32 < cosh(1). Noting that for t ∈ [0, 1],

                                   cosh(t) ≥ g(t) = 1 + 41 t2 ,                                       (77)
                                                      √
on s ∈ [0, cosh(1)], we have cosh−1 (s) ≤ g −1 (s) = 2 s − 1, giving
                                               √
                                         L ≤ 6 · κrθ.                                                 (78)
Dividing by κ gives the claimed bound.

Proof of Lemma 7. Form an (angular) ε0 -net N0 for {v ∈ Ts♮ S | ∥v∥2 = 1} satisfying
                               ∀ v ∈ Ts♮ S, ∃b                b) ≤ ε,
                                             v ∈ N0 with ∠(v, v                                       (79)
and an ε0 -net
                                   Nr = {0, ε0 , 2ε0 , . . . , ⌊∆/ε0 ⌋}                  (80)
                                                    d
for the interval [0, ∆]. We can take #N0 ≤ (3/ε0 ) and #Nr ≤ ∆/ε0 ≤ 1/ε0 . Combine these two
to form a net N for {v ∈ Ts0 S | ∥v∥2 ≤ ∆} by setting
                                                  [
                                         N=             rN0 .                            (81)
                                                  r∈Nr

Note that #N ≤ (3/ε0 )d+1 . Let Sb = {exps♮ (v) | v ∈ N }. Consider an arbitrary element s of
B(s♮ , ∆). There exists v ∈ Ts♮ S such that exps♮ (v) = s. Set

                                                  ∥v∥2
                                        v̄ = ε0          v.                              (82)
                                                   ε0

                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             b ∈ N with ∥b
There exists v           v ∥2 = ∥v̄∥2 and ∠(b
                                            v , v̄) ≤ ε0 . Note that

                                          b                b
                                                     v ) ∈ S.
                                          s = exps♮ (b                                            (83)
By Lemma 8, we have

                       dS s, b
                             s  ≤       dS s, exps♮ (v̄) + dS exps♮ (v̄), b
                                                                          s
                                    ≤   ε0 + 3∆ε0
                                    <   4ε0 .                                                     (84)
Setting ε0 = ε/4, we obtain that Sb is an ε-net for B(s♮ , ∆).

N ETS FOR THE TANGENT B UNDLE

Lemma 9. Set                 n                                       o
                          T = v | v ∈ Ts S, ∥v∥2 = 1, dS (s, s♮ ) ≤ ∆ ,                           (85)

Then there exists an ε-net Tb for T of size
                                                              2d+1
                                                       12κ
                                         #Tb ≤                       .                            (86)
                                                        ε

Proof. Let Sb be the ε0 -net for B(s♮ , ∆). By Lemma 7, there exists such a net of size at most
(12/ε0 )d+1 . For each b   b form an ε1 -net Nbs for
                       s ∈ S,
                                     n                      o
                                        v ∈ Tbs S | ∥v∥2 = 1 .                             (87)

We set                                                 [
                                                Tb =         Nbs .                                (88)
                                                       s∈S
                                                       b b
                                                  d
By ? Lemma 5.2, we can take #Nbs ≤ (3/ε1 ) , and so
                                          d    d+1
                                  b       3       12
                                 #T ≤                .                                            (89)
                                          ε1      ε0
Consider an arbitrary element v ∈ T . The vector v belongs to the tangent space Ts S for some s. By
                           s ∈ Sb with dS (s, b
construction, there exists b                  s) ≤ ε. Consider a minimal geodesic γ joining s and b  s.
We generate v̄ ∈ TsbS by parallel transporting v along γ. Let Pt,0 denote this parallel transport. By ?
Lemma 8.5, the vector field v t = Pt,0 v satisfies
                                         d
                                           v t = II γ̇(s), v t ,                                   (90)
                                        dt
where II(·, ·) is the second fundamental form. So,
                                               Z t
                                  Pt,0 v = v +     II γ̇(s), v s ds.                              (91)
                                                       0

By Lemma 4, for every s
                                          II γ̇(s), v s ≤ 3κ                                      (92)
and
                                              ∥v̄ − v∥ ≤ 3ε0 κ.                                   (93)
                                     b of Nbs with
By construction, there is an element v
                                               ∥b
                                                v − v̄∥ ≤ ε1 ,                                    (94)

and so Tb is an ε1 + 3κε0 -net for T . Setting ε1 = ε/4 and ε0 = ε/4κ completes the proof.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPORTING R ESULTS ON G EOMETRY

Lemma 10. For a Riemannian submanifold S of RD , the sectional curvatures κs (v, v ′ ) are bounded
by the extrinsic geodesic curvature κ, as
                                           κs (v, v ′ ) ≥ −κ2 .                                  (95)

Proof. Using the Gauss formula (Theorem 8.4 of ?), the Riemann curvature tensor RS of S is related
to the Riemann curvature tensor RRn of the ambient space via
        ⟨RS (u, v)v, u⟩ = ⟨RRD (u, v)v, u⟩ + ⟨II(u, v), II(u, v)⟩ − ⟨II(u, u), II(v, v)⟩
                        = ⟨II(u, v), II(u, v)⟩ − ⟨II(u, u), II(v, v)⟩
                        ≥ − ⟨II(u, u), II(v, v)⟩ ,                                               (96)
where we have used that RRD = 0 and ⟨II(u, v), II(u, v)⟩ ≥ 0. Take any v, v ′ ∈ Ts S. The sectional
curvature κs (v, v ′ ) satisfies
                             κs (v, v ′ ) = κs (u, u′ ) = ⟨RS (u, u′ )u′ , u⟩ ,                  (97)
for any orthonormal basis u, u′ for span(v, v ′ ). So
                  κs (v, v ′ ) = ⟨RS (u, u′ )u′ , u⟩ ≥ − ⟨II(u, u), II(u′ , u′ )⟩ ≥ −κ2 ,        (98)
as claimed.


Fact 11. For a hyperbolic triangle with side lengths a, b, c and corresponding (opposite) angles
A, B, C, we have
                         cosh c = cosh a cosh b − sinh a sinh b cos C.                      (99)

E    P ROOF OF R ESULT (9)

In this section, we state and prove the other part of our main claims about gradient descent:

    Theorem 12. Suppose that x = s♮ + z, with T max (z) < 1/κ. Consider the constant-
    stepping Riemannian gradient method, with initial point s0 satisfying d(s0 , s♮ ) < 1/κ, and
                  1
    step size τ = 64 .

                       d sk+1 , s♮   ≤ 1 − ε · d sk , s♮ + CT max .                        (100)

    Here, C and ε are positive numerical constants.

Together with Theorem 6,√this result shows that gradient descent rapidly converges to a neighborhood
of the truth of radius Cσ d.


Proof. Let
                                     s̄t = exp −t · grad[f ](sk )                               (101)

be a geodesic joining sk and sk+1 , with s̄0 = sk and s̄τ = sk+1 . Let f♮ denote a noise-free version
of the objective function, i.e.,
                                         f♮ (s) = − ⟨s, s♮ ⟩ ,                                  (102)
and notice that for all s,
                                 grad[f♮ ](s) = grad[f ](s) + PTs S z.                          (103)
Furthermore, following calculations in Lemma 5, on B(s♮ , 1/κ), the Riemannian hessian of f♮ is
bounded as
                                       ∥Hess[f♮ ](s)∥ ≤ 4.                               (104)


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the relationship
                                                      Z t
      grad[f♮ ](s̄t ) = Ps̄t ,s̄0 grad[f♮ ](s̄0 ) +          Ps̄t ,s̄r Hess[f♮ ](s̄r )Ps̄r ,s̄0 grad[f ](s̄0 ) dr,   (105)
                                                       r=0

where Ps̄t ,s̄0 to denote parallel transport along the curve s̄t , we obtain that

                         grad[f♮ ](s̄t ) − Ps̄t ,s̄0 grad[f♮ ](s̄0 )     ≤ 4t∥grad[f ](s̄0 )∥2 .                     (106)

Along the curve s̄t , the distance to s♮ evolves as

d                                                − logs̄t s♮
   d s̄t , s♮   = − Pt,0 grad[f ](s̄0 ),
dt                                              ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2

                             − logs̄t s♮                                               − logs̄t s♮
  =        −grad[f ](s̄t ),                  + grad[f ](s̄t ) − Pt,0 grad[f ](s̄0 ),
                            ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2                                           ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2

                             − logs̄t s♮                                                − logs̄t s♮
  ≤        −grad[f ](s̄t ),                  + grad[f♮ ](s̄t ) − Pt,0 grad[f♮ ](s̄0 ),                  + 2T max
                            ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2                                             ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2

                             − logs̄t s♮
  ≤        −grad[f ](s̄t ),                  + 4t∥grad[f ](s̄0 )∥ + 2T max
                            ∥ logs̄t s♮ ∥2

  ≤ − 21 d s̄t , s♮ + 4td s̄0 , s♮ + (3 + 4t)T max

  ≤ − 12 d s̄t , s♮ + 16    1
                              d s̄0 , s♮ + 4T max                                                             (107)

where we have used Lemma 13. Setting Xt = d(s̄t , s♮ ), we have

                                                      Ẋt ≤ − 41 Xt                                                  (108)

whenever Xt ≥ 14 X0 + 16T max . Hence,
                                            n τ                       o
                                    Xτ ≤ max e− 4 X0 , 41 X0 + 16T max ,                                             (109)

and so
                                                                 k
                          d sk+1 , s♮   ≤                 1
                                                   exp − 256  · d s , s♮ + 16T max ,                                 (110)

as claimed.



E.1     S UPPORTING L EMMAS

Lemma 13. Suppose that ∆ < 1/κ. For all s ∈ B(s♮ , ∆), we have

                                    − logs s♮
                     −grad[f ](s),                ≤ − 12 d(s, s♮ ) + T max .                                         (111)
                                   ∥ logs s♮ ∥2

Proof. Notice that

                               − logs s♮                                               − logs s♮
                −grad[f ](s),                =                      PTs S (s♮ + z),
                              ∥ logs s♮ ∥2                                            ∥ logs s♮ ∥2

                                                                                − logs s♮
                                                            ≤       PTs S s♮ ,                + T max .              (112)
                                                                               ∥ logs s♮ ∥2
Consider a unit speed geodesic γ joining s♮ and s, with γ(0) = s♮ and γ(t) = s♮ . Then
                                                 − logs s♮
                                                             = γ̇(t),                                                (113)
                                                ∥ logs s♮ ∥2

                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and

                                 − logs s♮
                   PTs S s♮ ,                      = ⟨γ(0), γ̇(t)⟩
                                ∥ logs s♮ ∥2
                                                                       Z t
                                                   = ⟨γ(t), γ̇(t)⟩ −         ⟨γ̇(s), γ̇(t)⟩ ds
                                                       this term = 0     0
                                                                       Z tZ s
                                                   = −t∥γ̇(t)∥22 −               ⟨γ̈(r), γ̇(t)⟩ dr ds
                                                                        0    t
                                                   ≤   −d(s, s♮ ) + 21 κd2 (s, s♮ ).                    (114)
In particular, this term is bounded by − 12 d(s, s♮ ) when ∆ < 1/κ.
Lemma 14. For s ∈ B(s♮ , ∆), we have

                                         grad[f ](s) ≤ d(s, s♮ ) + T max                                (115)

Proof. Notice that

                                    grad[f ](s)        =    PTs S (s♮ + z)

                                                       ≤    PTs S s♮ + T max

                                                       ≤    PTs SD−1 s♮ + T max
                                                       =   sin ∠(s, s♮ ) + T max
                                                       ≤   dSD−1 (s, s♮ ) + T max ,
                                                       ≤   dS (s, s♮ ) + T max ,                        (116)
as claimed.

F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
F.1   G RAVITATIONAL WAVE G ENERATION

Below we introduce some details on Gravitational Wave data generation. Synthetic gravitational
waveforms are generated with the PyCBC package Nitz et al. (2023) with masses uniformly drawn
from [20, 50] (times solar mass M⊙ ) and 3-dimensional spins drawn from a uniform distribution over
the unit ball, at sampling rate 2048Hz. Each waveform is padded or truncated to 1 second long such
that the peak is aligned at the 0.9 second location, and then normalized to have unit ℓ2 norm. Noise is
simulated as iid Gaussian with standard deviation σ = 0.1. The signal amplitude is constant a = 1.
The training set contains 100,000 noisy waveforms, the test set contains 10,000 noisy waveforms and
pure noise each, and a separate validation set constructed iid as the test set is used to select optimal
template banks for MF.

F.2   H ANDWRITTEN D IGIT R ECOGNITION E XPERIMENT S ETUP

The MNIST training set contains 6,131 images of the digit 3. In particular, we create a training
set containing 10,000 images of randomly transformed digit 3 from the MNIST training set, and a
test set containing 10,000 images each of randomly transformed digit 3 and other digits from the
MNIST test set. We select a random subset of 1,000 embedded points as the quantization Ξ̂ of the
parameter space, and construct a k-d tree from it to perform efficient nearest neighbor search for
kernel interpolation. Parameters of the trainable TpopT are initialized using heuristics based on the
Jacobians, step sizes and smoothing levels from the unrolled optimization, similar to the previous
experiment. ξ 0 is initialized at the center of the embedding space. We use the Adam optimizer with
batch size 100 and constant learning rate 10−3 .


                                                           24
