Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O UTLIERS M EMORIZED L AST:
T RENDS IN M EMORIZATION OF D IFFUSION M ODELS
BASED ON T RAINING D ISTRIBUTION AND E POCH
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Memorization and replication of training data in diffusion models like Stable Dif-
         fusion is a poorly understood phenomenon with a number of privacy and legal is-
         sues tied to it. This paper analyzes how the location of a data point in the training
         dataset’s distribution affects its likelihood of memorization over training epochs.
         Importantly, it finds that memorization of ’outliers’ is less likely early in the train-
         ing process until eventually matching with the rest of the dataset. It then suggests
         applications utilizing this difference in memorization rate, including hyperparam-
         eter tuning and anomaly detection. It then suggests research that could be done
         from this conclusion to further improve memorization understanding.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models are a class of generative neural networks that utilize iterative denoising on a sam-
ple from a trained distribution in order to produce an image.Ho and et al. (2020) They are a rapidly
emerging model in computer vision, with Open Diffusion, Imagen, and DALLE-2 being notable
examples. However, these large-scale models have a well-documented issue: memorizing and re-
producing individual training examples.Carlini and et al. (2023) This violates all guarantees of pri-
vacy and causes a number of issues related to copywriting and “digital forgery”.Somepalli and et al.
(2022) In this paper, I seek to better understand this phenomenon as it relates to their training distri-
bution. By training a two-feature toy diffusion model hundreds of times with a variety of different
distributions, I was able to measure memorization over epochs at the tail vs. the head of the training
distribution. I found clear differences in the rates of memorization between the two. Specifically,
training examples at the tail/outlier of the training distribution were memorized at a slower rate early
in the training process.

2   RELATED WORK
In terms of memorization being researched with respect to outliers, the most relevant work is that
of Vitaly Feldman.Feldman (2021) This paper, while making interesting connections between learn-
ing and memorization of atypical examples, does not explore the relationship with respect to the
training process. There does exist research on the distinction between memorization of near dupli-
cates and the rest of the distribution, with findings showing that they are on average memorized at
a higher rate.Carlini and et al. (2023) It is also important to note a clear distinction has been found
between memorization and overfitting. Memorization has been identified as a separate phenomenon
altogether.Neyshabur et al. (2017) However, there do not seem to be any papers that explore the
relationship between memorization and the training process itself over epochs. This paper aims to
begin filling that gap.

3   DEFINITIONS
In order to better understand this phenomenon, I had to make a number of assumpitons in the form
of definitions of the metric of memorization and our seperation of the training distribution.They are
listed below.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   M EMORIZATION

It is increadibly difficult to perfectly encapsulate memorization using a metric. While previous
metrics have used black box extraction (Carlini and et al. (2023)), memorization is defined here
using a more intuitive reasoning. It can be argued that examples that closely fit a training example
while being far from any test example is memorized, since rather than being generalized to the
distribution it is replicating the training example. Therefore, we define memorization as follows:
A generated example is memorized if it is much closer(as defined by a 2:1 ratio) to its closest
training example than its closest test example.

3.2   I NLIERS

Inliers are defined as the majority of the training distribution. In the case of the toy diffusion model,
this is the entire original training set without the injected outliers or near duplicates.

3.3   O UTLIERS

Outliers aim to represent the tail of the distribution. Here, they are defined as training examples
injected into the training set that are far from the original distribution. This is done for the toy
dataset by generating a random cluster of points that are 2 standard deviations from the mean of the
original distribution.

3.4   N EAR D UPLICATES

Duplicates are defined as training examples that are very close or at the same position as each other.
This is done by sampling random samples in the original distribution and adding points equal to
those samples.

4     EXPERIMENT
My aim was to determine if the following was true: Diffusion models memorize more dupli-
cates(as placed into the dataset) at an earlier training epoch while memorizing outliers (as
placed into the dataset) at later epochs. To set up the experiment, I trained a diffusion model on
a toy dataset with two features. The initial skeleton for the model was taken from(Tanelp (2023)).
This public github repo features a very simple toy model that was easy to train and iterate on. This
dataset was a mixture of two moons with a small amount of noise. By adjusting hyperparameters, I
was able to induce a high rate of memorization in the initial model. It is currently not directly linked
due to anonymity rules. I then trained models with the same hyperparameters, except I injected a
set amount of outliers and near duplicates as defined above into the training set. At the beginning of
each training epoch, I also had the model generate a set of examples of the same size as the training
set. After training, these generated sets at each epoch were tested for memorization. This was done
using FAISS to determine, for each generated point, the samples they were closest to in both the test
and training set. If the closest training sample was significantly closer than the closest test sample,
it was considered memorized, as per the definition above. At each epoch of training, I generated
examples equal to the training set size. Each generated example was then compared to all training
and test examples to find the closest to each at the given epoch. These closest points where then
used to identify a memorized point as defined in the previous section. The memorized points at each
epoch were then classified by whether they were an injected near duplicate, an injected outlier, or an
already existing inlier. These statistics were then used to plot the graphs depicted below.

4.1   P ERCENTAGE OF M EMORIZATION OVER E POCHS

These graphs show the percentage of memorized points as a fraction of the total size of the generated
set, mapped over each epoch, with varied amounts of injected outliers,injected near duplicates, and
epochs. This expirement was tested with these same paramaters 10 times each, with random training
distributions as defined above each time. Similiar results with the same general trends were seen.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: 400 Inliers/400 Outliers Injected, 400 Epochs, 20000 Dataset Size, 1.5 Ratio Between Test
and Train Data For Determining Memorization


Figure 2: 200 Inliers/200 Outliers Injected, 800 Epochs, 20000 Dataset Size, 1.5 Ratio Between Test
and Train Data For Determining Memorization


                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: 100 Inliers/100 Outliers Injected, 800 Epochs, 10000 Dataset Size, 1.5 Ratio Between Test
and Train Data For Determining Memorization


Figure 4: 100 Inliers/100 Outliers Injected, 10 Epochs, 10000 Dataset Size, 1.5 Ratio Between Test
and Train Data For Determining Memorization


                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
Through all the data, a common trend can be seen: memorization of injected outliers happens later
than the rest of the distribution. This difference is also universal with changes to the thresholds,
injection size, and training data size. This is a property of the training process itself, and not the
model. This trend is an important step forward in our understanding of memorization in diffusion
models, while also opening up potential useful applications in anomaly detection and tuning.

5.1   A PPLICATIONS

Outliers being memorized later help in identifying images with uniform outlier features: images
with watermarks, for example, tend to be a large outlier cluster, especially if the distribution is dif-
ferentiated over a focused subset of features. By identify the group of examples that are memorized
later than the rest of the distribution, we would be able to identfiy and parse watermarks through a
diffusion model training proccess. Tuning hyperparameters based on the memorization of outliers
could also be useful for fine-tuning GANs. Outliers beginning to be memorized could be an indica-
tor for overfitting starting, allowing early stops: if data you know is an outlier start to be memorized
early stop.

6     L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
This experiment has yet to be done on anything beyond the toy diffusion dataset and thus requires
testing on more varied distributions, as well as datasets with more features. Testing to see if this is
a property of the training process or the model itself is highest in importance. Doing so will require
a more computationally efficient method of identifying memorization, as doing the closest point
comparisons would not scale to large models. Another important step would be finding what the
relationship between model generation quality and memorization is, in order to understand how this
property relates to model learning.

7     R EFERENCES

R EFERENCES
Carlini, N. and et al. (2023). Extracting training data from diffusion models. arXiv.org.
Feldman, V. (2021). Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. arXiv.org.
Ho, J. and et al. (2020). Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv.org.
Neyshabur, B., Bhojanapalli, S., McAllester, D., and Srebro, N. (2017). Exploring generalization in
  deep learning. CoRR, abs/1706.08947.
Somepalli, G. and et al. (2022). Diffusion art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in
  diffusion models. arXiv.org.
Tanelp (2023). Tanelp/tiny-diffusion: A minimal pytorch implementation of probabilistic diffusion
  models for 2d datasets.


                                                   5
