Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Designing Skill-Compatible AI:
    Methodologies and Frameworks in Chess
   Karim Hamade                    Reid McIlroy-Young                    Siddhartha Sen
  kar@cs.toronto.edu               reidmcy@cs.toronto.edu              sidsen@microsoft.com
 University of Toronto              University of Toronto                Microsoft Research

                      Jon Kleinberg          Ashton Anderson
                   kleinberg@cornell.edu    ashton@cs.toronto.edu
                     Cornell University      University of Toronto



                                        Abstract

        Powerful artificial intelligence systems are often used in settings where they
        must interact with agents that are computationally much weaker, for example
        when they work alongside humans or operate in complex environments
        where some tasks are handled by algorithms, heuristics, or other entities
        of varying computational power. For AI agents to successfully interact in
        these settings, however, achieving superhuman performance alone is not
        sufficient; they also need to account for suboptimal actions or idiosyncratic
        style from their less-skilled counterparts. We propose a formal evaluation
        framework for assessing the compatibility of near-optimal AI with interaction
        partners who may have much lower levels of skill; we use popular collaborative
        chess variants as model systems to study and develop AI agents that can
        successfully interact with lower-skill entities. Traditional chess engines
        designed to output near-optimal moves prove to be inadequate partners when
        paired with engines of various lower skill levels in this domain, as they are
        not designed to consider the presence of other agents. We contribute three
        methodologies to explicitly create skill-compatible AI agents in complex
        decision-making settings, and two chess game frameworks designed to foster
        collaboration between powerful AI agents and less-skilled partners. On
        these frameworks, our agents outperform state-of-the-art chess AI (based on
        AlphaZero) despite being weaker in conventional chess, demonstrating that
        skill-compatibility is a tangible trait that is qualitatively and measurably
        distinct from raw performance. Our evaluations further explore and clarify
        the mechanisms by which our agents achieve skill-compatibility.


1   Introduction

As AI achieves superhuman performance in an increasing number of areas, a recurring theme
is that its behavior can be incomprehensible to agents of lower skill levels, or incompatible
with their behavior. Game-playing is a familiar instance of this; it is well-understood, for
example, that modern chess engines play in a style that is often alien to even the best human
players, to the extent that calling out “engine moves” (actions only computers would take)
is a staple of professional commentary. It is also standard practice for human players to use
moves outputted by chess engines as recommendations for their own play, only to find that
they cannot successfully follow them up. In a way, chess AI (which is "near-optimal") and
human players (as examples of less-skilled agents) "speak" very different dialects that are
often not mutually intelligible. This lack of compatibility leads to failures when less skilled
agents interact with optimal ones, in settings where the less-skilled parties may be humans
interacting with powerful AI systems, or simple heuristics interacting with much stronger ones.
Given this state of affairs, an important open question in any given domain is how to achieve
AI performance that is both high-level and compatible with agents of lower skill. How might
we accomplish this, and how would we know when we’ve succeeded?


                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this work, we propose a training paradigm to create AI agents that combine strong
performance with skill-compatibility, we use our paradigm to train several skill-compatible
agents, and we illustrate their effectiveness on two novel chess tasks. Our paradigm is based on
the following idea: skill-compatible agents should still achieve a very high level of performance,
but in such a way that if they are interrupted at any point in time and replaced with a much
weaker agent, the weaker agent should be able to take over from the current state and still
perform well. We enforce a high level of performance by testing in an adversarial environment
where the opponent might have superhuman abilities, and we encourage robustness against
interruption and replacement by a weaker agent in chess (skill-compatibility) in two different
ways: independently at random after each move; and by decomposing individual moves into
a selection of a piece type and a subsequent selection of a move using that piece type, following
the popular chess variant known as “hand and brain.”
This interruption framework thus provides computationally powerful agents with an objective
function that balances two distinct goals: (i) it dissuades them from playing incompatible
“engine moves,” since such moves may strand a weaker agent in a state where it can’t find
a good next action even when one exists, but (ii) it still promotes high performance since
the goal is to win games despite interruptions from weaker counterparts. Our paradigm
thus suggests a strong and measurable notion of the interpretability of a powerful agent’s
actions: the actions are interpretable (and skill-compatible) in our sense if and only if a weaker
agent can find an effective way to follow up on them. This grounding is particularly useful
in complex settings such as our motivating domain of chess which contains actions where there
might be no succinct "explanation" (we know this both in practice, and also theoretically from
the fact that general game-tree evaluation is believed to be outside the complexity class NP.)

2     Background and Related Work
Chess and AI. Chess has a long history in AI research Shannon (1950), with milestones
including Deep Blue Campbell (1999), followed by superhuman performance on commodity
hardware, and more recently AlphaZero and its follow-ups Silver et al. (2016); Schrittwieser
et al. (2020). More recent work on the relation of algorithmically-generated chess moves to
human behavior play an important role in our work McGrath et al. (2022); McIlroy-Young
et al. (2020); Anderson et al. (2017); Maharaj et al. (2022).
Human-AI collaboration. Recent work has studied human-AI collaboration in a
multi-agent scenario, where an AI agent and a weaker human agent work alongside each
other to complete a task Carroll et al. (2019); Strouse et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2022). One
distinction from our work is their notion of compatibility, where the focus has been on agents
working simultaneously on related tasks; in contrast, a central feature of our framework is
that the compatibility is inter-temporal, with the design goal that a less-skilled agent should
be able to take over at any point from the partially completed state of the AI agent’s progress.
Opponent modeling. Agents that interact with humans have made great strides in per-
formance by modeling other human actors Bard et al. (2019), whether by modeling opponents
as an optimal player (Perolat et al., 2022; Gray et al., 2020; Brown & Sandholm, 2018), or
by building agents that communicate and collaborate with other human players in multiplayer
games (Vinyals et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021; (FAIR)† et al., 2022). Several prior works explore
from a strict adversarial, non-collaborative perspective the use of MCTS to exploit suboptimal
play safely, in strong agents (Wang et al., 2022; Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2015).

2.1   Chess engines

We select chess as our model system due to the ready availability of both superhuman AI
agents and AI agents designed to emulate lower-skilled human players, the complexity of the
decision-making task, and the need for more understandable game AI agents that others can
interact with. We list the existing engines that we make use of in our work.
leela. leela Lyashuk & et al (2023) is an open source version of AlphaZero Silver et al. (2018),
a deep RL agent that consists of a neural network that evaluates boards (value) and suggests
moves (policy) Silver et al. (2016), both of which are used to guide a Monte Carlo Tree Search


                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Team 1                   D                   E        Team 2         Team 1             n                   o        Team 2
                                    S1 S2                                                          S1 S2
          S1                        J1 J2                         S2          S1                   J1 J2                         S2
              e5                                                 e4
                        8
                          rmblkans                                                     8
                                                                                          rmblkans
                        7
                          opopopop                                                     7
                                                                                          opopopop
          X        e5   6
                          0Z0Z0Z0Z                                X             N      6
                                                                                          0Z0Z0Z0Z                               p
                        5
                          Z0Z0Z0Z0                          d4                          5
                                                                                          Z0Z0Z0Z0
              d5
                        4
                          0Z0O0Z0Z                               d4
                                                                                    Nc6 4 0Z0ZPZ0Z
                        3
                          Z0Z0Z0Z0                                                      3
                                                                                          Z0Z0Z0Z0                         pe4
                        2
                          POPZPOPO                                                      2
                                                                                          POPO0OPO
          J1            1
                          SNAQJBMR
                            a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h
                                                                  J2          J1        1
                                                                                          SNAQJBMR
                                                                                           a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h
                                                                                                                                 J2

    Figure 1: Stochastic Tag Team Framework                                Figure 2: Hand and Brain Framework


(MCTS) algorithmto select the next action Jacob et al. (2022); Grill et al. (2020). The network
is trained using repeated iterations of self-play followed by back-propagation. We use a small
version of leela as the superhuman engine in our tests and as our baseline for comparison.
maia. The maia engines McIlroy-Young et al. (2020; 2022) are a set of human-like chess engines
that capture human style at targeted skill levels. They are trained as a classification task on tens
of millions of human games at a specified skill level, and as such maia does not use MCTS during
play. Most of our work uses the weakest version, maia 1100, which was trained on games from
1100-rated players—those roughly in the 20th percentile of skill—on the open-source online
chess platform lichess.org. maia serves as the instantiation of sub-optimal, lower-skilled agents.


3     Methodology

3.1    Chess frameworks

Our goal is to develop chess agents that can behave in inherently skill-compatible ways, much
like skilled coaches tailor their actions to suit their students. In this work, we approach this task
via two proxy frameworks in which our engine “coaches”, or seniors, interact collaboratively
with weaker “students”, or juniors. There are two natural ways in which this collaboration
could take place within a sequential game setup: the seniors and juniors could alternate
between who takes the current action, or the seniors and juniors could collaboratively construct
each action. Our two frameworks follow these two directions to enable cooperation within
a chess game, suiting our experimental purpose of designing and evaluating skill-compatible
agents. The former can be likened to self-driving cars, where AI needs to be ready for a
hand-off to humans at a moment’s notice, whereas the latter resembles automatic stock
picking strategies where potential candidates are filtered by AI for humans to make final picks.
Note that both frameworks incorporate a strong and weak engine jointly in control of a single
color, and incorporate an element of stochasticity to preclude perfect prediction strategies
by agents that skirt the objective of achieving compatibility. We will generally refer to our
agents as playing the Focal roles against a team of opponent agents playing the Alter roles.
Stochastic Tag Team (STT ). The STT setup consists of two teams, each in control of
a color on the chessboard. A team consists of two agents, the junior teammate, which is
generally maia, and the senior teammate, which is generally a stronger engine (e.g. leela,
or the engines we design). Prior to each move, Nature flips a fair coin to determine whether
the junior or senior makes the move, with no consultation with any other party allowed. This
setting introduces a cooperative aspect to chess, since a senior will need to be prepared for
the possibility that a weaker junior might be making the next move. At the same time, the
senior will need to play at a high level of chess, since the opponent senior will also be playing
at a high level, and it will simultaneously need to attempt to exploit the weaknesses in the
opponent junior. The ST T framework thus allows us to explore scenarios where teammates
and opponents can be both high-skilled and low-skilled, and the high-skilled AI is required
to both perform at a high level and account for low-skill involvement inD both teams. E       See
Figure 1. We use the following tuple to denote a game played under ST T : J1 J2 , where S1
                                                                               S1 S2

is the senior engine on the white team, J1 the junior engine on the white team, S2 the senior
engine on the black team, and J2 the junior engine on the black team. Note that while the first


                                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


team is technically white and the second team black in this notation, we abuse the notation to
indicate multiple games played between these two teams, alternating between black and white.
Hand and Brain (HB). This cooperative setup, which has witnessed a massive increase in in-
terest by grandmasters (GMs) and amateurs alike in recent years, also consists of two teams, each
in control of a color on the chessboard. A team consists of two agents, the brain agent (always
the stronger agent in our case), which selects the piece type to be moved (e.g., knight N), and the
hand (maia agent in our case), which then selects the specific piece and move to make given the
brain’s selection (e.g., move the knight on g1 to f3). See Figure 2. GM Hikaru Nakamura stated
that as the brain playing with a weaker hand, he often picks sub-optimal moves he finds more
suitable for his hand partner Nakamura (2021), which is in the spirit of our work. In contrast to
the previous framework, this framework exemplifies scenarios where the stronger agent “nudges”
the weaker agent, narrowing their action space, whichn thenomakes the action. We will use the fol-
lowing tuple to denote a game played under HB: H       B1 B2 , where H1 and B1 are the hand and
                                                         1 H2


brain agents on the white team, and H2 and B2 are the hand and brain agents on the black team.
In our work, the brain will always be the stronger agent, and the hand the weaker engine that
chooses a move (stochastically from its distribution, to induce some randomness and ensure the
brains aren’t able to perfectly predict their decision) conditioned on the brain’s piece-type choice.


3.2   Methodologies to create skill-compatible seniors

We contribute three methodologies to create agents that outperform superhuman chess
engines (leela) in these two skill-compatibility frameworks. We emphasize that we are not
aiming to improve upon state-of-the-art chess engines. Instead, we are interested in designing
skill-compatible chess AI that can productively interact with weaker agents.
Tree agent. Our first agent is the maia engine augmented with MCTS. By exploring future
game states based solely on maia’s policies and values, the Tree agent inherently takes its
junior’s propensities into account when deciding what move to make. Notably, this agent only
requires a maia model and does not rely on a superhuman agent. It is also framework-agnostic
and thus implemented identically for both frameworks. In HB, the tree agent’s output is
filtered to only convey the piece type, as mentioned above.
Expector agent. We introduce a type of gold standard agent that conforms to the exact
setting of the frameworks. The expector agent has access to models of juniors/hands, and
maximizes its expected win probability w over a short time horizon given the identities of
the seniors and juniors. For ST T , it simulates all possible
                                                              bitstrings 2 plies into the future,
selecting the move m = argmax Es∈{00,01,10,11} [w|(m,s)] ; and for HB it selects the piece
                              m
that maximizes its expected win probability  over maia’s distribution of moves conditioned
on that piece (Dp ): p = argmax Em∈Dp [w|m] . In the former case it requires a model of the
                             p
other three agents in the game to perform the simulation, and in the latter case it also needs
a model of its own hand to obtain the distribution Dp . In both cases, it requires access to
a strong agent to compute the win probabilities that the expectation is maximizing. Although
it requires no training, playing moves is expensive due to calls to multiple chess engines and
evaluations of the current board state. The version of the expector designed for ST T will
be denoted as expt , and the one designed for HB will be denoted as exph .
Attuned agent. The attuned agent is a self-play RL agent that directly learns from playing
in the two frameworks. In contrast to learning from self-play in conventional chess, as leela
does, the attuned agents are created by generating games from self-play of leela and maia
teams in both frameworks. With a small training set, this method is essentially a fine-tuning
procedure for leela that takes into account maia’s interventions, rather than training a chess
engine from scratch. The Supplement includes full training details. This methodology is the
most practical of the three in its ability to be modified and generalize, and lies somewhere
between the rigidity of tree and the specificity of exp. However, it is the only agent of the
three we introduced that requires training. The version of the attuned agent trained on ST T
will be denoted as attt , and the one trained on HB will be denoted as atth . In HB, similar
to the tree agent, we only take the piece of the outputted move.


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 1: Game Results for all agents ST T and HB

                          ST T                                    HB
               Game Setup tree expt                     attt maia tree               exph atth maia
               focal leela
               maia | maia   56.5 66.5  **         **
                                                        55.0 7.5 60.0
                                                             **      *          **
                                                                                     56.5** 55.0** 27.5*
               focal | leela 0.5** 14.0*                12.5* 0.0** 0.5**            N/A 4.5 * 0.0**
    ** ≤ ±0.5, * ≤ ±1.5, see appendix for full error ranges. Note that exph doesn’t output moves, so can’t play leela directly.


4     Experiments

4.1    Agent strength in each framework

Our foremost goal is to quantify the objective performance of each agent on each framework.
Are they better at playing with weaker partners than state-of-the-art chess AI—that is, are they
skill-compatible? Here, we use maia1100 as the junior and hand agent for all analyses, and the
three methodologies will accordingly make use of maia1100 as a base model to guide the search
for tree, as a junior to guide the look-ahead for exp, and in the creation of the training dataset
for att. Our evaluation metric is the win-share over games, which is defined as (W +D/2)
                                                                                      n    , where
W is the number of wins, D the number of draws, and 1000 ≤ n ≤ 10000 the number of games,
from the perspective of the focal team. Equally-matched agents will each score a win-share of
50%, and scoring above 50% indicates a victory. We compute the standard error by treating the
experiments as random samples from a trinomial distribution, as detailed in the Supplement.
Tables 1 shows the results for all three agents on both frameworks ST T and HB respectively.
As shown in the first row, which documents the performance of our focal agents in matchups
against the state-of-the-art chess AI leela in our frameworks, all of our methodologies achieve
a winning score (>50%) in both frameworks. In ST T , the expt agents that perform a short
look-ahead (66%) tend to dominate, and in HB it is the tree agent that scores the highest
(60%). Our main result is that all three methodologies produce agents that play well and
more intelligibly to weaker partners than state-of-the-art chess AI.
In order to validate that our focal agents are achieving their gains by explicitly accounting for
the presence of the weaker partners, we eliminate the two most pressing potential confounders.
The first hypothesis we rule out is that our focal agents are simply stronger than leela, which
the second row in Tables 1 shows is evidently not the case. In fact, they are significantly weaker,
losing most of their games to leela in head-to-head regular-chess matchups. tree performs
particularly poorly (<1%), likely because it is unrelated to leela’s weights, unlike exp and
att. It is striking that tree outperforms att on the ST T and HB despite being significantly
weaker, indicating that it must compensate with larger adaptation to and synergy with its
lower-skilled partner. The second hypothesis we rule out is whether leela is a particularly bad
senior/brain due to its strength, and our focals are better at adapting to their hands/brains
simply because they are weaker and more similar to them. Replacing our focals with maia
as a senior/hand (the most similar, weakest possible senior/brain) refutes this idea (see last
column). We note that, while att and exp are weaker than leela, they still achieve non-trivial
scores (>10%) in regular chess versus leela, indicating they are still strong chess agents.
We have established our central result: Our focal agents are objectively weaker than standard
state-of-the-art AI, but their compatibility with maia is more than sufficient to defeat leela
in both collaborative frameworks. We now investigate the mechanisms of skill-compatibility.

4.2    Mechanisms of achieving skill-compatibility in STT

How do our agents achieve skill-compatibility? In this section, we answer this question by
analyzing agent behavior at the individual move level. We define the win probability loss of a
move, which measures the degree to which any given move is sub-optimal. Notice that any chess
move is either optimal, meaning it preserves the win probability of the previous position (as
evaluated by a strong engine such as leela), or is sub-optimal, meaning it degrades the agent’s
win probability by a certain amount. We will define the win probability loss of a move, or simply


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table 2: Average losses for agents in ST T .

Agent                           Gt         Ge          Ga           Agent                 Gt      Ge       Ga
leela                           1.15**     1.16**      1.17**       maial                 4.46*   4.21*    4.19**
focal                           1.91**     1.37**      1.43**       maiaf                 3.57*   3.37**   3.77**
∆Gf (leela, focal,∗)            -0.76**
                                           -0.21**
                                                       -0.26**
                                                                    ∆Gf (maial , maiaf ,∗) 0.89
                                                                                              *
                                                                                                  0.84*
                                                                                                           0.42*
∆Gf (teamL , teamF ,∗) 0.13          *
                                           0.63  *
                                                       0.16    **

   ** ≤ ±0.02, * ≤ ±0.04, see appendix for full error ranges


                         Table 3: Different effects of seniors on juniors
  in ST T . Effects that are stronger (p<0.05) than that of the opposing senior are in bold.

                                             Gt                        Ge                 Ga
  Agent                                      leela tree                leela exp          leela att
  Tricking :                                 -0.03** 0.54**            -0.27** 1.38**     -0.01** 0.25**
  Helping (Interceding Junior):              0.26*      0.36*          0.30**    0.61**   0.34**    0.21**
  Helping (Interceding Senior):              0.15 *
                                                        0.46*          0.12*
                                                                                 1.88**   0.20**
                                                                                                    0.25**
  Indirect:                                         0.56*                   -0.18**            0.37**

   ** ≤ ±0.07, * ≤ ±0.11, see appendix for full error ranges


the loss, as the difference in the win probability of the board following the move to the win
probability of the board preceding it. It ranges from 0 to 100. Given an agent A and a condition
C on moves played by A from a set of games Gf , we define a mean value LGf (A,C) as follows:
                    m∈S Loss(m) where S = {m ∈ Gf |m satisfies C and m is played by A}. To
                1
                  P
LGf (A,C) = |S|
compare losses between agents A1 and A2 , we define ∆Gf (A1 ,A2 ,C) = LGf (A1 ,C)−LGf (A2 ,C),
where setting C = ∗ means taking all moves.
                                                                            D             E
For this section, we will be referring to agents as they appear in the tuple maia
                                                                              focal leela
                                                                                  f maial
                                                                                           , where
focal refers to one of tree, expt , or attt ; leela denotes leela playing as the alter; maiaf
refers to the Focal team’s junior maia agent, and maial refers to the Alter team’s junior maia
agent. Note that maiaf and maial are both maia1100 agents. We will refer to this tuple
as Gf for simplicity, with f being the starting letter of the corresponding focal. All agents
and games in this section are in ST T , so we omit the specifying subscript.


4.2.1    General effects on junior performance

Table 2 shows the average loss by the agents involved at every move from the games played in STT.
For all focal agents, we have LGf (focal,∗) > LGf (leela,∗), yet LGf (maiaf ,∗) < LGf (maiaL ,∗).
This is a more granular, move-level statement of our central result: our focal engines sacrifice
some optimality for the ability to influence and be skill-compatible with the sub-optimal
agents they are interacting with.
Note also that LGt (tree,∗) > LGa (att,∗), yet ∆Gt (maial ,maiaf ,∗) > ∆Ga (maial ,maiaf ,∗),
implying tree’s results are more dependent on influencing the juniors present in the game.
exp combines low absolute ∆Ge (focal,leela,∗) with higher ∆Ge (maial ,maiaf ,∗) to get the
best overall team loss difference among the three agents, which explains its higher score in
the main evaluations.
To compare how these findings vary with position strength, we plot ∆Gf (maial ,maiaf ,i),
where i stipulates the moves originate from boards where the probability of winning is equal to
i (Figure 4). For all focal engines, the gap is increasing in i: the closer the board is to winning,
the more maiaf outperforms maial . Winning boards are thus more critical, where the junior’s
moves have a chance to throw the game, compared to losing situations where the junior cannot
bring about large positive changes to the evaluation.


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                       4
                       6             1               att                                                                             exp              tree           att


                                                                                               ∆Gt (maial ,maiaf ,i)
Ratio focal vs leela
                                     exp             tree
                                                                                                                       2
                       4


                       2                                                                                               0


                           [0, 1]          [1, 5]       [5, 10]     [10, 50]   [50, 100]                                   [0, 20]         [20, 40]     [40, 60]     [60, 80]   [80, 100]
                                               Range of loss magnitude                                                                         Board Win Probability (i)


       Figure 3: Ratio of probability of excess         Figure 4: ∆Gf (maial , maiaf ) as
    loss induction over different loss magnitudes a function of different board win probabilities


4.2.2                               Tricking, Helping, and Indirect Effects in ST T
Having established that our focal agents induce a gap between maiaf and maial performance,
we investigate three possible mechanisms by which they can achieve this: an immediate
“tricking” effect, which we define as an induction of loss in maial over a 1-ply horizon (the
alter junior’s next move), an immediate “helping” effect, which we define as reduction of loss
in maiaf over a 2-ply horizon (the focal junior’s next move), and finally an indirect effect
that cannot be measured over these short horizons (for example, early choices that impact
how the game unfolds many moves into the future).
The chief difficulty of comparing the focals’ effect on the juniors to that of leela on the juniors
in the games played is that direct comparison would be potentially confounded by the different
board distributions the opposing teams faced. We deal with the different distributions using two
distinct methods detailed in the appendix. We present in table 3 the main results derived from
the first method. Bold values indicates that the senior exhibits the effect in question. All agents
display some tricking effect, with the magnitude being largest for exp (1.38) and smallest for att
(0.25). We do not observe a helping effect for att, but do so for the other focals. In particular,
the helping effect for exp is dramatically higher the when opponent leela intercedes (1.88 vs
0.61), and we believe this is due to the agent’s preference for tricking the opponent junior when
it intercedes instead of helping its own junior down the horizon. Finally, exp has no beneficial
indirect effect on the juniors (meaning longer than its optimization horizon of 2 plies), whereas
the tree and att have a measurable indirect effect even when they do not precede the juniors.
Additionally, extra analysis in the supplement suggests that this indirect effect is more important
than the tricking effect for these engines. These results demonstrate that there are multiple ways
to influence the juniors, and the strongest agent, exp, distinguishes itself by a complete lack
of a beneficial indirect effect in favour of strong immediate effects, both helping and tricking.

4.3                          Mechanisms of achieving skill-compatibility in HB
                                                                               n               o
We now turn to the HB framework. Note that Gf now refers to the tuple maia        focal leela
                                                                                       f maial
                                                                                                ,
and agents without subscript will be referring to those created for the HB framework. We
examine the effect of our focal agents (playing as brain) on the maia agents (playing as hand),
and focus on two mechanisms: intra-team effects, where the brain picks a piece that causes
maia to pick a better/worse move than it would have without interference, and inter-team
effects, where the teams affect each other.
We first examine intra-team effects by computing the savings, the difference between the loss
of the team’s actual move played to the loss of the move maia would have selected without
interference from the brain agent. Interestingly, Table 4 shows that exp is the only brain
exhibiting such an effect (0.3%), which is natural as it has been explicitly instructed to minimize
the expected loss of its hand. tree, which is the best performing agent in the framework,
actually has negative savings (-0.2%), meaning its influence is causing its own hand to play worse
moves. To analyze results more closely, we inspect the interaction between hands and brains.
There are four key hand-brain interactions: agreement (same move chosen), blindsiding
(different moves but same piece-type, allowing the hand’s move), correction (hand resamples to


                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Comparison of team loss to hypothetical maia loss without brain in HB. Better in bold.

                 Gt                      Ge                          Ga                   maia as focal

                   leela        tree          leela         exp        leela      att      leela     maia
                   maial       maiaf          maial        maiaf       maial     maiaf     maial     maiaf
  True loss      3.76**       3.55**        3.44**       3.33**      3.61**     3.50**    3.73*    4.25*
  maia loss      3.75**       3.29**        3.40**       3.62**      3.59**     3.43**    3.39*    3.60*
  Savings   -0.01      **
                              -0.22**
                                            -0.04 **
                                                         0.3 **
                                                                     -0.02 **
                                                                                -0.07**
                                                                                          -0.32*
                                                                                                   -0.65*

   ** ≤ ±0.03, * ≤ ±0.07, see appendix for full error ranges


match the brain’s different piece-type move), and disagreement (hand selects a different move
after forced resampling). Detailed results on the proportions of each are in the supplement.
For all brains, the correction case yields some savings (4%–6%), and the disagreement yields
a drop in the performance of the hands (1%–2%). Furthermore, the savings in the correction
case are lower for tree and att than they are for leela. tree’s effect does not appear to
come from savings, but rather, we see that when tree corrects its hand, it induces a high
loss in the opponents’ next move compared to leela’s correction (4.8% vs 3.8%), showing
a tricking action exerted by the tree on the opponent team.
As tree and att both increase their agreement with maia, we test the strategy of maximizing
agreement and eliminating disagreement (as well as correction and blindsiding) entirely by
letting maia play on its own against leela as the alter senior and maia as the alter junior,
and it loses to leela with a 40% ±1.5 score. This confirms that disagreement-induced loss
is more than compensated for by the benefit of correction of a strong brain.

4.4     Exploring imperfect partner modelling

All our experiments thus far have explored the results of senior agents designed to play with
maia1100 (meaning a generic maia trained on many 1100 rated player games), tested on
maia1100. Note that the term "designed for junior X" means, for att: that it trains with
junior X; for tree: that it runs MCTS using X to guide the search tree; and for exp: that it uses
junior X to simulate the next couple of moves. Now we investigate cross-compatibility, meaning
whether seniors designed for these generic maia juniors are compatible with juniors that they are
not explicitly designed for. We investigate three possible instantiations of cross-compatibility:
cross-skill compatibility, specific player compatibility, and cross-style compatibility, and observe
some success with the first two and an inability to generalize to radically different juniors.

4.4.1    Cross-skill compatibility
Here, we use maia1900, the strongest available version of maia trained on data of 1900 rated
players, as an alternative junior/hand. We analogously create tree, exp, and att agents
designed to be compatible with maia1900. In this section, focalx denotes a focal designed for
compatibility with maia1x00. Testing focal9 agents with maia1900 as the junior in 8 shows
that they are able to beat leela in the frameworks, with the exception of tree9 producing
no gains in ST T . We test cross-compatibility of the focal1 and focal9 agents by partnering
them with each other’s juniors. We emphasize that focal9 agents are not exposed to maia1100
prior to testing, and vice versa. As shown in Table 8 (appendix), focal9 agents are always
compatible with maia1100 as a junior, irrespective of focal and framework, while the same
is not always true of focal1 agents with maia1900. We hypothesize the assymetry is due to
focal1 agents being more aggressive in playing suboptimally in order to exploit the junior,
which backfires when maia1900 does not fall for exploits, whereas focal9 agents do not get
explicitly punished if they over-conservatively fail to setup a trap for maia1100.

4.4.2    Specific Player compatibility in ST T
We turn to validating whether the focal agents we created here using the generic maia models
are compatible with individualized engines that are fine-tuned to mimic particular human
players McIlroy-Young et al. (2020). We do so with the objective of exploring the applicability of


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our method in the case where a complete model of the opponent/partner junior is not available
(as is the case in most situations). Our initial experiment consists of individualized models
of 2 players (rated 1650 and 1950), for which we designed specialized seniors, and compared
the performance of these specialized seniors to that of seniors designed for generic maia1900.
In these games, generally, generic focal agents win against leela, with a proportionally smaller
margin than when seniors designed for generic/specific juniors are matched with the junior
it was designed for. We now turn to more extensive player generalization testing.
Accordingly, we selected a random subset of 23 models, each trained on a particular human
Lichess players rated between 1400 (43rd percentile skill) and 1900 (83rd percentile skill)
as the junior for this experiment. We then use an exp that internally uses the generic Maia
agent with the nearest rating to the player in question, and have it play in ST T with that
player’s model. The median score of the different exp agents over in this scenario with the
23 different juniors is 53.3% (±1%). While this is below exp’s performance of 66.5% in
table 1, it nonetheless demonstrates that a generic approximation is sufficient to encapsulate
skill-compatibility with individuals. In fact, out of 23 different players tested, exp was shown
to be winning (p<0.05) in 18 of the cases after 3000 games played, with the experiments on
the remaining 5 players not showing statistical significance to that level.

4.4.3   Cross-style compatibility in ST T
We now investigate using a completely different junior based on a non-neural architecture. To
do that, we calibrate a low-depth version of stockfish (we call it sfw), to play at the skill-level
of maia1100, and comparison in the appendix demonstrates that it is very different from any
agent used so far. Note that there is no tree agent. It is seen that exp is able to obtain results
against sfw, but att is unable to. Generalization is nonexistent, with engines trained with
maia1100 losing when testing with a sfw junior and vice versa. We attribute this to the lack
of similarity between sfw and maia1100. This does indicate, that our agents’ compatibility
is not a function of merely skill, but also style alignment.

5    Limitations and Discussion
Our work proposes a methodology for creating powerful agents that are skill-compatible
with weaker partners. Our key finding is that, in a complex decision making setup as chess,
skill-compatibility is a qualitatively and quantitatively measurable attribute of agents distinct
from raw ability on the underlying task. Our designed frameworks show that in situations
where strong engines are required to collaborate with weak engines, playing strength alone
is insufficient to achieve the best results; it is necessary to achieve compatibility, even at the
cost of pure strength. Finally, our three methodologies, each distinct in design and method of
operation, demonstrate that there are multiple viable techniques to create agents that achieve
this form of compatibility, with different agents using different strategies in-game. Indeed,
some strategies center on helping the weak engine make better moves should it assume control,
while others explicitly disrupt the compatibility of the adversary forcing weak opponent agents
into errors, which even a strong partner like leela is unable to mitigate.
Our work therefore is an empirical proof-of-concept for skill-compatibility in chess, and
provides a roadmap for the creation of human-compatible agents in this domain and beyond.
While our paper does not speak directly to the prospect of skill-compatibility in other domains,
we believe that a number of the techniques here are relatively general in nature, with clear
analogues to other settings. For example, while the tree agent is very chess specific, and exp is
difficult to run in continuous environments, a number of ideas underlying these methodologies
— exp’s short-term prediction, att’s tandem training with the targeted skill — can be easily
modified to fit different tasks, and offer potential for skill-compatibility in these tasks.
The training frameworks we propose use human-like maia agents as weak partners, and a natural
next direction for future work is the design of experiments to test these methods with human
chess players. Our scope likewise did not include instantiating the stronger partner beyond
using leela, which offers opportunity to test robustness to modifications of the environment.


                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


References
Anderson, Ashton, Kleinberg, Jon, & Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2017. Assessing human error
 against a benchmark of perfection. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data
 (TKDD), 11(4), 1–25.
Bard, Nolan, Foerster, Jakob N., Chandar, A. P. Sarath, Burch, Neil, Lanctot, Marc, Song,
  H. Francis, Parisotto, Emilio, Dumoulin, Vincent, Moitra, Subhodeep, Hughes, Edward,
  Dunning, Iain, Mourad, Shibl, Larochelle, H., Bellemare, Marc G., & Bowling, Michael H.
 2019. The Hanabi Challenge: A New Frontier for AI Research. Artif. Intell., 280, 103216.
Brown, Noam, & Sandholm, Tuomas. 2018. Superhuman AI for heads-up no-limit poker:
  Libratus beats top professionals. Science, 359(6374), 418–424.
Campbell, Murray. 1999. Knowledge discovery in deep blue. Communications of the ACM,
 42(11), 65–67.
Carroll, Micah, Shah, Rohin, Ho, Mark K, Griffiths, Tom, Seshia, Sanjit, Abbeel, Pieter, &
  Dragan, Anca. 2019. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 32.
(FAIR)†, Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team, Bakhtin, Anton, Brown, Noam,
  Dinan, Emily, Farina, Gabriele, Flaherty, Colin, Fried, Daniel, Goff, Andrew, Gray,
  Jonathan, Hu, Hengyuan, et al. 2022. Human-level play in the game of Diplomacy by
  combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624), 1067–1074.
Ganzfried, Sam, & Sandholm, Tuomas. 2015. Safe opponent exploitation. ACM Transactions
 on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 3(2), 1–28.
Gray, Jonathan, Lerer, Adam, Bakhtin, Anton, & Brown, Noam. 2020. Human-level
  performance in no-press diplomacy via equilibrium search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02923.
Grill, Jean-Bastien, Altché, Florent, Tang, Yunhao, Hubert, Thomas, Valko, Michal,
 Antonoglou, Ioannis, & Munos, Rémi. 2020. Monte-Carlo tree search as regularized policy
  optimization. Pages 3769–3778 of: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR.
Jacob, Athul Paul, Wu, David J, Farina, Gabriele, Lerer, Adam, Hu, Hengyuan, Bakhtin,
  Anton, Andreas, Jacob, & Brown, Noam. 2022. Modeling strong and human-like gameplay
  with KL-regularized search. Pages 9695–9728 of: International Conference on Machine
  Learning. PMLR.
Lyashuk, Alexander, & et al. 2023. leela. https://lczero.org/. Accessed: 2023-02-11.
Maharaj, Shiva, Polson, Nick, & Turk, Alex. 2022. Chess AI: competing paradigms for
 machine intelligence. Entropy, 24(4), 550.
McGrath, Thomas, Kapishnikov, Andrei, Tomašev, Nenad, Pearce, Adam, Wattenberg,
 Martin, Hassabis, Demis, Kim, Been, Paquet, Ulrich, & Kramnik, Vladimir. 2022.
 Acquisition of chess knowledge in alphazero. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences, 119(47), e2206625119.
McIlroy-Young, Reid, Sen, Siddhartha, Kleinberg, Jon, & Anderson, Ashton. 2020. Aligning
 superhuman ai with human behavior: Chess as a model system. Pages 1677–1687 of:
 Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
 & Data Mining.
McIlroy-Young, Reid, Wang, Russell, Sen, Siddhartha, Kleinberg, Jon, & Anderson, Ashton.
 2022. Learning Personalized Models of Human Behavior in Chess. Proceedings of the 28th
 ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
Nakamura, Hikaru. 2021. In Hand and Brain chess, is the stronger player generally preferred to
 be the hand or the brain? https://chess.stackexchange.com/a/34973. Accessed: 2023-04-07,
  Original video source no longer available.


                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Perolat, Julien, De Vylder, Bart, Hennes, Daniel, Tarassov, Eugene, Strub, Florian, de Boer,
  Vincent, Muller, Paul, Connor, Jerome T, Burch, Neil, Anthony, Thomas, et al. 2022.
  Mastering the game of Stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science,
  378(6623), 990–996.
Schrittwieser, Julian, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Hubert, Thomas, Simonyan, Karen, Sifre, Laurent,
  Schmitt, Simon, Guez, Arthur, Lockhart, Edward, Hassabis, Demis, Graepel, Thore, et al.
  2020. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature,
  588(7839), 604–609.
Shannon, Claude E. 1950. XXII. Programming a computer for playing chess. The London,
  Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 41(314), 256–275.
Silver, David, Huang, Aja, Maddison, Chris J, Guez, Arthur, Sifre, Laurent, Van Den Driessche,
   George, Schrittwieser, Julian, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Panneershelvam, Veda, Lanctot, Marc,
  et al. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature,
   529(7587), 484–489.
Silver, David, Hubert, Thomas, Schrittwieser, Julian, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Lai, Matthew,
   Guez, Arthur, Lanctot, Marc, Sifre, Laurent, Kumaran, Dharshan, Graepel, Thore, et al.
  2018. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through
   self-play. Science, 362(6419), 1140–1144.
Strouse, DJ, McKee, Kevin, Botvinick, Matt, Hughes, Edward, & Everett, Richard. 2021.
  Collaborating with humans without human data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 14502–14515.
Vinyals, Oriol, Babuschkin, Igor, Czarnecki, Wojciech M., Mathieu, Michaël, Dudzik, Andrew,
  Chung, Junyoung, Choi, David H., Powell, Richard, Ewalds, Timo, Georgiev, Petko, Oh,
  Junhyuk, Horgan, Dan, Kroiss, Manuel, Danihelka, Ivo, Huang, Aja, Sifre, L., Cai, Trevor,
  Agapiou, John P., Jaderberg, Max, Vezhnevets, Alexander Sasha, Leblond, Rémi, Pohlen,
  Tobias, Dalibard, Valentin, Budden, David, Sulsky, Yury, Molloy, James, Paine, Tom Le,
  Gulcehre, Caglar, Wang, Ziyun, Pfaff, Tobias, Wu, Yuhuai, Ring, Roman, Yogatama, Dani,
  Wünsch, Dario, McKinney, Katrina, Smith, Oliver, Schaul, Tom, Lillicrap, Timothy P.,
  Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Hassabis, Demis, Apps, Chris, & Silver, David. 2019. Grandmaster
  level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 1–5.
Wang, Tony Tong, Gleave, Adam, Belrose, Nora, Tseng, Tom, Dennis, Michael D, Duan, Yawen,
 Pogrebniak, Viktor, Miller, Joseph, Levine, Sergey, & Russell, Stuart. 2022. Adversarial poli-
 cies beat professional-level go ais. In: Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022.
Yang, Mesut, Carroll, Micah, & Dragan, Anca. 2022. Optimal Behavior Prior: Data-Efficient
  Human Models for Improved Human-AI Collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01602.
Yu, Chao, Velu, Akash, Vinitsky, Eugene, Wang, Yu, Bayen, Alexandre M., & Wu, Yi. 2021.
  The Surprising Effectiveness of MAPPO in Cooperative, Multi-Agent Games. ArXiv,
  abs/2103.01955.


                                              11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6     Supplement

6.1     Code Release

Our code is released at github.com/CSSLab/skill-compatibility-chess. We also include
several of our trained models.

6.2     Methodology Details

6.2.1    Testing and error range computation
                                                                 D            E
To test a particular focal in ST T , we run games of the form fmaia     maia . For any bitstring s, we
                                                                   ocal leela

play 2 games, with the focal and leela teams switching between black and white. This is done
because some bitstrings are biased in favour of a particular color, and we therefore eliminate this
bias by having each team playing both sides of the bitstring. Additionally, unfair bitstrings are
undesirable, as it is likely that the team is less relevant than the color to achieve victory. Hence,
they represent a source of unbiased noise to the result, by adding 1 win for each team. It is difficult
to quantify fairness of a bitstring, (it is not sufficient to ensure equal number of senior and junior
moves-the order matters). Therefore, for consistency, all experiments to test individual focal
agents are sampling from the same set of bitstrings during testing, eliminating the possibility that
some agents sample more unfair (and hence, noise-contributing) bitstrings during their testing.
No analogous measures are applicable for HB, as stochasticity is internal to the teams rather
than being a characteristic of a game.
For both frameworks, testing consists of between 1000 and 10000 games, depending on our
targeted significance. Here we detail computation of the standard error se for the win-share
displayed in the main section of the paper.
If we play n games, with W wins and L losses, we can write the empirical win-share as

                                                    ŵ− ˆl
                                             0.5+
                                                      2
where ŵ and ˆl are the empirical unbiased estimators of the true probabilities w, l, computed
as W/n and L/n respectively. Since w, l, and d (probability of a draw) form a trinomial
distribution, we have
                                           w(1−w) l(1−l) 2wl
                              V (ŵ− ˆl) =        +        +
                                              n       n        n
which simplifies to
                                           w+l−(w−l)2
                                                n

Plugging in the variance to get the se of the win-share, we have
                                           r
                                              w+l−(w−l)2
                                   se = 0.5
                                                    n

This is maximized with w = l = 0.5, and we have
                                                   0.5
                                              se ≤ √
                                                     n

Our data is presented in percentages, so, this implies setting n = 10000 we guarantee
se <= 0.5%, and n = 1000 guarantees se <= 1.5%. In practice, we are often able to get lower
errors with lower n because w ̸= l.
All other quantities in our paper are sample means, with large sample sizes allowing the central
limit theorem to be used to obtain their standard errors.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.2.2   leela

We use the a 128x10-t60-2-5300 leela network, obtained from Vieri1 , with a 1500 node search.
Against stockfish 13 (60k nodes), a strong classical engine that uses alpha-beta search, this
version of leela obtains a score of 59 ± 3. Meloni2 benchmarks stockfish 13 to human elo,
so we deduce that our version of leela plays at around 3050 elo. While leela can be made
significantly stronger if more nodes are used in search, limiting it to 1500 allows us to generate
more games and run more tests, while still retaining superhuman capability. We use 1500
nodes for all seniors, for consistency. To compute the win probabilities of boards, needed to
conduct most of our loss analysis, we use a separate instantiation of leela with the same
parameters. In practice though, the leela used for evaluation is stronger than the leela
playing as senior, because evaluations occur multiple times per move for different statistics,
which, due to caching, is equivalent to working with more nodes.


6.2.3   att

To create att, a dataset of 10000 games (80% train, 10% validate, and 10% test) is generated
of the following game leela     leela
                          maia maia   for ST T or leela   leela
                                                     maia maia    for HB. Then, starting
with leela’s weights, and using a learning rate of 10 , and 10000 iterations, we run
                                                         −5

back-propagation to update leela’s policy and value neural network. We use the version
of maia for which we are attempting to achieve compatibility in this training scheme.
As this is a tuning task, and we are starting with leela weights, we perform some parameter
tuning, with the objective not necessarily to find optimal parameters, but rather to find a
set thereof that compromises between cost and robustness. The main time cost comes from
generating the datasets of games, and training the agents.
To do so, we train models with learning rates from 10−1 to 10−6 on dataset sizes of 1000,
10000, and 100000 games, and a short training time of 1000 iterations. We test these models
with a small number of matches that is sufficient to determine whether the training procedure
produced viable engines (viable simply means plausible, not necessarily successful). See table
5. Some learning rates catastrophically fail and exhibit nonsensical learning curves, or produce
agents that lose a large majority of their games.
From the above, we decide to use 10000 games as our dataset size, as it appears that a range
of learning rates are viable on it, and it is not as costly to generate as 100000. We also settle
on learning rate of 10−5 , as this rate is more robust in small datasets than 10−4 and requires
less time to convergence than 10−6 .
We note that there appears to be a connection between the quality of the policy and value accu-
racy curves and actual performance, meaning, models that overfit or fail to converge also perform
poorly when testing on the frameworks. Accordingly, we observe that 100000 iterations produces
more complete convergence curves for this particular learning rate and dataset size choice.
After having selected hyper-parameters which we deem plausible, we run our first full training
run 8 times to ensure that performance on the framework following training is repeatable,
rather than a product of chance. The worst model of the 8 has a win-rate of 53.5 ±1, and
the best model a win-rate of 56.0 ±1.
Note that our goal is to find valid, stable hyper-parameters, which does not preclude the
existence of better sets of hyper-parameters. For all other models, (meaning different frame-
works, or different maia juniors), we use these parameters, and if convergence issues arrive,
we modify parameters heuristically. This type of modification was not actually needed for any
models in the main paper, but was required for a few additional models which we detail here.
The rest of the hyper-parameters can be found in the configuration files in the linked code.


   1
   https://lczero.org/dev/wiki/best-nets-for-lc0
   2
   https://www.melonimarco.it/en/2021/03/08/stockfish-and-lc0-test-at-different-number-of-
nodes/


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.2.4   exp
exp is more expensive to run than the standard neural netework engines as it makes multiple calls
to engines as subroutines to compute the move that maximizes expectation. Accordingly, it is
unfeasible to do a full search over all legal moves, as that may consume up to hundreds of times as
much compute. Likewise, these engines use shallow leela engines for board evaluation to deter-
mine their move selection. For ST T , we compute the expectation over the top 5 moves, with eval-
uation conducted at 300 nodes, whereas in HB, for each piece, we compute the expectation over
the top 3 maia moves (meaning 18 moves checked total), with evaluation conducted at 50 nodes.

6.2.5   Detailing method 1 used in 4.2.3
While involved, the technique used here comes with the added benefit that no engines play
additional moves outside what has already played within evaluation games, and therefore the
comparison is more pertinent to the games themselves. To study these three mechanisms, we
analyze special sequences on the board. Since in ST T , agent selection is done via coin flipping,
games can be represented as a bitstring, s where 1s indicate senior moves and 0s indicate
junior moves. We now detail how we compute the values present in table 3. By computing
the loss on moves that are preceded by specific substrings, we can isolate different effects.
Accordingly, we define LGf (A,s) where s is a condition that stipulates that the moves must
be preceded by a (partial) bitstring s in Gf . For example, LGf (maiaf ,1) means that we are
computing the loss of maiaf only when its move comes immediately after leela’s, whereas
LGf (maia, 0) means the moves come after maial ’s.
As mentioned earlier, in order to compare the tricking effect of a senior S1 to a senior S2 , we do not
directly compare LGf (J2 ,1) (measuring how S1 tricks J2 ) to LGf (J1 ,1) (measuring how S2 tricks
J1 ) , as J1 and J2 are playing on different board distributions (the distributions of the board of the
two teams are not the same, the simplest example being that the focal team will have more win-
ning boards). We perform an indirect comparison of each senior’s effect to its own junior’s effect,
as they share a board distribution, and all necessary moves are already present. We do the same
for both seniors and then compare these quantities. Formally, we define IGf (A,s) = LGf (A,1⊕
s)−LGf (A,0⊕s) where ⊕ is concatenation, the 1 and 0 denote the comparison of the loss induced
by the senior being present in that position to that by the junior, and s is a string to standardize
the agents that play in between should we be measuring an effect across more than 1 ply.
The immediate tricking effect of a senior S under this definition can thus be computed as
IGf (Jopp ,ϕ) where ϕ is the empty string and Jopp is the opposing junior.
To measure the immediate helping effect of a senior S on its partner junior J par , note that the
opposing team must play a move prior to J par , and there are two possible situations depending
on which opponent plays. There are thus two helping effects to be measured, IGf (Jpar ,1) and
IGf (Jpar ,0), denoting the opponent senior and junior being the interceding agents, respectively.
An in order to examine the indirect effect, to see whether the focal agents affect the performance
of their juniors over longer time horizons. We compute this as ∆Gf (maial ,maiaf ,00), where
two zeros indicate the move must not be preceded by any senior for 2 plies.

6.2.6   Detailing method 2 used in 4.2.3
We perform this analysis with leela and each focal agent on two separate board distributions:
the set of boards that leela’s team and that the focal’s team encountered in-game. Table 6
shows these results for different focal agents. exp induces similar loss in maia regardless of the
board distribution (4.47 ≈ 4.39). This is in line with exp’s myopic optimization objective. The
gulf between exp and leela remains large regardless if we compare the distributions as seen
in game (4.39 > 3.25) or if we standarde the board distribution (4.39 > 3.65 and 4.47 > 3.25).
In contrast, there is a notable degradation in the loss induction abilities of tree and att when
eliminating distributional effects (3.89 < 4.85 and 3.95 < 4.46). Consequently, the standardized
comparisons for these focals to leela shows a much closer result than the unstandardized in-
game observations. Interestingly, comparing along the minor diagonal shows that leela induces
more loss than these two agents (4.50 > 3.89 and 4.45 > 3.87), suggesting that the distributional
effects induced by tree and att are actually more important than their direct effects.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.3     Hardware

We made use of four Tesla K80 GPU’s for the purpose of experimentation, each with a VRAM
of 12 GB. We show in table 11 the times taken for the most important tasks of the paper.
As an example, if we wish to generate the games for an attt agent, train it, test it to se = 0.5,
and obtain analysis metrics, it would take 10 hours for generation, 3 hours for training, 10
hours for testing, and 12 hours for analysis, a total of 35 hours. Alongside experiments that
are not included in the paper, we approximate the total compute time used by the project
to be approximately 1 year’s worth of our GPUs.

6.4     Extra Experiments

6.4.1    Agreement rate of various engines
We compute the agreement rate of various engines used in our experiments in figure 5. Notice
how the att agents from both frameworks and calibrated to both juniors all play similar
moves to each other and to leela, on which they are based. maia1100 and maia1900 also
exhibit similarity to each other and dissimilarity to att agents. tree exhibits moderate
similarity to both the maia agents and the leela-derived agents. sfw, a weakened version
(25 nodes) of stockfish 8 used in a later experiment, is entirely dissimilar to any other agent,
likely due to its architectural uniqueness.

6.4.2    Modification of training target for att in ST T
The training procedure for att includes back-propagating on moves that both leela and maia
play in ST T . Semantically, this updates the value-head to take into account maia’s interven-
tions, however, it also updates the policy-head to learn maia’s moves, which we believed would
weaken the engine. Therefore, we created a version of the engine that only learns leela’s moves,
as to not affect the policy with maia’s moves, and only to have the value-head change to adapt
to maia’s interventions. We also use an increased training games of 40000 because convergence
with smaller datasets was worse (exclusion of maia moves halves quantity of data, and reduces
its diversity, making it prone to overfitting). Interestingly, this turns out to be less effective than
the default version in ST T . (52%±0.5 < 55.0%±0.5) than including the maia policy moves,
although the engine turns out to be very strong in raw strength, achieving a 36.5%±1.5 >
14.0%±1.5.It is expected that the engine is stronger, as it is not ingesting maia moves, and we
suspect that in ST T , training the policy on maia moves is actually beneficial, as it allows the
agent to conduct search at least partially based on maia’s moves, mimicking tree to an extent.

6.4.3    Comparison of tricking vs helping strategies in ST T
In order to compare the effect of attempting purely to sabotage maial , to that of  purely
aiding the maiaf , we modify the algorithm of exp to m = argmax Es∈{0,1} [w|(m,s)] , which
                                                                   m
effectively optimizes only one ply in the future, eliminating any helping effect which requires
at least 2 ply foresight and making this a pure tricking engine. In order to isolate the helping
effect, we use m = argmax Es∈{10,11} [w|(m,s)] , which (falsely) assumes an un-exploitable

                        m
leela is always playing the opponent move, thereby forcing the optimization to be solely
to help maiaf . Both versions are able to beat leela in the framework, however the tricking
version achieves a higher score of 62.5%±1 as opposed to the helping version which achives
a score of 57.0%±1, both lower than that achieved by the actual exp. We suspect that pure
tricking is easier to conduct than pure helping, as there is no interceding agent to account
for, and a shorter time horizon, hence less branching.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.5     Extra Figures and Tables


                  Figure 5: Agreement rate of different engines with each other

      Table 5: Viability of attt engines created according to learning rate and dataset size

                        Learning Rate 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6
                        1000 Games X       X    X    X    ✓    ✓
                        10000 Games X      X    X    ✓    ✓    ✓
                        100000 Games X     X    ✓    ✓    ✓    ✓


6.6     Main Paper Tables with Standard Deviation

Tables 12-15, show the standard deviation of each value from the main text.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Table 6:
 maia loss induced by different seniors in distributions occurring to different teams in ST T

                         Gt                  Ge                   Ga
maia loss induced
                 by   leela        tree      leela     exp        leela     att
Distribution of leela    3.60±0.02 3.89±0.02 3.25±0.02 4.47 ±0.02 3.87±0.02 3.95±0.02
                 maial
Distribution of focal
                 maiaf   4.50±0.03 4.85±0.03 3.65±0.02 4.39±0.02 4.33±0.01 4.46±0.01



               Table 7: Metrics by interaction type for tree and att in HB

Interaction         Agreement             Correction             Disagreement          Blindsiding

Team                  leela
                      maial
                                focal
                                maiaf
                                           leela
                                           maial
                                                       focal
                                                       maiaf
                                                                  leela
                                                                  maial
                                                                             focal
                                                                             maiaf
                                                                                         leela
                                                                                         maial
                                                                                                 focal
                                                                                                 maiaf
Gt Distribution  44±1    60±1             20±1    16±1    21±1     14±1     15±1   10±1
Gt Savings       0       0                5.4±0.1 4.3±0.1 -2.0±0.1 -2.1±0.1 0      0
Gt Opponent loss 3.2±0.1 3.4±0.1          3.8±0.1 4.8±0.1 4.0±0.1 4.4±0.1 3.3 ±0.1 3.8±0.1
Ga Distribution 44±1     52±1             20±1    20±1    20±1     16±1     16±1   11±1
Ga Savings       0       0                5.2±0.1 4.6±0.1 -1.8±0.1 -1.9±0.1 0      0
Ga Opponent loss 3.2±0.1 3.2±0.1          3.8±0.1 4.0±0.1 3.9±0.1 3.9±0.1 3.3 ±0.1 3.7±0.1


     Table 8: Generalization results with maia1100 and maia1900 as junior partners.

                                                ST T framework
                              tree                       expt                             attt
 Tested on junior             maia1100      maia1900 maia1100              maia1900       maia1100   maia1900
 Designed for maia1100        56.5±0.5      41.5±1.5     66.5±0.5          53.0 ±0.5      55.0±0.5   51.5±0.5
 Designed for maia1900        51.0±0.5      50.0±0.5     55.0±0.5          65.5±1.0       52.0±0.5   53.0±0.5
                                                HB framework
                              tree                       exph                             atth
 Tested on junior             maia1100      maia1900 maia1100              maia1900       maia1100   maia1900
 Designed for maia1100        60.0±0.5      52.5±0.5     55.0±0.5          45.5 ±1.5      56.0±0.5   37.5±1.5
 Designed for maia1900        57.0±0.5      58.0±0.5     51.5±0.5          55.0±0.5       54.0±0.5   54.0±0.5


              Table 9: Generalization results with maia1100 and sfw on ST T

                                    expt                           attt
         Tested on                  maia1100        sfw            maia1100         sfw
         Designed for maia1100      66.5±0.5        44.0±1.0       55.0±0.5         44.0±1.0
         Designed for sfw           43.5±1.0        55.0±0.5       48.5±0.5         51.0±0.5


               Table 10: Generalization results with Specific Players in ST T

                                    Player A (1650 rating)
                   Senior trained for       Att          Tree              Exp
                   Maia1900               51 ±0.5     52.5 ±0.5           57 ±2
                   Player A             Not trained 51.5 ±0.5             68 ±2
                                    Player B (1950 rating)
                   Type of Senior           Att          Tree               Exp
                   Maia1900               51 ±0.5      52 ±0.5             53 ±2
                   Player B             Not trained 46.5 ±0.5             66.5 ±2



                                               17
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 11: Approximate times of main tasks involved in experimentation

                                  Task                                                 Approximate Time (h)
                                  1000 ST T games, no exp                              1
                                  1000 ST T games, with exp                            2-3
                                  1000 HB games, no exp                                2
                                  1000 HB games, with exp                              2-3
                                  1000 games with metric collection                    4
                                  10000 training iterations                            3


                                                  Table 12: Table 1 with standard deviations

                        ST T                                                           HB
             Game Setup tree                     expt       attt           maia        tree         exph         atth       maia
             focal leela
             maia | maia   56.5±0.5 66.5±0.5 55.0±0.5 7.5 ±1.5 60.0±0.5 56.5±0.5 55.0±0.5 27.5 ±1.5
             focal | leela 0.5±0.5 14.0 ±1.5 12.5 ±1.5 0.0±0 0.5±0.5 N/A         4.5 ±1.5 0.0±0


                                                  Table 13: Table 2 with standard deviations

Agent                    Gt                  Ge          Ga          Agent                  Gt         Ge         Ga
leela                    1.15 ±0.01          1.16 ±0.01 1.17 ±0.01 maial                    4.46 ±0.04 4.21 ±0.04 4.19 ±0.02
focal                    1.91 ±0.01          1.37 ±0.01 1.43 ±0.01 maiaf                    3.57 ±0.03 3.37 ±0.02 3.77 ±0.02
∆Gf (leela, focal,∗)     -0.76 ±0.02         -0.21 ±0.02 -0.26 ±0.02 ∆Gf (maial , maiaf ,∗) 0.89 ±0.04 0.84 ±0.04 0.42 ±0.03
∆Gf (teaml , teamf ,∗) 0.13 ±0.03            0.63 ±0.04         0.16 ±0.02


                                                  Table 14: Table 3 with standard deviations

                                                 Gt                                  Ge                              Ga
    Agent                                        leela      tree                     leela       exp                 leela      att
    Tricking: I(Jopp ,ϕ)                         -0.03±0.06 0.54±0.07                -0.27±0.04 1.38±0.05            -0.01±0.06 0.25±0.04
    Helping: I(Jpar ,0)                          0.26±0.11  0.36±0.10                0.30±0.07   0.61±0.07           0.34±0.06  0.21±0.05
    Helping: I(Jpar ,1)                          0.15±0.09  0.46±0.09                0.12±0.09   1.88±0.07           0.20±0.06  0.25±0.05
    Indirect: ∆(maial , maiaf ,00)                     0.56±0.10                           -0.18±0.07                      0.37±0.06


                                                  Table 15: Table 4 with standard deviations

               Gt                                    Ge                                Ga                               maia as focal

                 leela               tree               leela             exp           leela             att            leela            maia
                 maial               maiaf              maial            maiaf          maial            maiaf           maial            maiaf
    True loss 3.76±0.02 3.55±0.02 3.44±0.02 3.33±0.02 3.61±0.02 3.50±0.02 3.73±0.05 4.25±0.05
    maia loss 3.75±0.02 3.29±0.02 3.40±0.02 3.62±0.02 3.59±0.02 3.43±0.02 3.39±0.05 3.60±0.05
    Savings   -0.01±0.03 -0.22±0.03 -0.04±0.03 0.3±0.03 -0.02±0.03 -0.07±0.03 -0.32±0.07 -0.65±0.07


                                                                            18
