Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SK YOUR D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT IF P RE -T RAINING IS
R IGHT FOR YOU
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
          Pre-training is a widely used approach to develop models that are robust to dis-
          tribution shifts. However, in practice, its effectiveness varies: fine-tuning a pre-
          trained model improves robustness significantly in some cases but not at all in
          others (compared to training from scratch). In this work, we seek to characterize
          the failure modes that pre-training can and cannot address. In particular, we focus
          on two possible failure modes of models under distribution shift: poor extrapola-
          tion (e.g., they cannot generalize to a different domain) and biases in the training
          data (e.g., they rely on spurious features). Our study suggests that, as a rule of
          thumb, pre-training can help mitigate poor extrapolation but not dataset biases.
          After providing theoretical motivation and empirical evidence for this finding, we
          explore two of its implications for developing robust models: (1) pre-training and
          interventions designed to prevent exploiting biases have complementary robust-
          ness benefits, and (2) fine-tuning on a (very) small, non-diverse but de-biased
          dataset can result in significantly more robust models than fine-tuning on a large
          and diverse but biased dataset.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A common paradigm for developing machine learning models is pre-training them on a large, di-
verse dataset (e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), JFT-300M (Sun et al., 2017), LAION-5B (Schuh-
mann et al., 2022)) and then fine-tuning them on task-specific data. Indeed, compared to training
from scratch, fine-tuning a pre-trained model often significantly improves performance and reduces
computational costs (Sharif Razavian et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2017; Kornblith et al., 2019).
Yet another benefit that pre-training may offer is distribution shift robustness. Specifically, machine
learning models tend to suffer from distribution shifts, i.e., changes between the reference distri-
bution used to develop the model and the shifted distribution that the model actually encounters
when deployed. For example, a tumor identification model trained on tissue slide images from one
hospital might perform poorly when deployed at another hospital (Bandi et al., 2018; Koh et al.,
2020). Notably, different models (with different architectures, hyperparameters, etc.) tend to be
similarly sensitive to a given distribution shift. However, models pre-trained on auxiliary data and
then fine-tuned on the reference distribution can break this trend, exhibiting substantially higher per-
formance on the shifted distribution than models trained from scratch with the same performance on
the reference distribution (Taori et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2020; 2021).
These robustness benefits of pre-training are promising, but they are not universal. In particular,
fine-tuning the same pre-trained model can yield significant robustness gains on some distribution
shifts but not on others (Radford et al., 2021; Wortsman et al., 2021). To attain robustness to the latter
shifts, would fine-tuning a larger model pre-trained on more data suffice? Or are there fundamental
limitations to the robustness that pre-training can provide? To answer these questions, we develop a
more fine-grained understanding of how pre-training improves robustness. Specifically, we ask:

    Can we identify and characterize the failure modes that pre-training can and cannot address?

Recall that under distribution shift, models can fail in a number of ways. One of them is their
inability to extrapolate effectively outside of the reference distribution (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2020; Koh et al., 2020). If, for instance, a model is trained only on photos taken during the day, then
this model might fail when deployed on photos taken at night.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Models can also underperform even when the shifted distribution does not contain anything “new.”
In particular, they can fail due to biases in the reference distribution. For example, if a certain
feature is spuriously correlated with the label in the reference distribution, a model might learn to
exploit this relationship and fail on examples encountered during deployment where it does not hold
(Arjovsky et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020).

1.1       O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

To identify the failure modes that pre-training can address, we study the robustness benefits of pre-
training under two types of distribution shifts: (1) shifts where extrapolation is necessary and (2)
shifts where extrapolation is not needed. We start by analyzing a simple logistic regression setting
and illustrate why pre-training might improve robustness to the former type of shift, but not the
latter (Section 3). We subsequently build on this intuition by measuring the robustness benefits of
pre-training on synthetic and natural distribution shifts of each type (Section 4). Our results suggest
the following rule of thumb: pre-training helps specifically with extrapolation, but does not address
other failures, for example, those stemming from dataset biases.
Implications for developing robust models. Guided by this rule of thumb, we explore two related
avenues for harnessing pre-training to develop robust models.

          1. Combining pre-training with interventions designed to handle bias (Section 5): There are
             a number of robustness interventions specifically designed to mitigate biases present in a
             training dataset (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko
             et al., 2022; Idrissi et al., 2022). Our findings suggest that pre-training and this kind of
             intervention address two different sources of failures (the former helping with extrapolating
             and the latter with avoiding dataset biases) and thus may be viewed as complementary. We
             indeed find that combining them can yield models with both sets of benefits.
          2. Curating datasets for fine-tuning (Section 6): One possible intervention that aims to address
             dataset biases is curating a de-biased dataset. In general, however, the de-biasing process
             might be prohibitively expensive. That said, we find that if we leverage pre-training to help
             with extrapolation, we might only need a small, non-diverse fine-tuning dataset; such a
             dataset might actually be feasible to de-bias. Specifically, we demonstrate that fine-tuning
             on a hair color classification dataset with only 64 examples that was carefully de-biased
             yields greater robustness than fine-tuning on the entire CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015).

2       BACKGROUND
Fine-tuning a pre-trained model. Methods for fine-tuning a pre-trained model vary: two com-
mon strategies are full fine-tuning, in which one continues training the entire model, and linear
probing, in which one only fine-tunes the final layer. Some recent pre-trained models with natural
language supervision (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021)) can also be ap-
plied to a downstream task in a zero-shot context (i.e., without fine-tuning) by specifying the task
through a text description. In this work, we focus on the full fine-tuning strategy, which typically
outperforms linear probing and zero-shot models on the reference distribution. We also will some-
times consider linear probing followed by full fine-tuning (LP-FT), which can in some cases improve
over full fine-tuning alone in terms of performance and robustness (Kumar et al., 2022). We discuss
other fine-tuning strategies in Appendix D.1.
Measuring robustness. For many distribution shifts, different models trained from scratch on the
reference distribution exhibit similar degrees of robustness to the shift. Specifically, when varying
architectures, hyperparameters and training methods there is often a strong linear relationship be-
tween the reference accuracy and shifted accuracy1 (i.e., the accuracies on the reference and shifted
distributions, respectively) (Taori et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2020; 2021). This relationship, dubbed
accuracy on the line, can be visualized by plotting shifted accuracies against reference accuracies
and finding a linear fit. When this linear trend is strong (i.e., shifted accuracies are highly corre-
lated with reference accuracies), one can predict the shifted accuracy of models trained from scratch
from their reference accuracy. Furthermore, to quantify the robustness of a model trained with a
    1
        For a linear relationship, accuracies are probit-scaled (transformed by the inverse of the Gaussian CDF).


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Positive example
        Negative example
        Model decision boundary
        Optimal decision boundary


    (a) Reference dataset       (b) Models trained from              (c) Shift inside of Wref:   (d) Shift outside of Wref:
       in subspace Wref          different initializations           models equally robust           robustness varies


Figure 1: Illustration of logistic regression setting. (a) Consider a reference dataset that lies within
a subspace Wref of Rd . (b) Models trained from different initializations all learn the same (optimal)
decision boundary in Wref , but may behave differently outside of Wref . (c) Under shifts within Wref ,
models with different initializations are equally robust. (d) Under shifts outside of Wref , initialization
can affect robustness.

robustness intervention beyond the “baseline” of models trained from scratch, one can measure the
amount by which its shifted accuracy exceeds the linear fit’s prediction, a metric known as effec-
tive robustness (ER) (Taori et al., 2020). In this work, we choose to study distribution shifts for
which accuracy on the line holds (i.e., the linear fit is strong) and quantify robustness by computing
effective robustness (see, e.g., Figure 3). See Appendix B.1.2 for additional details.

3      S TUDYING P RE -T RAINING IN A L OGISTIC R EGRESSION S ETTING
Our central goal is to understand the failure modes that pre-training can and cannot address. To
this end, we first study the robustness benefits of pre-training in a simple logistic regression setting
(illustrated in Figure 1).
Setup. Suppose that we are given access to a reference dataset Sref of input-label pairs, each con-
sisting of a d-dimensional input x ∈ Rd and a binary label y ∈ {−1, 1}. We learn a linear model for
this task by finding weights w ∈ Rd that minimize the (standard) logistic loss on Sref :
                                           X                   ⊤
                               Lref (w) =         log(1 + e−w x·y ).                            (1)
                                                        (x,y)∈Sref

We assume that the reference dataset Sref satisfies the following conditions:

        1. Inputs in Sref lie within a k-dimensional (with k < d) subspace Wref of Rd . Intuitively,
           this condition corresponds to features lacking certain variation in the reference dataset.
        2. The logistic loss Lref has a minimum value. This condition ensures that minimizing Lref
           is well-defined. Note that there may be multiple weights that attain this minimum value.

Starting with initial weights (which, in our case, are either random or the result of pre-training),
suppose that we use gradient descent to minimize Lref (w). We would like to understand how well
the resulting model performs under distribution shift. To do so, we establish the following theorem
(proof in Appendix A):
Theorem 3.1. Suppose that we start with initial weights winit ∈ Rd and run gradient descent to
minimize Lref (w). With an appropriately chosen learning rate, gradient descent converges to weights
ŵ that minimize Lref . Letting projWref winit be the projection of winit onto Wref , ŵ can be written as
                                                  ∗
                                            ŵ = wref + (winit − projWref winit )                                             (2)
       ∗
where wref is a property of the reference dataset Sref and lies within the reference subspace Wref .
                                                                                                    ∗
Theorem 3.1 enables us to decompose the learned model’s weights ŵ into two terms: wref                and
(winit − projWref winit ). Notice that the first term is just a property of the reference dataset and is in
the reference subspace Wref , while the second term depends on winit and is orthogonal to Wref . As
a result, the reference dataset itself fully specifies the model’s behavior on inputs in Wref , while the


                                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         In-support shift                       Out-of-support shift
                 Label                      Label             Label                    Label
                                                                                               None

                                                                                               Less

       Setting


                                                    Setting
                                                                                               More

                                                                                               All


Figure 2: Examples of in-support and out-of-support shifts. One example of an in-support shift
(left) is a shift in which the indoor/outdoor frequencies of animal appearances change, but the pos-
sible combinations of animal and setting remain the same. An example of an out-of-support shift
(right) is a shift from day to night: the nighttime setting is entirely novel.

initialization determines how the model extends outside of Wref . Consequently, changing a model’s
initialization (e.g., with pre-training) can affect performance outside of Wref , but not within Wref .
This observation suggests the following key intuition: pre-training can improve robustness to a
distribution shift only when the shifted distribution contains “out-of-support” inputs, that is, inputs
that could not be reasonably sampled from the reference distribution. In other words, pre-training
helps specifically with extrapolation outside of the reference distribution.

4     E XPLORING THE E MPIRICAL ROBUSTNESS B ENEFITS OF P RE -T RAINING
In Section 3, we found that in a simple logistic regression setting, pre-training helps specifically
with extrapolation. We now want to assess whether this principle holds more broadly. To do so, we
measure the robustness benefits of pre-training under two types of shifts: in-support shifts, where
models cannot fail due to poor extrapolation (but might fail for other reasons, e.g., dataset biases),
and out-of-support shifts, where models can fail due to poor extrapolation (see Figure 2). We begin
by describing these two types of shifts in more detail and providing intuitions for why pre-training
might improve robustness to out-of-support shifts, but not in-support shifts.
In-support shift. A distribution shift is in-support if any input that could be sampled from the
shifted distribution could also be reasonably sampled from the reference distribution. In other words,
the shifted distribution does not contain anything “new”; however, an in-support shift can still cause
failures if, for example, the reference distribution is biased. To illustrate this failure mode, consider
a cat vs. dog image classification task in which photos are either taken indoors or outdoors. Suppose
that in the reference distribution 90% of cats appear indoors and 90% of dogs appear outdoors (i.e.,
the setting is spuriously correlated with the animal). A model trained on this distribution would
likely rely (at least in part) on indoor vs. outdoor features (Xiao et al., 2020; Geirhos et al., 2020).
Thus, under a shift in which the setting/animal correlation is reversed (which would be in-support
but out-of-distribution), the model would likely underperform. If pre-training helps specifically with
extrapolation, then it would not address this failure mode and, more generally, could not improve
robustness to in-support shifts.
Out-of-support shift. A distribution shift is out-of-support if there exists an input that could be
sampled from the shifted distribution but could not be reasonably sampled from the reference dis-
tribution. For example, consider a cat vs. dog image classification task in which photos from the
reference distribution are taken during the day and photos from the shifted distribution are taken at
night. In this case, the shifted distribution contains images with previously unseen lighting condi-
tions. Here, a model trained from scratch might learn features that are sensitive to lighting and thus
fail under the shift. Meanwhile, pre-training could provide priors for extrapolating, e.g., by produc-
ing features that are agnostic to lighting conditions as a starting point, leading to greater robustness.

4.1   C ONSTRUCTING SYNTHETIC IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SHIFTS

We now want to measure the robustness gains that pre-training provides on in-support and out-of-
support shifts. To this end, we explicity construct two shifts of each type by modifying CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky, 2009): (1) a “tint shift” in which we add a tint that is spuriously correlated with the
label in the reference dataset, but not in the shifted dataset, (2) a “label shift” in which the relative


                                                      4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               In-support shifts                                                                       Out-of-support shifts
                                  Tint shift                           Label shift                                            Pad shift                            Flip shift


                         ER = 0.54%                            ER = 0.44%                                             ER = 2.28%                          ER = 12.16%
                                                        97.5                                                     98
Shifted accuracy


                                                                                              Shifted accuracy
                                                                                                                 96                                  90
                   95                                      95
                                                        92.5                                                     94                                  80
                   90                                      90                                                    92                                  70
                                                        87.5                                                     90                                  60
                   85                                      85                                                    88                                  50
                   80                                   82.5                                                     86                                  40
                        94    96        98                   90 92 94 96             98                                94      96       98                  94 96              98
                              Reference accuracy                     Reference accuracy                                  Reference accuracy                     Reference accuracy
                                                 Baseline                   y=x           BiT                           CLIP               CLIP (zero shot init.)
                                                 Baseline linear fit        ImageNet      BEiT                          CLIP (LP-FT)

  Figure 3: Robustness of pre-trained models to synthetic in-support and out-of-support shifts.
  For each of two in-support shifts (left) and two out-of-support shifts (right) constructed by modifying
  CIFAR-10, the reference and shifted accuracies of models trained from scratch (in blue) are linearly
  correlated. Pre-trained models exhibit little effective robustness (i.e., little improvement over the
  linear trend, see Section 2) on the in-support shifts, but have significant effective robustness on
  the out-of-support shifts (averages in the top left of each plot). Error bars denote 95% confidence
  intervals over 8 random trials. See Appendix B.2 for descriptions of the individual models.

  frequencies of classes change between the reference and shifted datasets, (3) a “pad shift” in which
  we pad images with a black border in the shifted dataset, and (4) a “flip shift” in which we vertically
  flip images in the shifted dataset (see the top of Figure 3 for visualizations).
  For each shift, as a baseline, we train ResNet-18 (He et al., 2015) models from scratch on differently
  sized subsets of the reference dataset. Next, we fine-tune various pre-trained models and measure
  their effective robustness above this baseline. We select fine-tuning hyperparameters that maximize
  accuracy on the reference distribution (in Appendix C.1.1, we find that other reasonable hyperpa-
  rameter choices yield similar robustness). See Appendix B.2 for a description of the exact setup.
  We observe that pre-trained models exhibit substantial effective robustness on out-of-support shifts,
  but have very limited (yet non-zero) effective robustness on in-support shifts (see Figure 3). This
  broadly supports our hypothesis. However, note that if pre-training indeed only helped with extrap-
  olation, then we might initially expect that it would yield no effective robustness to in-support shifts
  at all. We investigate this limited effective robustness of pre-trained models on in-support shifts in
  Appendix C.1.2 and conclude that it likely also derives from better extrapolation.

  4.2                        D IVIDING NATURAL SHIFTS INTO IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SPLITS

  So far, we have constructed synthetic in-support and out-of-support shifts and observed that pre-
  training can significantly improve robustness to the latter but not the former. Now, we demonstrate
  that this principle seems to extend to natural shifts as well. Note that it is hard to find natural shifts
  that are “purely” in-support. After all, under natural shifts the shifted dataset may contain some
  inputs that are similar to those in the reference dataset and some that are not. For example, in a
  shift from photos to sketches, some sketches may look more photorealistic but most would probably
  be clearly distinguishable from photos. To measure robustness to each type of shift, we thus divide
  several natural shifted datasets each into an “in-support split” containing inputs that look like they
  could have come from the reference dataset and an “out-of-support split” containing the remaining
  inputs. We do so by training a classifier to distinguish between the reference and shifted datasets
  and using this classifier to approximate the probability of sampling a given shifted example from the
  reference distribution (see Appendix B.3.1 for the details of the splitting method).


                                                                                          5
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                            Out-of-support

     ImageNet
                                                                                                                                            In-support
                                                                                                                                   0.20


                                                                                                    Average effective robustness
                 Dobermann rock beauty fish wooden spoon cowboy boot           tennis ball
                                                                                                                                   0.15
In-support
  Sketch


                                                                                                                                   0.10
                 fountain pen   handkerchief   scabbard     aircraft carrier bulletproof vest
                                                                                                                                   0.05
Out-of-support
   Sketch


                                                                                                                                   0.00
                   sarong       coffeemaker    rugby ball     slide rule          torch                                                   ImageNet-V2        ImageNet Sketch   ImageNet-R

 (a) Random samples from ImageNet (top) as well as (b) Average effective robustness of 24 pre-trained
 the in-support split (middle) and out-of-support split models on each split of each of the three shifts. Er-
 (bottom) of ImageNet Sketch.                           ror bars denote 95% confidence intervals.

 Figure 4: We divide each of the ImageNet-V2, ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R datasets into an
 in-support split containing examples that look like ImageNet examples and an out-of-support split
 containing examples that look unlike ImageNet examples. We display samples from each split of
 ImageNet Sketch in Figure 4a and report the average effective robustnesses of pre-trained models in
 Figure 4b. See Appendix C.2.3 for scatterplots of reference vs. shifted accuracy.

 Specifically, in our study, we consider three natural shifts of the ImageNet dataset: ImageNet-
 V2 (Recht et al., 2019), which closely resembles ImageNet, ImageNet Sketch (Wang et al., 2019),
 which consists of sketches of ImageNet classes, and ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2020a), which
 consists of “renditions” (e.g, paintings, sculptures, cartoons) of a subset of ImageNet classes. We
 choose these shifted datasets because they include many inputs that look like they could have come
 from ImageNet and many that do not (according to our splitting method)2 . In Figure 4a, we visualize
 examples from the in-support and out-of-support splits of ImageNet Sketch.
 Consistently with our hypothesis that pre-training helps specifically with extrapolation, on the out-
 of-support splits of ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R pre-trained models have substantially higher
 effective robustness than on the respective in-support splits (see Figure 4b). On both ImageNet-
 V2 splits, however, pre-trained models have very little effective robustness. This may be because
 ImageNet-V2 is visually similar to ImageNet, so poor extrapolation might not be a significant failure
 mode (instead, the performance drop may be due to an increased presence of “harder” examples, as
 Recht et al. (2019) suggest). Thus, if pre-training helps only with extrapolation, it would not be able
 to substantially improve robustness on the ImageNet-V2 out-of-support examples. See Appendix
 B.3.2 for a description of the exact setup.


 5                C OMBINING P RE -T RAINING WITH I NTERVENTIONS FOR H ANDLING B IAS
 Our observations in Section 4 suggest that pre-training indeed helps prevent failures caused by poor
 extrapolation but not those stemming from biases in the reference dataset. How, then, can we develop
 models that avoid both failure modes? In this section, we explore one possible strategy: combining
 pre-training with interventions specifically designed to handle dataset biases.
 In particular, we investigate the effectiveness of this strategy on WILDS-FMoW (Christie et al.,
 2018; Koh et al., 2020), a distribution shift benchmark for classifying satellite images (in Appendix
 C.3.1, we provide a similar analysis for a synthetic distribution shift). In WILDS-FMoW, the ref-
 erence dataset consists of satellite images taken between 2002 and 2012, while the shifted dataset
 consists of satellite images taken between 2016 and 2017. Additionally, the images depict differ-
 ent regions and models typically underperform on underrepresented regions. Following Koh et al.
 (2020), we evaluate the worst-group accuracy (the minimum accuracy across groups—in our case,
 regions) on the shifted dataset. Hence, robustness to this shift requires being able to both extrapolate
     2
       We also explored ObjectNet (Barbu et al., 2019) and ImageNet-Vid-Robust (Shankar et al., 2019) but our
 splitting method marks fewer than 50 examples from these shifted datasets as “in-support,” and thus we cannot
 reliably measure in-support accuracy.


                                                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Effective robustnesses                                                          Comparison of robustness benefits
                               60                                                                                    (i)                              (ii)
                                                                                                  15 Pearson r = -0.112                                          10 Pearson r = 0.798
Shifted worst-group accuracy


                                                                                                                                      MG(Pre-Training and DFR)
                               50                                                                 10
                                                               ER = 6.43%


                                                                               MG(Pre-Training)
                               40                                                                                                                                 5
                                                             ER = 3.59%                            5
                               30               ER = 1.86%                                         0                                                              0
                               20                                                                  5
                                                                                                  10                                                              5
                                    30           40        50             60                           4       2      0    2                                             10        0       10
                                            Reference accuracy                                                     MG(DFR)                                            MG(Pre-Training)+ MG(DFR )
                                         Baseline        Baseline linear fit                      y=x              Pre-Training    DFR                                 Pre-Training and DFR

Figure 5: Combining pre-training and Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR) on the WILDS-
FMoW distribution shift. Pre-training and DFR (an intervention designed to handle dataset biases
(Kirichenko et al., 2022)) each yield some effective robustness (ER) and combining these two inter-
ventions yields the most effective robustness (left). The margin gains (MG) of pre-training and DFR
on the shifted dataset are negatively correlated (right, i), indicating that they improve performance
on different subpopulations. Meanwhile, the margin gains of using both interventions are highly
correlated with the summed margin gains of using each individually (right, ii), suggesting that com-
bining pre-training with DFR improves performance on both of these subpopulations. Error bars
denote 95% confidence intervals over 64 random trials.

to later years and perform consistently across regions (e.g., by avoiding biases that are harmful to
performance on some regions).
Aiming to overcome these two challenges, we leverage two types of interventions. To extrapolate
better to later years, we initialize the model via pre-training; specifically, we obtain our model by
fine-tuning a CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) ViT-B/32 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) model. To handle
potential biases in the reference dataset, we employ Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR) (Kirichenko
et al., 2022), an intervention intended to de-bias a model by re-training just the final layer on group-
balanced data. We measure the effective robustness of each intervention over a baseline of ResNet-
18 models trained from scratch (see Appendix B.4 for a description of the exact setup). We find
that pre-training and DFR each yield some effective robustness and that combining the two yields
greater effective robustness than applying either individually (see the left side of Figure 5).
Understanding robustness benefits. We observe that combining pre-training and DFR can be
effective for developing robust models, but is this actually because they address different failure
modes, as we suggest? To answer this question, we conduct a more fine-grained comparison of the
robustness benefits of these two interventions.
If pre-training and DFR address different failure modes, then we might expect that they improve per-
formance on different subpopulations. To quantify the extent to which a given intervention improves
performance on a particular example, we measure the resulting (expected) increase in correct-class
margin. The correct-class margin (a measure of confidence in the correct class) of a model M on
an example (x, y) is defined as
                                              f (M, (x, y)) = (logit for correct class) − (highest incorrect logit).                                                                               (3)
Here, we opt to measure the increase in correct-class margin instead of a more explicit performance
metric (e.g., an indicator for correctness) in order to capture fine-grained differences in model be-
havior. Next, let A be a learning algorithm with the intervention of interest and B be a baseline
learning algorithm (where A ∼ A denotes that model A is obtained from running A). Then the
increase in correct-class margin when applying the intervention, i.e., the margin gain, is
                                                    MGB (A, (x, y)) = EA∼A,B∼B [f (A, x, y) − f (B, x, y)].                                                                                        (4)

Now, to determine whether pre-training and DFR improve performance on different subpopulations,
we compute the correlation between their margin gains on the shifted dataset. We find that their
margin gains are negatively correlated, suggesting that their benefits are indeed complementary. We


                                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        CelebA dataset (n = 162K)
                                                                                                                          Accuracy vs. worst-group accuracy
              Non-blond female: 44%                    Blond female: 14%
                                                                                                                       Baseline                    Pre-Training
                                                                                                                       Baseline linear fit         Curating (n = 64, , 8192)
                                                                                                                       y=x                         Pre-Training and Curating
                                                                                                                                                   (n = 64)
                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                                                    ER = 68.35%


                                                                                      Worst-group accuracy
               Non-blond male: 40%              Blond male: 1%
                                                                                                             80
                   Curated dataset (n = 64, …, 8192)                                                         70                         Avg. ER = 60.85%
          Non-blond female: 25%                    Blond female: 25%
                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                             50                                                   ER = 5.74%
                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                             30
    [Counterfactual] Blond female: 25%   [Counterfactual] Non-blond female: 25%
                                                                                                                  75        80         85           90               95
     Non-blond           Blond           Counterfactual (using image editing)                                                                Accuracy

(a) CelebA vs. our curated hair color classification                                  (b) Fine-tuning on our curated dataset. Fine-tuning
dataset. In the CelebA dataset (top), attributes such as                              a pre-trained model on the CelebA dataset (orange)
gender are spuriously correlated with the class (blond                                yields little effective robustness over a baseline of
vs. non-blond). In our much smaller curated dataset                                   models trained from scratch (blue). However, fine-
(bottom), every real image is paired with a synthe-                                   tuning the same pre-trained model on just 64 examples
sized “counterfactual example” of the other class. As                                 from our curated dataset (red) yields a model with both
a result, the primary difference between the blond and                                high effective robustness and high accuracy. Train-
non-blond populations is hair color; other attributes                                 ing from scratch on our curated dataset (green) also
such as gender, age and hair style are not predictive.                                yields high effective robustness, but results in substan-
We include only females in our dataset to illustrate that                             tially lower accuracy than pre-trained models, even
diversity might not be necessary for robustness when                                  with many more examples. Error bars denote 95%
fine-tuning.                                                                          confidence intervals over 64 random trials.

Figure 6: Fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a small, non-diverse but de-biased dataset (see Figure
6a) yields a robust and performant model for hair color classification in CelebA (see Figure 6b).


also measure the correlation between the margin gains of combining pre-training with DFR and
the summed margin gains of the individual interventions. We find that they are highly correlated,
suggesting that combining pre-training and DFR not only yields high effective robustness but in fact
leads to models with both sets of benefits (see the right side of Figure 5).


6     C URATING DATASETS FOR F INE -T UNING
In Section 5, we explored pairing pre-training with interventions specifically designed to address
dataset biases. We observed that this strategy can be effective for developing models that both
extrapolate effectively and avoid undesirable biases present in the reference distribution.
In this section, we highlight one such intervention: training on a carefully curated (and, in particular,
de-biased) dataset instead of the original reference dataset. In general, de-biasing a large and diverse
dataset may be prohibitively expensive. However, if we can rely on pre-training for extrapolation (as
suggested in Section 4), we might only need a small, non-diverse fine-tuning dataset, which would
be more feasible to de-bias. Thus, curating such a dataset and then fine-tuning a large pre-trained
model on it might be a relatively inexpensive method for developing robust and performant models.
As a case study, we consider the task of predicting hair color (blond vs. non-blond) in the CelebA
dataset (Liu et al., 2015). In this dataset, hair color is spuriously correlated with other attributes
(especially gender). For example, 24% of females are blond, while only 2% of males are blond.
Following works studying group robustness (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko
et al., 2022), we measure worst-group accuracy to assess robustness rather than measuring accuracy
on an explicit shifted dataset. In this case, the four groups are blond females, non-blond females,
blond males and non-blond males. A model exploiting the spurious correlation between gender and
hair color would likely perform poorly on the underrepresented group of blond males.


                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Curating a de-biased dataset. To curate an de-biased dataset for hair color classification with n
examples, we construct a “counterfactual example” for each of n/2 CelebA examples by changing
the person’s hair to a color corresponding to the opposite class (i.e., blond to non-blond and vice
versa). We ensure that attributes besides hair color remain unchanged and include both the original
and edited images in our dataset. Hence, attributes that are spuriously correlated with hair color in
the CelebA dataset (e.g., gender, age) are equally represented in the blond and non-blond popula-
tions of our curated dataset. To illustrate that this dataset does not need to be diverse to yield high
robustness and performance when fine-tuning, we restrict the dataset to include only females. See
Figure 6a for a visualization of the dataset and Appendix B.5 for the image editing process.
Fine-tuning on a de-biased dataset. As expected, models trained from scratch on the CelebA
dataset exhibit high accuracy but very low worst-group accuracy, likely because they rely on gender
to predict hair color (see Figure 6b). Furthermore, a pre-trained model fine-tuned on the CelebA
dataset exhibits very little effective robustness above these models trained from scratch, consistently
with our hypothesis that pre-training does not mitigate dataset biases. However, we observe that fine-
tuning a pre-trained model on just 64 examples from our curated dataset yields a model with both
high accuracy and effective robustness. Finally, we also train models from scratch on our curated
dataset and find that they exhibit substantial effective robustness, but require many more examples
to attain a comparable accuracy. This suggests that the extrapolation benefits of pre-training are
key to make effective use of our small, non-diverse curated dataset. In particular, as we illustrate in
Appendix C.4.1, pre-training improves extrapolation from the female-only curated dataset to males.


7   R ELATED W ORK

Characterizing distribution shifts. There exists a plethora of definitions for characterizing dis-
tribution shifts, many of which are aligned with the in-support and out-of-support chracterizations
that we discuss in this work. For example, domain generalization involves shifts in which the refer-
ence and shifted distributions are from different domains (Koh et al., 2020; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2020). In a subpopulation shift, subpopulations appear with different frequencies in the reference
and shifted distributions (Santurkar et al., 2021; Koh et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2023). In shifts
with spurious correlations, certain features are predictive in the reference distribution but not in the
shifted distribution (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020b). Two more formal characterizations
are covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000), under which p(y|x) is fixed, and label shift (Lipton et al.,
2018), under which the label distribution may change but p(x|y) is fixed. We relate these definitons
to in-support and out-of-support shifts in Appendix D.3.
Robustness benefits of pre-training. Several works have suggested that pre-training can be an
effective strategy for improving robustness to distribution shifts (Hendrycks et al., 2019; 2020a;b;
Tu et al., 2020; Wiles et al., 2021; Andreassen et al., 2021). In particular, Wiles et al. (2021) de-
fine different types of distribution shifts and find that pre-training frequently improves performance
under these shifts, while most other interventions primarily help in specific settings. In the natural
language processing setting, Tu et al. (2020) argue that when pre-training helps with spurious corre-
lations, it is because pre-trained models can generalize better from the small number of counterex-
amples to these correlations; as we discuss in Appendix D.4, this is consistent with our intuition that
pre-training helps specifically with extrapolation. Lastly, Bommasani et al. (2021) discuss failure
modes that pre-training is unlikely to address including spurious correlations (both in pre-training
and fine-tuning datasets) and extrapolation across time.


8   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we study the failure modes that pre-training can and cannot address. Our findings
suggest that pre-training can help mitigate failures caused by poor extrapolation (e.g., inability to
generalize to a new domain) but might not address other failures, such as those stemming from
dataset biases. In light of this observation, dataset biases present a fundamental limitation that cannot
be overcome by additional pre-training data or larger models. We thus encourage practitioners not
to treat pre-training as a panacea for robustness. Instead, they should consider the specific failures
modes they might encounter (i.e., ask their distribution shift) to determine if pre-training can help.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


9   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our work is a scientific investigation of the robustness benefits of pre-training and does not include
novel methods. We provide relevant references to existing methods in the main paper and experiment
details such as hyperparameters and preprocessing steps in the appendix. We intend to release source
code for running the experiments in this work upon publication.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02095, 2021.
Anders Andreassen, Yasaman Bahri, Behnam Neyshabur, and Rebecca Roelofs. The evolution of
  out-of-distribution robustness throughout fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15831, 2021.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Peter Bandi, Oscar Geessink, Quirine Manson, Marcory Van Dijk, Maschenka Balkenhol, Meyke
  Hermsen, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Byungjae Lee, Kyunghyun Paeng, Aoxiao Zhong, et al.
  From detection of individual metastases to classification of lymph node status at the patient level:
  the camelyon17 challenge. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2018.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.
Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
  Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the
  limits of object recognition models. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Sébastien Bubeck. Theory of convex optimization for machine learning.                arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1405.4980, 15, 2014.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 872–881. PMLR, 2019.
Gordon Christie, Neil Fendley, James Wilson, and Ryan Mukherjee. Functional map of the world.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 6
  2018.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. In Na-
  ture Machine Intelligence, 2020.
Karan Goel, Albert Gu, Yixuan Li, and Christopher Ré. Model patching: Closing the subgroup
  performance gap with data augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06775, 2020.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual net-
  works. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Nether-
  lands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pp. 630–645. Springer, 2016.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Piotr Dollár. Rethinking imagenet pre-training. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4918–4927, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Kimin Lee, and Mantas Mazeika. Using pre-training can improve model robustness
  and uncertainty. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2712–2721. PMLR, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization, 2020a.
Dan Hendrycks, Xiaoyuan Liu, Eric Wallace, Adam Dziedzic, Rishabh Krishnan, and Dawn Song.
  Pretrained transformers improve out-of-distribution robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06100,
  2020b.
John Hewitt, Xiang Lisa Li, Sang Michael Xie, Benjamin Newman, and Percy Liang. Ensembles
  and cocktails: Robust finetuning for natural language generation. 2021.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Conference on Causal Learning and
  Reasoning, pp. 336–351. PMLR, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, 2021.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of GANs for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Alexander Ke, William Ellsworth, Oishi Banerjee, Andrew Y Ng, and Pranav Rajpurkar. Chextrans-
  fer: performance and parameter efficiency of imagenet models for chest x-ray interpretation. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 116–124, 2021.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Sara Beery, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07421, 2020.
Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Jessica Yung, Sylvain Gelly,
  and Neil Houlsby. Big transfer (bit): General visual representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.11370, 2019.
Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Do better imagenet models transfer better? In
  computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. In Technical report, 2009.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10054, 2022.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. ffcv. https://github.com/libffcv/ffcv/, 2022.
Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo. Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive
  facial image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5549–5558, 2020.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zachary Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift with
  black box predictors. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3122–3130. PMLR,
  2018.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.
Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan, Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li,
  Ashwin Bharambe, and Laurens van der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly supervised
  pretraining. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
John Miller, Karl Krauth, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt. The effect of natural distribution
  shift on question answering models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6905–
  6916. PMLR, 2020.
John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
  between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7721–7735. PMLR, 2021.
Preetum Nakkiran, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. The deep bootstrap framework: Good
  online learners are good offline generalizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08127, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020b.
Hadi Salman, Saachi Jain, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Eric Wong, and Aleksander Madry.
  When does bias transfer in transfer learning? In arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02842, 2022.
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander Madry. Breeds: Benchmarks for subpopulation
  shift. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b:
  An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.08402, 2022.
Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, Rebecca Roelofs, Deva Ramanan, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Do image classifiers generalize across time? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02168, 2019.
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. Cnn features off-
  the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition. In conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition (CVPR) workshops, 2014.

                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 2000.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable ef-
  fectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, 2017.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Lifu Tu, Garima Lalwani, Spandana Gella, and He He. An empirical study on robustness to spurious
  correlations using pre-trained language models. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 8:621–633, 2020.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Eric P Xing, and Zachary C Lipton. Learning robust global represen-
  tations by penalizing local predictive power. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019.
Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                  https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre Alvise-Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy
  Dvijotham, and Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.11328, 2021.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01903, 2021.
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of
  image backgrounds in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020.
Michael Xie, Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Transfer learning from
 deep features for remote sensing and poverty mapping. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, 2016.
Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12254, 2023.
Nanyang Ye, Kaican Li, Haoyue Bai, Runpeng Yu, Lanqing Hong, Fengwei Zhou, Zhenguo Li,
  and Jun Zhu. Ood-bench: Quantifying and understanding two dimensions of out-of-distribution
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 7947–7958, 2022.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
A.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Setup. Suppose that we are given access to a reference dataset Sref of input-label pairs (x, y), with
x ∈ Rd and y ∈ {−1, 1}. We decide to learn a linear classifier for this task by finding a weight w
that minimizes the (standard) logistic loss on Sref :
                                             X                   ⊤
                               Lref (w) =             log(1 + e−w x·y ).                          (1)
                                                (x,y)∈Sref

We assume that the reference dataset Sref satisfies the following conditions:

      1. Inputs in Sref lie within a k-dimensional (with k < d) subspace Wref of Rd . Intuitively,
         this condition represents a lack of variation in certain features in the reference dataset (e.g.,
         if the reference dataset has fixed lighting conditions).
      2. The logistic loss Lref has a minimum value. This condition ensures that minimizing Lref
         is well-defined, and means (roughly) that the two classes are not linearly separable. Note
         that there may be multiple weights that attain this minimum value.
Theorem 3.1. Suppose that we start with initial weights winit ∈ Rd and run gradient descent to
minimize Lref (w). With an appropriately chosen learning rate, gradient descent converges to weights
ŵ that minimize Lref . Letting projWref winit be the projection of winit onto Wref , ŵ can be written as
                                           ∗
                                     ŵ = wref + (winit − projWref winit )                              (2)
       ∗
where wref is a property of the reference dataset Sref and lies within the reference subspace Wref .

To prove Theorem 3.1, we will first show that running gradient descent starting from an initialization
                                                           ∗
within Wref always converges to the same weights wref        . We will then show that running gradient
descent starting from an arbitrary initialization has the same convergence behavior except for an
“offset” term (winit − projWref winit ) representing the component of the initialization that lies outside
of Wref .

A.1.1     C ONVEXITY AND SMOOTHNESS OF THE LOSS
We begin by providing the gradient and hessian of Lref and using these to establish convexity
(Lemma A.1) and smoothness (Lemma A.2) properties of Lref . The gradient of Lref is
                                        X                  1
                          ∇Lref (w) =          x·y·              .                        (5)
                                                     1 + ew⊤ x·y
                                                 (x,y)∈Sref

The Hessian of Lref is
                                   X                            1
                 ∇2 Lref (w) =                xx⊤ ·                            = X ⊤ D(w)X              (6)
                                                      2 + e−w⊤ x·y + ew⊤ x·y
                                 (x,y)∈Sref

where X ∈ R|Sref |×d is the matrix of inputs in Sref and D(w) ∈ R|Sref |×|Sref | is the diagonal matrix
                          1
with D(w)ii =                       . Note in particular that the non-zero elements of D(w) are in
                2+e−w⊤ x·y +ew⊤ x·y
(0, 1/4).
Lemma A.1. The loss Lref is (1) convex on Rd , (2) strictly convex on Wref , and (3) strongly convex
on any closed convex subset of Wref .

Proof. According to Taylor’s Theorem, for any u, v ∈ Rd , there exists a α ∈ [0, 1] such that
                                                       1
      Lref (v) = Lref (u) + ∇Lref (u)⊤ (v − u) +         · (v − u)⊤ ∇2 Lref (v + α · (v − u))(v − u).   (7)
                                                       2

       1. Convexity on Rd . To show that Lref is convex on Rd , we need to show that
                                       Lref (v) ≥ Lref (u) + ∇Lref (u)⊤ (v − u)


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         for any u, v ∈ Rd . Using (7), it suffices to show that a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a ≥ 0 for any a ∈ Rd
         and w ∈ Rd . Recall from (6) that ∇2 Lref (w) = X ⊤ D(w)X. Thus, we have
                                      a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a = a⊤ X ⊤ D(w)Xa
                                                        = ∥D(w)1/2 Xa∥22
                                                        ≥0

      2. Strict convexity on Wref . Next, to show that Lref is strictly convex on Wref , we need to
         show that
                                 Lref (v) > Lref (u) + ∇Lref (u)⊤ (v − u)
         for any u, v ∈ Wref . Using (7), it suffices to show that a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a > 0 for any non-
         zero a ∈ Wref and w ∈ Wref . We know that a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a = ∥D(w)1/2 Xa∥22 . Since
         D(w) is diagonal with positive entries along the diagonal, ∥D(w)1/2 Xa∥22 > 0 if and only
         if Xa ̸= 0. Recall that Wref is the subspace spanning the rows of X. Hence, since a is
         non-zero and is in Wref , we know that Xa ̸= 0.
      3. Strong convexity on any closed convex subset of Wref . Finally, to show that Lref is
         strongly convex on any closed convex subset T of Wref , we need to show that there ex-
         ists an m > 0 such that
                                                                    m
                          Lref (v) ≥ Lref (u) + ∇Lref (u)⊤ (v − u) + ∥v − u∥22
                                                                    2
         for any u, v ∈ T . Using (7), it suffices to show that there exists an m > 0 such that
         a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a > m         2
                              2 · ∥a∥2 for any a ∈ Wref and w ∈ T . Making use of the fact that T is
         closed, let λmin be the minimum diagonal entry of D(w) for w ∈ T , that is,
                                       λmin = min        min           D(w)ii .
                                               w∈T i∈{1,...,|Sref |}

         Next, let cmin be the minimum value of ∥Xa∥22 over unit vectors a in Wref , that is,
                                         cmin =         min         ∥Xa∥22 .
                                                  a∈Wref ,∥a∥2 =1

         We previously established that Xa ̸= 0 for any non-zero a ∈ Wref , which means that cmin >
         0. Finally, we conclude that for m = 2 · λmin · cmin , a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a = ∥D(w)1/2 Xa∥22 ≥
         λmin · cmin · ∥a∥22 = m      2
                               2 · ∥a∥2 .


Lemma A.2. The gradient of the loss function ∇Lref is K-Lipschitz with K = ∥X∥2op /4.

Proof. To show that ∇Lref is K-Lipschitz, we need to show that ∇2 Lref (w) ⪯ KI. Recall from (6)
that ∇2 Lref (w) = X ⊤ D(w)X. Thus, we have
                           a⊤ ∇2 Lref (w)a = a⊤ X ⊤ D(w)Xa
                                           = ∥D(w)1/2 Xa∥22
                                           ≤ ∥D(w)1/2 ∥2op · ∥X∥2op · ∥a∥22
                                           ≤ (∥X∥2op /4) · ∥a∥22 .
In the final step, we use the fact that D(w) is diagonal with non-zero elements in (0, 1/4) to conclude
that ∥D(w)1/2 ∥2op ≤ 1/4.

A.1.2    C ONVERGENCE OF GRADIENT DESCENT WITHIN THE REFERENCE SUBSPACE
Next, we establish that there exists a unique minimumizer of Lref within the reference subspace Wref
(Lemma A.3) and that gradient descent converges to these weights (Lemma A.4).
                                  ∗                     ∗
Lemma A.3. There exists a unique wref ∈ Wref such that wref ∈ arg minw L(w).


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                ∗                      ∗
Proof. We will first show that there exists a wref ∈ Wref such that wref ∈ arg minw Lref (w). Let
w∗ ∈ arg minw Lref (w) be an arbitrary minimimum point of Lref . By definition, for every (x, y) ∈
Sref , x ∈ Wref . Hence, for every such x, w⊤ x = projWref w⊤ x. This means that Lref (w∗ ) =
Lref (projWref w∗ ), which implies that wref
                                         ∗
                                             := projWref w∗ ∈ arg minw Lref (w), as desired. Next,
                                                           ∗
because Lref is strictly convex on Wref (Lemma A.1), wref    is the only minimum point of Lref in
Wref .
Lemma A.4. If we start with winit ∈ Wref and run gradient descent with η = 4/∥X∥2op to minimize
                                        ∗
Lref (w), the weights will converge to wref .

Proof. Suppose that we start with initial weights winit ∈ Wref and run gradient descent to minimize
Lref with learning rate η. In particular, let w(0) = winit and w(t+1) = w(t) + η · ∇Lref (w(t) ).
Because Lref is convex (Lemma A.1), ∇Lref is K-Lipschitz with K = ∥X∥2op /4 (Lemma A.2), and
η = 4/∥X∥2op ≤ 1/K, we know from Theorem 3.2 of Bubeck (2014) that
                                                                           ∗
                                                    ∗        K · ∥winit − wref ∥
                              Lref (w(t) ) − Lref (wref )≤                       .                         (8)
                                                                   t−1
                                                                                    ∗
Hence, the loss attained by w(t) converges to the optimal loss attained by wref       . To show that w(t)
                ∗
converges to wref  , we will show that Lref is strongly convex on a set containing every w(t) for t ≥ 0.
                                                                     ∗                   ∗
In particular, consider the set WGD = {w ∈ Wref | ∥w − wref            ∥2 ≤ ∥winit − wref   ∥2 } containing
                                            ∗
weights in Wref at least as close to wref     as winit . Clearly, WGD contains w(0) = winit . We know
from Theorem 3.2 of Bubeck (2014) that with each iteration of gradient descent we get closer to a
                                          ∗                 ∗
minimum point, that is, ∥w(t+1) − wref      ∥ ≤ ∥w(t) − wref  ∥. Additionally, because winit and ∇Lref are
                   (t)                              (t)
in Wref , every w is in Wref . Hence, every w is in WGD . Because WGD is closed and convex,
from Lemma A.1 we know that Lref is strongly convex on WGD . This means that there exists an
m > 0 such that
                                   ∗               ∗ ⊤             ∗     m               ∗ 2
             Lref (w(t) ) ≥ Lref (wref ) + ∇Lref (wref ) (w(t) − wref )+     · ∥w(t) − wref ∥2 .
                                                                          2
                        ∗
Plugging in ∇Lref (wref   ) = 0 and rearranging, we get
                                     ∗ 2         2                          ∗
                            ∥w(t) − wref ∥2 ≤      · (Lref (w(t) ) − Lref (wref )).
                                                 m
Finally, combining with (8) yields
                                                                        ∗
                                          ∗ 2         2 · K · ∥winit − wref ∥
                                 ∥w(t) − wref ∥2 ≤                                                         (9)
                                                           m · (t − 1)
which completes our proof.

A.1.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.1. Suppose that we start with initial weights winit and run
gradient descent to minimize Lref with learning rate η = 4/∥X∥2op . In particular, let w(0) = winit and
w(t+1) = w(t) + η · ∇Lref (w(t) ) for t ≥ 0. We will show that running gradient descent starting with
an arbitrary winit has the same behavior as running gradient descent with winit projected onto Wref . To
be more precise, suppose that we instead start with initial weights projWref winit when running gradient
descent. In particular, let wproj (0) = projWref winit and wproj (t+1) = wproj (t) + η · ∇Lref (wproj (t) ) for
t ≥ 0. Then the trajectory of w(t) is the same as that of wproj (t) but with an additional component
(winit − projWref winit ), that is,

                                 w(t) = (winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (t) .
To show that this is the case, we will proceed by induction. As a base case,
                                w(0) = winit
                                     = winit − projWref winit + projWref winit
                                     = (winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (0) .


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the inductive step, assume that the statement holds for t = k. Then,
      w(k+1) = w(k) + η · ∇Lref (w(k) )
              = (winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (k) + η · ∇Lref ((winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (k) )
              = (winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (k) + η · ∇Lref (wproj (k) )
              = (winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (k+1)
where in the third step we use the fact that ∇Lref (w) = ∇Lref (projWref w). This completes the
induction. Because wproj (0) = projWref winit ∈ Wref , from Lemma A.4 (in particular, from equation 9),
we know that
                                                                           ∗
                                       ∗ 2      2 · K · ∥projWref winit − wref ∥
                         ∥wproj (t) − wref ∥2 ≤                                  .
                                                          m · (t − 1)
where K and m are positive constants. Finally, we conclude that
                                                                                                ∗
      ∥w(t) − ŵ∥22 = ∥((winit − projWref winit ) + wproj (t) ) − ((winit − projWref winit ) + wref )∥22
                                      ∗ 2
                     = ∥wproj (t) − wref ∥2
                                                  ∗
                       2 · K · ∥projWref winit − wref ∥
                     ≤
                                  m · (t − 1)
Hence, w(t) converges to ŵ, completing our proof.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

B.1     G ENERAL

B.1.1    M ODEL TRAINING
All models are trained using the FFCV data-loading library (Leclerc et al., 2022) on a cluster of
A100 GPUs.

B.1.2    M EASURING EFFECTIVE ROBUSTNESS
Effective robustness. In this work, we quantify the robustness of pre-trained models using effec-
tive robustness (ER), a measure of the robustness a model above the “baseline” of models trained
from scratch (Taori et al., 2020). Computing this metric first involves establishing a relationship
between the accuracies of baseline models (in our case, models trained from scratch on a reference
dataset). In particular, let Accref (M ) and Accshift (M ) denote the accuracies of a model M on test
datasets drawn from the reference and shifted distributions, respectively. Given a set Mbaseline of
baseline models, we compute a linear fit relating Φ−1 (Accref (M )) and Φ−1 (Accshift (M )), where
Φ−1 is the probit function (i.e., the inverse cumulative distribution function of the standard normal
distribution). We compute a linear fit relating probit-scaled accuracies because this has been em-
pirically observed to improve the strength of the linear relationship (Miller et al., 2021; Taori et al.,
2020). Formally, we compute parameters â and b̂ such that
                               X
           â, b̂ = arg min            ∥(a · Φ−1 (Accref (M )) + b) − Φ−1 (Accshift (M ))∥2 .
                     a,b   M ∈Mbaseline

    d shift (M ) be the resulting function estimating shifted accuracy given reference accuracy, that
Let Acc
is
                             d shift (M ) = Φ(â · Φ−1 (Accref (M )) + b̂).
                            Acc
Then the effective robustness of a model M is
                                         d shift (M ) − Accshift (M )
                                ER(M ) = Acc
Intuitively, effective robustness is the extent to which a model’s accuracy on the shifted distribution
exceeds the accuracy of a baseline model with the same accuracy on the reference distribution.
Establishing a baseline for effective robustness. To establish a baseline with respect to which
we can measure effective robustness, we train ResNet-18 models from scratch on differently sized
subsets of the reference dataset. The number of models and the minimum subset size vary by
experiment. Miller et al. (2021) observe that models trained from scratch in this way often exhibit a
strong linear relationship between their accuracies on the reference and shifted distributions (and the
same relationship holds for models with different architectures, hyperparameters, etc.). In each of
the experiments in which we measure effective robustness, we confirm that this relationship exists
for our baseline models (see, e.g., Figure 3).

B.2     C ONSTRUCTING SYNTHETIC IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SHIFTS

In Section 4.1, we measure the effective robustness of various pre-trained and fine-tuned models on
two in-support and two out-of-support shifts synthetically constructed by modifying CIFAR-10.
Specifications of synthetic shifts. Here, we provide detailed descriptions of the four synthetic
distribution shifts (see Figure 3 for visualizations).

      1. Tint shift (in-support): We tint images (i.e., replace each pixel with a mix of the original
         value, with weight 0.75 and a specific color, with weight 0.25) such that the tint is correlated
         with the label in the reference distribution but not in the shifted distribution (i.e., tint is a
         spurious feature). Specifically, in the reference distribution we apply tint with a class-
         specific color to 80% of examples and a tint with a random color to the remaining 20%.
         Meanwhile, in the shifted distribution we apply a tint with a random color universally.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        2. Label shift (in-support): Label shift is a commonly studied type of distribution shift in
           which the relative frequencies of classes change, but p(x|y) is fixed. To construct a label
           shift, we sub-sample CIFAR-10 such that in the reference distribution, the first five classes
           are four times more likely to appear than the last five classes. In the shifted distribution,
           these relative frequencies are reversed.
        3. Pad shift (out-of-support): We pad the images in the shifted distribution by adding 6 black
           pixels to each side of the original 32 × 32 CIFAR-10 images. Note that our models resize
           inputs to 224 × 224 as a pre-processing step, so padding does not affect the final size of
           images fed into our models.
        4. Flip shift (out-of-support): We vertically flip images in the shifted distribution.

Shared model specifications. For data augmentation, we use the FFCV implementations of Ran-
domHorizontalFlip and RandomTranslate. We preprocess images by resizing the original 32 × 32
images to a resolution of 224 × 224.
Specifications of baseline models. To establish a baseline, we train 64 models from scratch on
subsets ranging from 50% of the dataset to the entire dataset. We train baseline models by running
SGD for 96 epochs, using a triangular learning rate schedule with a peak learning rate of 0.5 and 5
warmup epochs, a batch size of 512, a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 and a momentum of 0.9.
Specifications of pre-trained models and fine-tuning strategies. We consider a 7 different pre-
trained models (implementations from PyTorch Image Models (Wightman, 2019)): ResNet-18 and
ResNet-50 models trained on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009), a Big Transfer (BiT) (Kolesnikov
et al., 2019) ResNet-503 model trained on ImageNet-21K, a BEiT (Bao et al., 2021) model with
patch size of 16 × 16 and resolution of 224 × 224 trained on ImageNet-22K (with self-supervised
training followed by standard supervised training), and CLIP models from Radford et al. (2021)
with ResNet-50, ViT-B/32 and ViT-B-16 architectures. For the ImageNet-1K models, BiT and BEiT
models, we employ full fine-tuning with a randomly initialized classification layer. For the CLIP
models, in addition to full fine-tuning we also consider linear probing followed by full fine-tuning
(LP-FT) (Kumar et al., 2022) and full fine-tuning initialized with zero-shot weights, as specified
by Radford et al. (2021). This results in a total of 13 pre-trained and fine-tuned models, which we
group in Figure 3 according to the pre-training and fine-tuning strategies (models within a single
group have different architectures, but are otherwise the same).
We fine-tune models by running Adam for 24 epochs, using a cosine learning rate schedule with
5 warmup epochs. We select the best peak learning rate (in terms of reference accuracy) among
1 × 10−2 , 3 × 10−3 , 1 × 10−3 , 3 × 10−4 , 1 × 10−4 , 3 × 10−5 , 1 × 10−5 , 3 × 10−6 . We use a
batch size of 256 for the BiT, BEiT and ViT-B/16 models (due to memory constraints) and a batch
size of 512 for other pre-trained models and use a weight decay of 0.1. When doing LP-FT, we
perform linear probing with the same hyperparameters as full fine-tuning, except that we always use
a learning rate of 0.1 and a weight decay of 0.

B.3      D IVIDING NATURAL SHIFTS INTO IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SPLITS

B.3.1      S PLITTING A S HIFTED DATASET
To split a shifted dataset into an “in-support split” and an “out-of-support split”, we would ideally
measure the reference distribution probability density pref of inputs in the shifted dataset and as-
sign inputs with small pref to the out-of-support split. Unfortunately, it is difficult to estimate pref
directly when dealing with high-dimensional inputs (in this case, images). Instead, we estimate the
probability density ratio pref /pshift , that is, how much more likely an input is under the reference
distribution than under the shifted distribution. We then assign examples in the shifted dataset with
pref /pshift < 0.2 to the out-of-support split and examples with pref /pshift ≥ 0.2 to the in-support split.
We visualize examples in Figure 11.
Estimating pref /pshift . To estimate pref /pshift , we use a classifier trained to distinguish between
examples from the reference and shifted datasets. Specifically, let p be a probability mass/density
function over examples that can either be drawn from Dref or Dshift (i.e., p represents the distribution
   3
       We use the ResNet-v2 variant of the ResNet-50 architecture from He et al. (2016).


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of a dataset created by joining a reference dataset and a shifted dataset). Next, let yref be the event
that an example is drawn from Dref and yshift be the event that an example is drawn from Dshift . We
can express the ratio pref /pshift as follows:
                             pref (x)     p(x|yref )
                                        =
                             pshift (x)   p(x|yshift )
                                          p(yref |x) · p(x)       p(yshift )
                                        =                   ·
                                              p(yref )        p(yshift |x) · p(x)
                                          p(yref |x) p(yshift )
                                        =              ·        .
                                          p(yshift |x) p(yref )
The terms p(yref ) and p(yshift ) are easy to estimate since they are simply the proportions of reference
and shifted examples in p. Hence, to estimate pref /pshift we just need to estimate p(yref |x) and
p(yshift |x).
To do so, we train a classifier to distinguish between reference and shifted examples on a dataset
drawn from p. We construct such a dataset by combining 100K samples from ImageNet with each of
the shifted datasets (for ImageNet-R, which contains a subset of the classes of ImageNet, we restrict
the 100K samples to these classes). Next, we fine-tune a CLIP ViT-L/14 pre-trained on LAION-2B
from OpenCLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021) to distinguish between reference and shifted examples. We first
fine-tune just the final layer with a learning rate of 0.1 and then fine-tune the entire model with the
best learning rate selected from 2×10−4 , 1×10−4 , 5×10−5 , 2×10−5 , 1×10−5 , 5×10−6 , 2×10−6
and 1 × 10−6 . After training the classifier, we calibrate it by rescaling its output. We then estimate
p(yref |x) and p(yshift |x) by applying a sigmoid to its output, from which we can estimate pref /pshift .
To estimate this ratio for the entire shifted dataset, we split the dataset into 10 folds and train a
classifier to estimate pref /pshift on each fold using the remaining 9 folds.
Calibrating the classifiers used for splitting As discussed in Section B.3, our method for divid-
ing a shifted dataset into an in-support split and an out-of-support split requires a calibrated classifier
to distinguish between examples from the reference and shifted datasets. Recall that to distinguish
between examples from the reference and shifted datasets, we fine-tune a CLIP ViT-L/14 pre-trained
on LAION-2B from OpenCLIP. Such over-parameterized models can be overconfident in their pre-
dictions (and thus uncalibrated), so we calibrate the classifier by rescaling its (logit) output.
In particular, let f be a (potentially uncalibrated) classifier trained to distinguish between examples
from the reference and shifted datasets (where the output of f is a logit). We find the scaling
parameter α that minimizes the standard logistic loss of f on a calibration set Scal :
                                               X                    ′
                              α = arg min ′
                                                      log(1 + e−α ·f (x)·y ).                      (10)
                                         α
                                             (x,y)∈Scal

We then define a rescaled classifier fcal (x) = α · f (x) (which is used to estimate the ratio pref /pshift ).
We produce calibration curves of the rescaled classifiers for each of the shifted datasets we split (see
Figure 7) and observe that they are indeed well-calibrated.

B.3.2    S PECIFICATIONS OF I MAGE N ET MODELS
To measure the robustness benefits of pre-training on in-support and out-of-support splits of Ima-
geNet distribution shifts, we take existing models from PyTorch Image Models (Wightman, 2019).
We establish a baseline for robustness by taking 77 models of different architectures trained from
scratch on ImageNet. We compute the effective robustness of 24 pre-trained models that are fine-
tuned on ImageNet. We select only models pre-trained on large web-scale datasets such as LAION-
2B Schuhmann et al. (2022) and IG-1B (Mahajan et al., 2018), as these models are likely to have
higher effective robustness.

B.4     C OMBINING PRE - TRAINING WITH INTERVENTIONS FOR HANDLING BIAS

Shared model specifications. When training on the WILDS-FMoW dataset, we use the FFCV
implementation of RandomHorizontalFlip. We train on a randomly sampled subset of the training
dataset that is 50% of the size of the original training dataset and reserve the remaining 50% for the
Deep Feature Reweighting intervention.


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  ImageNet-V2                           ImageNet Sketch                            ImageNet-R
                1.0                                         1.0                                     1.0

                0.8                                         0.8                                     0.8
Positive rate

                0.6                                         0.6                                     0.6

                0.4                                         0.4                                     0.4

                0.2                                         0.2                                     0.2

                0.0                                         0.0                                       0.0
                      0.0      0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                0.0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0              0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                            Average predicted probability            Average predicted probability           Average predicted probability
                                                            y = x (perfectly calibrated)       Our model

Figure 7: Calibration curves of classifiers used for splitting. We display calibration curves for
the classifiers used to divide ImageNet-V2, ImageNet-Sketch and ImageNet-R into in-support and
out-of-support splits. Specifically, we sort the outputs of each classifier on a combined dataset
of reference and shifted examples into 100 bins (where bin edges are quantiles). For each bin,
we compute the actual positive rate (i.e., the proportion of examples from the shifted dataset) and
the average predicted probability of an example being from the shifted dataset. When we plot
the actual positive rates against average predicted probabilities, they are close to equal (close to
y = x), suggesting that the classifiers are well-calibrated. Error bars denote 95% Clopper-Pearson
confidence intervals.


Specifications of models trained from scratch. We train models from scratch by running SGD
for 16 epochs, using a triangular learning rate schedule with a peak learning rate of 0.5 and 2 warmup
epochs, a batch size of 128, a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 and a momentum of 0.9.
Baseline specifications. To establish a baseline, we train 64 models from scratch on subsets rang-
ing from 25% of the dataset to the entire dataset.
Specifications of pre-trained models. The pre-trained model in this experiment is a CLIP ViT-
B/32 model initialized as a zero-shot classifier following Wortsman et al. (2021). We fine-tune
models by running AdamW for 10 epochs, using a cosine learning rate schedule with a peak learning
rate of 3 × 10−5 and 2 warmup epochs, a batch size of 512 and a weight decay of 0.1.
Our implementation of Deep Feature Reweighting. The Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR) inter-
vention proposed by Kirichenko et al. (2022) aims to improve the robustness of a model on difficult
subpopulations by using a validation dataset with group labels. The algorithm consists of two steps:
(1) train a standard model on the original training dataset, and (2) re-train only the final layer of the
model (i.e., “re-weight” the features of the model) on the validation dataset to be more favorable
to minority groups. To re-train the final layer, Kirichenko et al. (2022) repeatedly sample group-
balanced subsets of the validation dataset, re-train the final layer on each subset, and then average
the resulting re-trained final layers. Our implementation differs slightly in that we assign sample
weights to the validation dataset such that each group has equal total weight and re-train the final
layer on the weighted validation dataset. When applying Deep Feature Reweighting to WILDS-
FMoW, we use 50% of the training dataset for re-weighting.

B.5                   C URATING DATASETS FOR FINE - TUNING

Image editing to synthesize “counterfactual examples” In order to curate a “de-biased” dataset
for hair color classification, we edit images from CelebA-HQ (Karras et al., 2018), a subset of the
CelebA dataset with segmentation masks for each attribute provided by CelebAMask-HQ (Lee et al.,
2020). To change the hair color in a given image, we use InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), a
recent image editing model fine-tuned from Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). This model
accepts an input image to be edited along with a prompt describing the desired change (e.g., “change
the hair color to blond”). We find that InstructPix2Pix is able to successfully edit the hair color;
however, this model often makes undesired changes to attributes such as skin tone and eye color


                                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  InstructPix2Pix: “Change the hair color to blond”                            Counterfactual Example
                                                           Accept changes
                                                         within segmentation


                               Unwanted Edits                       Reject changes outside
                                                                    of segmentation


Figure 8: Synthesizing counterfactual examples. We edit hair color in CelebA-HQ images using
InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023). However, this model can also make unwanted changes to
attribute other than hair color, e.g., changing eye color (left). To avoid such issues, in the final image
we incorporate only changes within the hair region of the image.


(see, e.g., the left side of Figure 8). To ensure that we only edit hair color, we use the attribute masks
to isolate the pixels in a given image corresponding to the hair region, and ignore any changes made
outside of this area. When using a binary mask, this procedure could cause unnatural “edges” along
the border of the mask. Thus, we apply a Gaussian blur to the hair mask to smooth the transition
when “merging” the original and edited images.
To edit an image from non-blond to blond, we use the prompt “change the hair color to blond.”
When editing from blond to non-blond, however, we find that the prompt “change the hair color
to non-blond” gives inconsistent results, likely because the instruction is vague. We observe that
most non-blond people in the CelebA dataset have brown or black hair, so as a simple heuristic we
randomly edit each image with either the prompt “change the hair color to brown” or the prompt
“change the hair color to black.” See Figure 8 for a visualization of the image editing process.
Shared model specifications. Accuracy and worst-group accuracy on the CelebA dataset are sen-
sitive to hyperparameter choices. As a result, we conduct a grid search to select hyperparameters
for each type of model. We use class-balanced accuracy as the metric for hyperparameter selection,
which empirically better correlates with worst-group accuracy than standard accuracy.
When selecting hyperparameters for a curated dataset of a given size, we randomly sample 32
datasets of that size from a pool of 16, 000 images (i.e., 8, 000 CelebA images and their corre-
sponding counterfactual synthesized images) and average the class-balanced accuracies of models
trained on each dataset. When evaluating the accuracy and worst-group accuracy of models trained
on a curated dataset of a given size, we similarly randomly sample 64 datasets of that size and report
average metrics.
For all models, we use the FFCV implementation of RandomHorizontalFlip for data augmentation.
Specifications of models trained from scratch. We train ResNet-18 models from scratch by run-
ning SGD for 32 epochs, using a triangular learning rate schedule with 4 warmup epochs. We use
a batch size of 128, a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 and a momentum of 0.9. We select the best com-
bination of batch size and learning rate from batch sizes of 64, 128, 256, 512 and learning rates of
0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.02, 0.01.
When training models from scratch on our curated dataset, we run SGD for 512 epochs and use a
triangular learning rate schedule with 64 warmup epochs. We use a batch size equal to the total num-
ber of examples when it is less than 512 and a batch size of 512 otherwise. We use a weight decay of
5×10−4 and a momentum of 0.9. We select the best learning rate from 0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.02, 0.01.
Baseline specifications. To establish a baseline, we train 100 models from scratch on subsets
ranging from 5% of the dataset to the entire dataset.


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifications of pre-trained models. The pre-trained model in this experiment is a CLIP ViT-
B/32 model initialized as a zero-shot classifier with “blond” and “non-blond” as the class names.
We fine-tune models by running AdamW for 16 epochs, using a cosine learning rate schedule with 2
warmup epochs, and a weight decay of 0.1. We select the best combination of batch size and learning
rate from batch sizes of 64, 128, 256, 512 and learning rates of 3×10−5 , 1×10−5 , 3×10−6 , 1×10−6 .
When training on our curated dataset, we use a batch size of 64 (the size of the dataset) and select
the best learning rate from 3 × 10−5 , 1 × 10−5 , 3 × 10−6 , 1 × 10−6 .


                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1     C ONSTRUCTING SYNTHETIC IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SHIFTS

C.1.1    H OW DOES THE CHOICE OF FINE - TUNING HYPERPARAMETERS AFFECT ROBUSTNESS ?

In Section 4.1, we select hyperparameters (in particular, learning rate) for fine-tuning that maxi-
mize accuracy on the reference distribution. This reasonably simulates hyperparameter selection in
practice because typically only samples from the reference distribution are available.
In this section, we investigate how the choice of hyperparameters affects the robustness of pre-
trained models. In particular, we would like to understand if pre-training yields little effective
robustness to in-support shifts and substantial effective robustness to out-of-support shifts across
a wider range of hyperparameter choices. We study the tint shift (an in-support shift) and the pad
shift (an out-of-support shift) from Section 4.1 and vary the learning rate, weight decay, number
of epochs, and batch size of a CLIP ViT-B/32 initialized with zero-shot weights (Figure 9). With
zero-shot initialization, the starting point of fine-tuning is a robust model that performs well on
our task. Hence, even under an in-support shift, hyperparameter choices that do not change the
model substantially (e.g., low learning rate, small number of epochs) result in substantial effective
robustness. However, these hyperparameter choices generally result in lower absolute reference and
shifted accuracies, and are thus unreasonable. The hyperparameter choices that are relevant in prac-
tice are those with high reference accuracy, and these are the hyperparameters that we use in our
experiments.

C.1.2    W HY DO PRE - TRAINED MODELS EXHIBIT ANY EFFECTIVE ROBUSTNESS UNDER
         IN - SUPPORT SHIFTS ?

On the left side of Figure 3, we observe a small robustness gap between pre-trained models and
models trained from scratch on in-support shifts constructed with CIFAR-10. This seemingly refutes
our intuition that pre-training helps specifically with extrapolation, which implies that in-support,
pre-training should offer no robustness benefits. However, we hypothesize that this robustness gap
actually stems from extrapolation: under empirical shifts (where we have access to samples and not
an actual distribution), models must extrapolate from the limited number of samples available. For
example, in the label shift setting there are only 1, 250 instances of each of the minority classes in
the training dataset, and these samples may not fully represent the distributions of these classes.
To determine whether the limited sample size explains the robustness gap, we repeat our experiment
from Section 4.1 on 1 million examples (a 20× increase in size) from the CIFAR-5m dataset (Nakki-
ran et al., 2020), a large synthetically generated dataset resembling CIFAR-10. Besides the number
of epochs, which we decrease due to the larger dataset size, we use the same hyperparameters as in
the original experiment and again select the learning rate for fine-tuning that maximizes reference
accuracy. We observe that with a larger sample size, the effective robustness of pre-trained models
on in-support shifts vanish (Figure 10). This suggests that under the CIFAR-10 in-support shifts, the
small effective robustnesses of pre-trained models are due to extrapolation from the small number
of samples available, which would be consistent with our hypothesis. We also observe decreases in
the effective robustnesses of pre-trained models on out-of-support shifts, though pre-trained models
still exhibit substantial robustness under these shifts. This may be because as the size of the fine-
tuning dataset increases, the pre-trained features change more during fine-tuning, leading to lower
robustness.


C.2     D IVIDING NATURAL SHIFTS INTO IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SPLITS

C.2.1    S IZES OF IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SPLITS

In Table 1, we report the sizes of the in-support and out-of-support splits we compute for ImageNet-
V2, ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R. The out-of-support splits are much larger than the in-support
splits, perhaps because the large majority of the examples from these shifted datasets look unlike
examples from ImageNet.


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Varying learning rate                                                               Varying batch size
                                                            Baseline
                                                            Baseline linear fit                                                               Baseline
Shifted accuracy                                            Zero-shot init.                                                                   Baseline linear fit


                                                                                  Shifted accuracy
                                                            y=x                                                                               Zero-shot init.
                   95                                       3e-05                                    95                                       y=x
                                                            1e-05 (used)                                                                      64
                   90                                       3e-06                                    90                                       128
                                                            1e-06                                                                             256
                   85                                       3e-07                                    85                                       512 (used)
                   80                                       1e-07                                    80
                        8587.5 90 92.5 95       97.5                                                      8587.5 90 92.5 95       97.5
                                 Reference accuracy                                                                Reference accuracy
                            Varying number of epochs        Baseline                                            Varying weight decay
                                                            Baseline linear fit                                                               Baseline
                                                            Zero-shot init.                                                                   Baseline linear fit
                                                            y=x                                                                               Zero-shot init.
Shifted accuracy


                                                                                  Shifted accuracy
                                                                                                                                              y=x
                                                            2                                                                                 0.1 (used)
                   95                                       4                                        95
                                                            6                                                                                 0.01
                   90                                       8                                        90                                       0.001
                                                            12                                                                                0.0001
                   85                                                                                85                                       1e-05
                                                            24 (used)                                                                         0.0
                   80                                       48                                       80
                        8587.590 92.5 95      97.5                                                        8587.5 90 92.5 95       97.5
                                Reference accuracy                                                                 Reference accuracy

(a) In-support shift. The in-support shift we consider is the “tint shift” in which we introduce a tint that is
spuriously correlated with the label. On this in-support shift, learning rate and number of epochs influence
effective robustness, but the best hyperparameter choices result in a model with little effective robustness.
                              Varying learning rate                                                               Varying batch size
                                                            Baseline
                   98                                       Baseline linear fit                      98                                       Baseline
                                                            Zero-shot init.                                                                   Baseline linear fit
Shifted accuracy


                                                                                  Shifted accuracy


                   96                                       y=x                                      96                                       Zero-shot init.
                                                            3e-05                                                                             y=x
                   94                                       1e-05 (used)                             94                                       64
                   92                                       3e-06                                    92                                       128
                   90                                       1e-06                                    90                                       256
                   88                                       3e-07                                    88                                       512 (used)
                   86                                       1e-07                                    86
                        88 90 92 94       96           98                                                 88 90 92 94       96           98
                               Reference accuracy                                                                Reference accuracy
                            Varying number of epochs        Baseline                                            Varying weight decay
                                                            Baseline linear fit                                                               Baseline
                   98                                                                                98                                       Baseline linear fit
                                                            Zero-shot init.                                                                   Zero-shot init.
                                                            y=x
Shifted accuracy


                                                                                  Shifted accuracy


                   96                                                                                96                                       y=x
                                                            2                                                                                 0.1 (used)
                   94                                       4                                        94                                       0.01
                                                            6                                                                                 0.001
                   92                                       8                                        92
                   90                                       12                                       90                                       0.0001
                   88                                       24 (used)                                88                                       1e-05
                   86                                       48                                       86                                       0.0
                        88 90 92 94       96           98                                                 88 90 92 94       96           98
                               Reference accuracy                                                                Reference accuracy

(b) Out-of-support shift. The out-of-support shift we consider is the “pad shift” in which we pad images in the
shifted distribution. On this out-of-support shift, batch size most significantly affects robustness, while learning
rate and number of epochs affect overall performance.

Figure 9: The effects of hyperparameter choices on robustness. We vary hyperparameters when
fine-tuning a CLIP ViT-B/32 initialized with zero-shot weights on synthetic CIFAR-10 shifts from
Section 4.1 (different shades of green). Varying certain hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate, number
of epochs) can affect the effective robustness of pre-trained models even on an in-support shift. In
our experiments, we choose hyperparameters which yield high reference accuracy (purple).


C.2.2                       E XAMPLES FROM IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SPLITS

In Figure 11, we provide samples from the in-support and out-of-support splits we compute for
ImageNet-V2, ImageNet-Sketch and ImageNet-R.


                                                                                  26
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              In-support shifts                                                                     Out-of-support shifts
                                 Tint shift                           Label shift                                          Pad shift                            Flip shift


                         ER = 0.24%                          ER = 0.11%                                        94 ER = 2.33%                           ER = 3.05%
                                                        94                                                                                        90
                   96                                                                                          92
Shifted accuracy


                                                                                            Shifted accuracy
                   94                                   92                                                                                        80
                                                                                                               90
                   92                                                                                                                             70
                                                        90                                                     88
                   90                                                                                                                             60
                   88                                   88                                                     86
                   86                                                                                                                             50
                   84                                                                                          84                                 40
                        95     96        97                 91 92          93      94                               91     92     93       94             91      92      93     94
                             Reference accuracy                    Reference accuracy                                 Reference accuracy                      Reference accuracy
                                               Baseline                   y=x              BiT                       CLIP                CLIP (zero shot init.)
                                               Baseline linear fit        ImageNet         BEiT                      CLIP (LP-FT)

  Figure 10: Robustness of pre-trained models to synthetic in-support and out-of-support shifts
  constructed from CIFAR-5m. Pre-trained models exhibit virtually no effective robustness on the
  in-support shifts (left), but have significant effective robustness on the out-of-support shifts (right).
  Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals over 8 random trials.

                                                   Table 1: Sizes of in-support and out-of-support splits.

                                      Dataset                         In-support split size                              Out-of-support split size
                                      ImageNet-V2                                   1920                                                8080
                                      ImageNet Sketch                                162                                               50727
                                      ImageNet-R                                     588                                               29412


  C.2.3                      S CATTER PLOTS OF REFERENCE VS . SHIFTED ACCURACY

  In Figure 12, we provide scatter plots of accuracy on ImageNet vs. accuracy on the in-support and
  out-of-support splits of ImageNet-V2, ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R.

  C.2.4                      C ONTROLLING FOR DIFFICULTY WHEN MEASURING EFFECTIVE ROBUSTNESS

  The significance of a given effective robustness depends on the “difficulty” of a distribution shift. For
  example, if a shift causes an accuracy drop of 5%, an effective robustness of 4% might be considered
  large, but if a shift that causes a drop of 25%, an effective robustness of 4% would probably be
  considered small. When we divide a shifted dataset into an in-support and out-of-support split, the
  out-of-support split is typically more difficult than the in-support split. If we compare the effective
  robustness of pre-trained models on examples of similar difficulty in the in-support and out-of-
  support splits, do our findings from Section 4.2 still hold? In particular, do pre-trained models still
  exhibit substantially higher robustness on out-of-support examples than on in-support examples?
  To answer this question, we re-weight examples in out-of-support splits such that the difficulty
  distribution of the out-of-support split matches that of the in-support split. Specifically, we quantify
  the difficulty of a given example in terms of the fraction of baseline models (of 77 total baseline
  models) that classify it incorrectly. Given an example of difficulty d, we re-weight it by a factor
  of pin-support (d)/pout-of-support (d) where pin-support is the difficulty probability density function of the
  in-support split and pout-of-support is the difficulty probability density function of the out-of-support
  split. We then compute a “re-weighted” accuracy, which in turn yields a re-weighted effective
  robustness, on the out-of-support split. Intuitively, this re-weighted effective robustness represents


                                                                                           27
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     ImageNet
                  pedestal       sulphur          broom          Wire Fox         Bernese    Saharan horned       gyromitra       kingsnake         popsicle     infant bed
                                 butterfly                        Terrier       Mountain Dog      viper
In-support
    V2


                 great white      joystick       cabbage       English Setter      wallet        construction       apron        Dobermann          geyser       wild boar
                    shark                                                                           crane
Out-of-support
      V2


                    cello       fox squirrel       pole         freight car      tape player      frying pan      tow truck       plate rack         eraser      Bedlington
                                                                                                                                                                   Terrier
In-support
  Sketch


                 feather boa    grey whale        steam         toilet paper       couch         Siamese cat       aircraft      cliff dwelling   through arch   rotary dial
                                               locomotive                                                          carrier                           bridge      telephone
Out-of-support
   Sketch


                  football       washing        Arctic fox         snail          tile roof      screwdriver    loggerhead sea   night snake      water snake    plectrum
                  helmet         machine                                                                             turtle
In-support
     R


                     pig       West Highland   Border Collie       castle        strawberry      grasshopper       scorpion      assault rifle    scuba diver     lipstick
                               White Terrier
Out-of-support
       R


                  scorpion        Golden         revolver        clownfish         violin           snail          tree frog       banana         soccer ball    pufferfish
                                 Retriever

 Figure 11: Random samples from ImageNet and from the in-support and out-of-support splits
 of ImageNet-V2, ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R. In ImageNet-V2, it is difficult to distinguish
 between examples from the in-support and out-of-support splits. In ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-
 R, examples from the in-support splits look more realistic (i.e., more like ImageNet examples) than
 examples from the out-of-support splits.


 the effective robustness of pre-trained models on out-of-support examples of similar difficulty to
 in-support examples.
 We report the re-weighted effective robustnesses in Figure 13. We observe that the re-weighted ef-
 fective robustnesses of pre-trained models on out-of-support splits are indeed lower than the original
 effective robustnesses. However, they are still substantially higher than the effective robustnesses on
 in-support splits.

 C.3                C OMBINING PRE - TRAINING WITH INTERVENTIONS FOR HANDLING BIAS

 C.3.1                 S TUDYING A SYNTHETIC SHIFT

 In this section, we provide an additional experiment in a synthetic setting to further illustrate that
 pre-training and interventions designed to handle dataset biases can be complementary. In Section
 5, we discussed how robustness to the WILDS-FMoW distribution shift requires both extrapolating
 to later years and performing consistently across regions. We construct a synthetic distribution shift
 using that similarly requires both extrapolating well and avoiding reliance on spurious features.
 Specifically, we combine the tint and pad shifts from Section 4.1. We modify CIFAR-10 such that in
 the reference distribution, we add a tint that is spuriously correlated with the label: 80% of reference


                                                                                            28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      ImageNet-V2                                                           ImageNet Sketch                               ImageNet-R
                               ER = 0.36%                                                           ER = 1.87%                                   ER = 3.66%
In-support accuracy       85                                                                  85
                                                                                              80                                          90
                          80                                                                  75
                          75                                                                  70                                          80
                                                                                              65                                          70
                          70
                                                                                              60                                          60
                          65                                                                  55                                          50
                          60                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                          40
                                70    75     80                                    85                  70     75        80       85              87.5 90 92.5      95        97.5
                                                                                              90
                               ER = 0.97%                                                           ER = 17.80%                                  ER = 21.18%
                          85                                                                  80
Out-of-support accuracy


                                                                                                                                          90
                          80                                                                  70
                                                                                              60                                          80
                          75                                                                                                              70
                                                                                              50                                          60
                          70
                                                                                              40                                          50
                          65                                                                                                              40
                                                                                              30
                          60                                                                                                              30
                          55                                                                  20                                          20
                                70    75    80       85                                                70    75       80   85                    87.5 90 92.5 95             97.5
                                     ImageNet Accuracy                                                     ImageNet Accuracy                   ImageNet (class-subsampled) Accuracy
                                                     Baseline                                      Baseline linear fit      Pre-Trained            y=x

Figure 12: Reference vs. shifted accuracy for in-support and out-of-support splits of ImageNet
shifts. On each of the three ImageNet shifts we consider, the average effective robustness (ER)
of pre-trained models (orange) above the baseline of models trained from scratch (blue) on the
in-support split (top) is small. Meanwhile, their effective robustness can be very large on the out-of-
support split (bottom).


                                                                                        Out-of-support
                                                                                        Out-of-support (re-weighted)
                                                                            0.20        In-support
                                             Average effective robustness


                                                                            0.15

                                                                            0.10

                                                                            0.05

                                                                            0.00
                                                                                         ImageNet-V2           ImageNet Sketch        ImageNet-R

Figure 13: Re-weighed effective robustness of pre-trained models on in-support and out-of-
support splits of ImageNet shifts. When we re-weight examples in out-of-support splits to match
the difficulty distributions of their corresponding in-support splits, the average effective robustnesses
of pre-trained models (green) decrease relative to the original effective robustnesses (blue). How-
ever, they are still very high on ImageNet Sketch and ImageNet-R. Meanwhile, the average effective
robustnesses of pre-trained models on in-support splits (orange) are consistently low.


examples have a class-specific tint while the remaining 20% are randomly tinted. Meanwhile, in the
shifted distribution, examples are always randomly tinted and are also padded.
To extrapolate to padded examples, we initialize a CLIP ViT-B/32 with zero-shot weights and fine-
tune it on the reference distribution. To handle the spurious correlation between tint and label, we
consider the intervention of training on randomly tinted examples, which we refer to as balancing.


                                                                                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Effective robustnesses                                                         Comparison of robustness benefits
                                                                                                             (i)                                                                    (ii)
                                                                                                Pearson r = 0.163                                                15 Pearson r = 0.901


                                                                                                                                MG(Pre-Training and Balancing)
                                                 ER = 13.55%                               15
                                                                                                                                                                 10
Shifted accuracy
                   95                                                                      10


                                                                        MG(Pre-Training)
                                                           ER = 7.66%
                   90                                                                      5                                                                      5
                        ER = 15.05%                                                                                                                               0
                   85                                                                      0
                   80                                                                                                                                             5
                   75                                                                       5
                   70                                                                                                                                            10
                   65                                                                      10
                   60
                         95      96       97        98                                           5         0         5                                                    10       0      10     20
                                      Reference accuracy                                               MG(Balancing)                                                  MG(Pre-Training) + MG(Balancing)
                              Baseline         Baseline linear fit           y=x                     Pre-Training        Balancing                                     Pre-Training and Balancing

Figure 14: Combining pre-training and balancing on a synthetic CIFAR-10 distribution shift.
Pre-training and balancing (an “oracle” intervention for handling dataset biases) each yield some
effective robustness (ER) and combining these two interventions yields a high effective robustness
and the highest shifted accuracy (left). The margin gains (MG) of pre-training and balancing on
the shifted dataset are nearly uncorrelated (right, i), indicating that they improve performance on
different subpopulations. Meanwhile, the margin gains of using both interventions are very highly
correlated with the summed margin gains of using each individually (right, ii), suggesting that com-
bining pre-training and balancing improves performance on both of these subpopulations. Error bars
denote 95% confidence intervals over 64 random trials.


This is an “oracle” of sorts for handling dataset biases; it simply modifies the training distribution
such that spurious features are not useful.
As with WILDS-FMoW, we find that pre-training and balancing each yield some effective robust-
ness (see the left side of Figure 14). In this case, combining the two does not yield the greatest
effective robustness, but does have the highest shifted accuracy. We apply the same methodology
as in Section 5 to understand the robustness benefits of pre-training and balancing. We observe that
their margin gains have a low positive correlation and that the margin gains of using both interven-
tions are very highly correlated with the summed margin gains of using each individually (see the
right side of Figure 14). These results corroborate our finding that pre-training and interventions
designed to handle dataset biases can be complementary.

C.4                     C URATING DATASETS FOR FINE - TUNING

C.4.1                     U NDERSTANDING THE ROBUSTNESS BENEFITS OF PRE - TRAINING WHEN FINE - TUNING
                          ON A CURATED DATASET

In Section 6, we find that fine-tuning on a curated dataset with only 64 examples can yield a per-
formant and robust model for hair color classification. We observe that pre-training is necessary for
effective use of the small curated dataset; in particular, training a model from scratch on a curated
dataset yields robustness gains, but these gains are smaller and many more examples are required to
attain comparable accuracy.
In this section, we shed additional light on how pre-training helps in this setting. Based on our in-
tuition from Sections 3 and 4 that pre-training helps specifically with extrapolation, we hypothesize
that pre-training provides two benefits when training on a small curated dataset. First, a pre-trained
model may be able to extrapolate better from a small number of examples. This would result in
both higher accuracy on the original CelebA distribution and higher worst-group accuracy, which
we observe in Figure 6b. Second, recall that our curated dataset consists entirely of females, but hair
color classification models are expected to perform well on males too. To compare different model’s
ability to extrapolate along this axis, we plot the balanced accuracy on males against the balanced
accuracy on females. In Figure 6a, we observe that the pre-trained model indeed generalizes better
to males than models trained from scratch.


                                                                                                  30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       y=x
                                             90        Curating (n = 64, , 8192)
                                                       Curating (n = 64, , 8192) linear fit
                                                       Pre-Training and Curating (n = 64)
                    Male balanced accuracy


                                             85


                                             80

                                             75

                                             70

                                             65
                                                  78       80     82      84       86       88    90   92
                                                                       Female balanced accuracy

Figure 15: Comparing extrapolation from females to males of pre-trained models and models
trained from scratch. We plot the balanced accuracy on males against the balanced accuracy of
females of a pre-trained model fine-tuned on the curated dataset from Section 6 (red) and models
trained from scratch on this dataset (green). Models trained from scratch establish a linear relation-
ship between male and female balanced accuracy; however, the pre-trained model outperforms this
trend, suggesting that it more effectively extrapolates to males from the female-only curated dataset.


                                                                               31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION

D.1    A LTERNATIVE FINE - TUNING STRATEGIES

In this work, we focus on the common setting in which a pre-trained model is fully fine-tuned. It is
important to note that pre-trained models used in a zero-shot context (i.e., without fine-tuning) and
partially fine-tuned models (e.g., only the final classification layer is updated) are frequently more
robust than fully fine-tuned models (Radford et al., 2021; Miller et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022).
Such models may have higher effective robustness than fully fine-tuned models or in some cases
may even outperform fully fine-tuned models on the shifted distribution. However, such models are
typically less performant on the reference distribution than fully fine-tuned models.
Several works observe this tradeoff between performance on the reference distribution and robust-
ness and devise methods for mitigating it, i.e., methods for robust fine-tuning (Wortsman et al., 2021;
Hewitt et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022). For example, Kumar et al. (2022) argue that full fine-tuning
“distorts” pre-trained features and propose linear probing before full fine-tuning (LP-FT) to prevent
distortion. They also suggest that fine-tuning a model initialized as a zero-shot classifier may have
a similar effect. In addition to full fine-tuning, in Section 4.1 we thus consider LP-FT and zero-shot
initialization for fine-tuning. On in-support shifts, we observe that LP-FT and zero-shot initialization
do not provide effective robustness benefits compared to full fine-tuning (see Figure 3), suggesting
that these strategies do not help mitigate dataset biases.
Another strategy for robust fine-tuning is to ensemble a zero-shot model and a fully fine-tuned
model. Both weight-space ensembles (Wortsman et al., 2021) and output-space ensembles (Hewitt
et al., 2021) have been shown to improve robustness, sometimes even without sacrificing perfor-
mance on the reference distribution. In fact, this strategy can yield robustness benefits even when
dataset biases are a primary failure mode because the zero-shot model is independent of the biased
reference dataset. Our work seeks to complement such empirically effective strategies by providing
an understanding of when they are necessary. In particular, our findings suggest that ensembling is
valuable precisely when dataset biases cause failures.

D.2    C AN PRE - TRAINING HURT EXTRAPOLATION ?

In this work, we discuss distribution shifts in which pre-training is beneficial to a model’s ability
to extrapolation outside of the reference distribution. A natural question to consider is whether
pre-training can instead hurt it, yielding worse extrapolation than a model trained from scratch. A
recent work by Salman et al. (2022) suggests that this is indeed possible. Specifically, they show
that biases of pre-trained models can persist during fine-tuning. For example, a model pre-trained
on ImageNet and fine-tuned on CIFAR-10 is highly sensitive to the presence of tennis balls (which
are an ImageNet class but not a CIFAR-10 class). Meanwhile, a model trained from scratch on
CIFAR-10 is not particularly sensitive to tennis balls. Thus, under a hypothetical “tennis ball shift”
in which tennis balls appear in images in the shifted distribution, a pre-trained model would be less
robust than a model trained from scratch. In this instance, pre-training provides a harmful prior for
how to extrapolate.

D.3    R ELATING IN - SUPPORT AND OUT- OF - SUPPORT SHIFTS TO EXISTING
       CHARACTERIZATIONS

The characterizations relevant in this work, in-support shift and out-of-support shift, overlap with
many existing definitions. Ye et al. (2022) introduce notions of correlation shift and diversity shift
(closely aligned with in-support and out-of-support shifts, respectively) and provide a method for
measuring the “amount” of each type of shift in a given distribution shift (similar to our method
for dividing a distribution shift into in-support and out-of-support splits). Subpopulation shift (and
its sub-types), shifts involving spurious correlations, covariate shift, and label shift are typically in-
support. However, there are exceptions; for example, some works consider subpopulation shifts in
which a subpopulation does not appear in the reference distribution (Santurkar et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2023), which are out-of-support. Domain generalization problems are nearly always out-of-
support and extrapolating effectively outside of the reference distribution is often a key challenge of
these tasks.


                                                   32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.4   U NDERSTANDING THE ROBUSTNESS OF PRE - TRAINED LANGUAGE MODELS TO
      SPURIOUS CORRELATIONS

Tu et al. (2020) study the robustness of pre-trained language models to distribution shifts with spu-
rious correlations. Their central finding is that pre-training can improve performance on shifted
datasets in which spurious correlations do not hold. They illustrate that this is because pre-trained
models can generalize better from the small number of counterexamples to these correlations in the
reference dataset. This is a similar phenomenon to our observation from Section 4.1 that pre-training
can provide limited effective robustness even on in-support shifts (which we further explain in Sec-
tion C.1.2). In cases such as those discussed by Tu et al. (2020), we hypothesize that pre-training can
help to a limited extent by extrapolating better, but cannot mitigating the underlying failure mode of
dataset biases.

D.5   A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK

Pre-training. Pre-training a model (or taking an existing pre-trained model) and then fine-tuning
it on a task-specific dataset is a common practice when developing machine learning models, of-
ten significantly improving performance over training a model from scratch (Sharif Razavian et al.,
2014; Sun et al., 2017; Kornblith et al., 2019; Kolesnikov et al., 2019). Pre-training can be effective
even when the downstream task is unrelated to the pre-training task, suggesting that pre-training
yields useful general-purpose features; for example, object classification models trained on Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009) are good initializations for remote sensing (Xie et al., 2016) and medical
imaging (Ke et al., 2021) tasks. Although greatly effective, pre-training is not without limitations. In
some settings, pre-training does not improve performance over a randomly initialized model trained
for long enough (He et al., 2019). Downstream performance can saturate as performance on the
pre-training task improves (Abnar et al., 2021). Finally, biases of pre-trained models can persist
after fine-tuning (Salman et al., 2022).
Distribution shift robustness. Machine learning models are often deployed in different environ-
ments from those in which they are trained. Such distribution shifts can cause models to significantly
underperform (Koh et al., 2020; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2020a). Numer-
ous interventions have been proposed to improve the robustness of models, often targeting particular
types of shifts. These include algorithmic interventions (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Byrd & Lipton, 2019;
Sagawa et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022; Idrissi et al., 2022) (often requiring
group information), data augmentations (Hendrycks et al., 2020a; Goel et al., 2020) and pre-training
(discussed below). However, interventions proposed thus far have failed to provide consistent bene-
fits across distribution shift benchmarks (Koh et al., 2020; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Hendrycks
et al., 2020a; Wiles et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2022), rendering distribution shift robustness a persistent
challenge.


                                                   33
