Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F LEX C AP : G ENERATING R ICH , L OCALIZED ,                                                  AND
F LEXIBLE C APTIONS IN I MAGES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         We introduce FlexCap, a module that generates localized descriptions for any re-
         gion in a given image. We use the idea of length conditioning to ensure the output
         captions have the desired length. This allows for controllable generation of the
         full spectrum of localized captions, ranging from short object names to full sen-
         tence descriptions. To train this model, we create a dataset of image-box-caption
         triplets from web-scale text-image pairs using open-vocabulary object detection
         models. We show that FlexCap can connect images with LLMs by representing
         images as a sequence of region descriptions and their spatial extents. Using this
         interpretable textual representation, we exceed the state-of-the-art zero-shot per-
         formance on many visual question answering tasks. We also show that FlexCap
         can be fine-tuned to achieve strong performance on the dense captioning task on
         the Visual Genome dataset. Finally, we demonstrate qualitatively how FlexCap
         can be used for image labeling, object attribute recognition, and visual dialog.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The groundbreaking success of large language models (LLMs) has led to the widespread adoption
of this technology in a variety of applications. The introduction of vision-language models (VLMs)
has further enhanced these capabilities by enabling reasoning over visual content in the form of
question answering and visual dialog. Nevertheless, the ideal representation for utilizing LLMs to
enable visual applications is still an open question.
A popular and effective strategy is to directly provide visual features as input tokens to LLMs. Two
successful systems, Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022a) and BLIP (Li et al., 2022; 2023), have focused
on utilizing latent representations produced by frozen visual backbones and integrating these with
frozen LLMs. While Flamingo uses cross-attention to adapt visual tokens to be used by the language
model, BLIP adapts visual tokens to be ingested just like text tokens by the language model. In this
work we investigate if instead of representing the image by latent visual features, we can directly
provide textual representations of an image by focusing on its elements: objects and regions.
We explore this alternative strategy with the idea of flexible captioning – generating controllably
rich and localized captions as shown in Fig. 1. Our model, FlexCap, enables spatially controllable
inquiry of any bounding box in the image, with the desired text detail controlled by the generated
word count. FlexCap effectively combines three tasks that have been studied in isolation until now:
image captioning, object detection, and dense captioning. While image captioning models can cap-
ture coarse semantic information they lack spatial understanding of the visual content. On the other
hand, object detection brings spatial information in the form of bounding boxes. But object de-
tection systems lack semantic details (attributes and relationships between objects) and are usually
limited to a few classes. Recently open-vocabulary object detection increases the semantic diversity
but it is still limited by text queries or prompts provided manually. Dense captioning (Johnson et al.,
2016) is the task of localizing salient regions of the image and describing them with natural lan-
guage sentences. However the capacity and richness of these models are limited with existing image
captioning datasets (e.g. COCO(Lin et al., 2014) and Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017)). More-
over, these methods focus on full sentence generation rather than a mix of short and long captions
at several levels of richness as people typically do. FlexCap combines all three tasks into one sys-
tem by formulating each of them as different captioning problems – image captioning implies using
FlexCap to caption the whole image as one big bounding box, dense captioning can be performed
by conditioning on individual boxes, and object detection can be performed by prompting the model
to produce short class names as captions.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: FlexCap generates controllably rich localized descriptions for any region in an image as
shown on the left. It has the flexibility to produce captions in a controllable manner which allows the
full spectrum of valid descriptions to be explored from short object category names to fully-detailed
captions. On the right, we demonstrate that rich localized captions generated by FlexCap, when
coupled with large language models (LLMs), enable zero-shot visual question answering.


To be able to train such a model, we require a dataset of images where many boxes are labeled with
short and long descriptions. We propose a method to generate 32 billion triplets of (i) image, (ii) a
proposed region within the image, and (iii) its corresponding caption from a web-based image-text
pair dataset, through the use of open-vocabulary object detectors. Training FlexCap on this dataset
enables the model to generate spatially and semantically rich representations (bounding boxes and
their descriptions) that focuses on objects, their attributes, and their contextually changing descrip-
tions. We show that this human interpretable representation, when combined with the power of
LLMs, enables visual question answering and dialog. We also demonstrate that this combination
can result in performance that is competitive with state-of-the-art VLM models on zero-shot image
and video question answering benchmarks.
Our key technical contributions are: (i) controllable localized visual descriptions, using word count
as a proxy for complexity to modulate the output of a generative language model, and using bounding
box conditioning to indicate local regions in the image; (ii) a large-scale dataset generated from web-
scale image-text pairs that enables training of our model; (iii) demonstrating that, with the support of
LLMs, the human interpretable representation generated by FlexCap, is comparable performance of
SOTA methods on open-ended image and exceeds SOTA performance on video question answering
benchmarks in the zero-shot setup; (iv) demonstrating that our localized captioning performance
exceeds the existing localized captioning methods under comparable scenarios.


2   F LEX C AP

Architecture. Our objective is to train a model that takes an image and a region of interest and out-
puts a description of the region spanned by the box. We present FlexCap’s architecture in Figure 2.
The model takes an image, the coordinates of a bounding box and the conditioning tokens as input,
and outputs a textual description of visual contents within the specified bounding box. Our model
mainly consists of an image encoder (i.e. ViT-B/16) and a transformer-based text-decoder. We pass
the image through the vision model to produce outputs of dimensions n × d (where n is the number
of patches and d is the embedding size ). We pass the bounding box coordinates (of dimensions
1 × 4) through a linear layer to produce the coordinate features (of dimension 1 × d). The vision
features are concatenated with features from normalized bounding box coordinates. These concate-
nated inputs (of dimension (n + 1) × d) are fed into a text decoder which is a stack of L Transformer
layers. We use a decoder-only architecture in which all the vision, bounding box tokens remain un-
masked but the text tokens are masked in a causal manner to enable next-word prediction training.
The reason for adding all the vision tokens and bounding box coordinate tokens is so that the text
decoder has access to all the context present in the image and the exact location of the bounding box.
In this work, we train a decoder of 12 layers with a dimensionality of 768 and 12 attention heads.
We use the standard vision transformer encoder layer architecture for the text decoder as well. In
total, FlexCap has 248M parameters with 86M comprised of the image encoder (ViT-B) and the
remaining parameters in the text decoder.
Length conditioning. For the same region there may be multiple valid captions. In the input image
shown in Fig. 3, all the following descriptions are correct: dog, Border collie, dog playing with a


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                    grey and white cat lying on shoes <eos>


                                               Text Decoder

                                                           LENGTH-7 grey and white cat lying             on shoes
                                                                Prefix
     Image Encoder             Linear Projection                Token
                                                                                            Caption

                                                          cat                            LENGTH-1 cat
                               [xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax]   grey and white cat   Append    LENGTH-4 grey and white cat
                                                                                prefix
                                                          grey and white cat             LENGTH-7 grey and white cat
                                                                                token
                                                          lying on shoes                 lying on shoes

      Input Image                 Bounding Box                           Conditioned Captions

Figure 2: Architecture and Training Setup. We train a model that takes an image and a bounding
box as input and outputs a length-controlled caption of the object contained in the bounding box.
We specify the length by prefixing it before the caption. The training loss is the standard next-word
prediction loss that is used to train image captioning models.


frisbee, brown dog playing on a grass field. This task does not have one right answer as for the same
input there can be multiple correct outputs. We equip the model with the capability of producing
outputs of a desired length by utilizing the idea of length conditioning. This is implemented simply
by adding an additional token that indicates the desired length of the output caption. There are
several advantages for doing this. First, the number of words used to describe is often proportional
to the information content. We train the model to predict the next words in the sequence while
accounting for the desired length, thereby the model learns to modulate the amount of information
in the generated text. Also, length conditioning allows users to control the output of the model
further enabling the use of a single model for many diverse tasks.
Additionally, the length prefix provides a better conditioned initial state for the captioner. Fig. 2
shows how the same box might have more than one ground truth captions <s> a cat <e> or
<s> grey and white cat lying on shoes <e>. If we use the first caption as ground
truth and the words <s> a cat as the seen text, the next-word prediction loss encourages the
model to increase its score for the <e> token and decrease the score for the word playing due to
the softmax loss. This is in direct conflict with the second caption. These kind of training issues are
alleviated by the use of the length prefix.
Loss. We train the model to predict the next token of the text. The text tokens are prefixed with
the desired length of the caption and appended with an end of sentence token <e> to indicate the
end of the caption. The target text tokens are obtained by shifting the padded text by 1. This is
common training methodology for training generative language models like GPT (Brown et al.,
2020) or SimVLM (Wang et al., 2021). The loss is a classification loss over all the words present
in the vocabulary. The loss is ignored over the padded tokens that are used to keep the size of the
outputs same for all the captions in the batch.
Implementation. We implement this model using the JAX framework (Bradbury et al., 2018). We
train the entire model from scratch for about 250K steps using the AdamW optimizer with a cosine
learning rate schedule. The maximum learning rate is 6.4 × 10−4 with 10K warm-up steps. We use
a weight decay of 0.1. We train with a batch size of 16384 and image resolution of 224 × 224. We
use a maximum text sequence length of 16. For each image in the batch, we sample a maximum of
8 bounding boxes for each training step.
Inference. At inference time, we provide an image, the target bounding box, and the desired length
as input. We then decode in an auto-regressive manner till the end of caption token <e> is en-
countered or the maximum number of decoding steps is reached. It is also possible to provide a
partial caption as a prefix (such as ”this is made of”) to the model which enables us to query for any
particular property displayed in a given bounding box. We use standard sampling techniques used
in text-generation like beam search, temperature sampling, or nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al.,
2019) to generate multiple captions.

3   W EB - SCALE L OCALIZED C APTIONING DATASET
In order to train the FlexCap model, we build a large scale dataset of image region descriptions of
varying lengths. In the following section we describe how we produce such a dataset from existing


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

1                     2                       3                                    4


                                                                      Is Score >
                                                                      Threshold?


Figure 3: Dataset Generation. We use OWL-ViT to generate a dataset of triplets of image, bound-
ing box and captions from a web-scale dataset of noisy image-text pairs. Increasing levels of richness
in captions is captured through different length descriptions for each box.


image-text paired datasets. We leverage the web-based image-caption pairs from WebLI (Chen
et al., 2022). The dataset generation pipeline is shown in Fig. 3. First we create text queries using
n-grams from the caption of the image: e.g. “dog”,“brown dog”, “brown dog playing with a disc”.
We specifically create n-grams where n = {1, 2, · · · , 8} and then filter out incomplete captions like
“with a red”, “dog playing with”. More details about the filtering step are mentioned in the appendix.
Then we use the filtered n-grams as text queries for pre-trained region proposal models (i.e. OWL-
ViT (Minderer et al., 2022)) to extract boxes and select text-box pairs based on the similarity score
(> 0.1). Multiple n-grams may match for a box, and this results in several ways of describing a box
in the image as shown in Col. 4 in Fig. 3.
This data collection technique results in 32 billion image-box-caption triplets from 2 billion images
without requiring extensive manual annotation. Our captions show a rich vocabulary that is close
to common language used to describe objects in the context of an image. If we use MS-COCO’s
vocabulary then all humans in the dataset would get labeled as person. However by building our
vocabulary in a bottom-up manner we end up with captions that contain more informative words
such as baby, nurse, policeman, firefighter, or baseball player to describe the person class. Please
refer to the appendix for details of dataset statistics and examples.


4   F LEX C AP WITH LLM S

Recent work on improving the recognition and reasoning capability of vision models, so that they
can perform tasks such as question answering and visual dialog, has focused on connecting features
from vision models like ViT to Large Language Models (LLMs). Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022b),
PALI (Chen et al., 2022), PALM-E (Driess et al., 2023) have focused on using patch features from
images as words or tokens. Here, we propose an alternate approach. Instead of adapting LLMs to
understand vision features, we explore connecting images with LLMs using rich text in the form of
localized descriptions. As FlexCap solves the rich visual perception problem by generating dense
localized information, it enables LLMs to perform high-level spatial and textual reasoning by linking
spatially enriched visual concepts with the world knowledge. When combined with their well-
trained common-sense reasoning, LLMs can reason about attributes by looking at singular object
detections, scene-level understanding by utilizing larger window descriptions, counts by checking
number of bounding boxes with similar content, and relative spatial relationships by comparing
location of the boxes. Now we will discuss how to connect FlexCap with LLMs.
FlexCap-LLM. To adapt the base FlexCap to have improved detection skills, output longer sen-
tences, and identify OCR, we co-train FlexCap for 25k more steps on detection (COCO, VOC,
OpenImages, LVIS), captioning (COCO Captions, Visual Genome) and OCR datasets (WebLI). For
image captioning datasets we use the bounding box that covers the whole image. For decoding OCR,
we use an OCR token. We find this co-training step useful for downstream tasks using the LLM. In
Figure 4, we show how we use FlexCap with an LLM to solve visual questions. First, we convert
an image to a sequence of localized descriptions that describe the image in terms of the objects and
regions present in the image. To do so, we need region proposals. We use OWL-ViTv2 (Minderer
et al., 2023) to localize important objects and regions in an image. We keep the top 64 bounding
boxes by their objectness scores. We then use FlexCap to describe each box in the image in the


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                       Prompt to LLM
                                                                           Preamble
                                                                     You are an intelligent
                                 A fence behind the tennis court     assistant that answers
                                                                       questions based on
                                                                      region detections in
                                                                           images ...


                       FlexCap
                                                                       Box-caption pairs
                                 Tennis                               [([20,20,100,100],        LLM
    Bounding Box                 racket   Detection                     Tennis Racket),
                                                                     ([180,200,320,340], A
      Proposals                                   A green tennis
                                                                     green tennis ball on
    (OWL-ViTv2)                           s           ball on the      the ground),...]
                                                            ground                            Answer
                                                                           Question           Wimbledon
                                              White tennis shoes       What is the name
      Caption
                                                                     of this sport's famous
      Prefixes                                                       english competition?


Figure 4: FlexCap for VQA with bounding box proposals and an LLM. FlexCap generates
captions for different regions in a given image. To answer any open-ended questions, we prompt an
LLM with FlexCap’s detections (box-caption pairs).


context of the entire image. In order to produce holistic descriptions, we use multiple prefixes for
each region. These prefixes are a combination of length conditioning token and some initial text.
We add the boxes and their descriptions to a text preamble (see Fig. 4) that defines the setup where
we are using an LLM to answer questions about an image. In all the experiments, we use PALM2-S
model (Anil et al., 2023) as the LLM of choice. We refer to this end-to-end system that takes an
image and a question to output the answer as FlexCap-LLM.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our model across different tasks that require different levels of detail. In Section 5.1,
we test FlexCap-LLM on visual question answering tasks. In Section 5.2, we evaluate how FlexCap
can be used for localized captioning In Section 5.3, we provide ablations, qualitative results and
applications of FlexCap.

5.1     V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING

Visual question answering (VQA) often requires visually grounded rich semantic understanding
of the content at multiple levels of granularity depending on the question. These properties make
VQA a great test-bed for our method which can generate dense spatially grounded information on
visual content with desired semantic complexity. Hence we evaluate the effectiveness of FlexCap-
LLM on several image VQA benchmarks such as OKVQA (Marino et al., 2019), GQA (Hudson &
Manning, 2019b), and VizWiz (Gurari et al., 2018), and video question answering benchmarks such
as MSRVTT (Xu et al., 2016) and MSVD (Xu et al., 2017). Diverse characterictics of these datasets
helps gaining better insight on FlexCap’s capabilities. We report the commonly used accuracy metric
for each dataset.

5.1.1     I MAGE Q UESTION A NSWERING
First we evaluate FlexCap-LLM on GQA, OKVQA and VizWiz image VQA benchmarks in a zero-
shot setting, meaning that our approach is not trained with the task or the corresponding dataset. The
results on these benchmarks are presented in Table 1.
Compositional VQA. GQA dataset is generated for evaluating the performance on complex compo-
sitional questions. As FlexCap produces information for multiple visual elements in the scene with
their corresponding locations, it is quite well-suited for questions on compositional understanding
of the image. On this benchmark, as shown in Table 1(a), FlexCap-LLM outperforms all the re-
cent baselines except for ViperGPT (Sur’is et al., 2023) which is also known for its compositional
understanding properties. Though, note that ViperGPT uses multiple tools on the fly with certain
associated costs whereas we only utilize FlexCap outputs and feed them to an LLM.
VQA with External Knowledge. OKVQA dataset is particularly designed for evaluating the abil-
ity to answer questions about images that require external knowledge which is not readily available
on the image. Hence it requires multiple levels of understanding of the content and reasoning with
that informationm which is well-suited for applying FlexCap. Its performance on OKVQA is com-
parable to Flamingo and ViperGPT which highlights the effectiveness of the mix of generic and


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Zero-shot image question answering results. FlexCap-LLM is compared against recent
baselines. Grayed out methods are trained on question answering datasets.
           (a) GQA results on test-dev set                          (b) OKVQA results on Val set

Method                                Accuracy(%)       Method                              Accuracy(%) ↑
LGCN (Hu et al., 2019)                       55.8       PalmE-12B (Driess et al., 2023)            55.5
LXMERT (Tan & Bansal, 2019)                  60.0       PalmE-562B (Driess et al., 2023)           66.1
NSM (Hudson & Manning, 2019a)                63.0       PaLI-3B (Chen et al., 2022)                52.4
CFR (Nguyen et al., 2022)                    72.1       PaLI-17B (Chen et al., 2022)               64.5
FewVLM (Jin et al., 2021)                    29.3       BLIPv2 (Li et al., 2023)                   45.9
BLIPv2 (Li et al., 2023)                     44.7       Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022b)           50.6
ViperGPT (Sur’is et al., 2023)               48.1       ViperGPT (Sur’is et al., 2023)             51.9
FlexCap-LLM                                  47.5       FlexCap-LLM                                50.6
                                       (c) VizWiz results on Val set

                          Method                                     Accuracy(%) ↑
                          Flamingo 32-shot (Driess et al., 2023)          49.8
                          Flamingo FT (Driess et al., 2023)               65.7
                          PaLI-3B (Chen et al., 2022)                     67.5
                          PaLI-17B (Chen et al., 2022)                    74.4
                          Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022b)                31.6
                          FlexCap-LLM                                     38.0


Table 2: Zero-shot video question answering results reported on MSRVTT-QA and MSVD-QA
on test set. FlexCap-LLM is better than other zero-shot baselines for video VQA benchmarks.

                                                             MSRVTT-QA        MSVD-QA
              Flamingo 3B (Alayrac et al., 2022b)                  11.0              27.5
              Flamingo 9B (Alayrac et al., 2022b)                  13.7              30.2
              Flamingo 80B (Alayrac et al., 2022b)                 17.4              35.6
              FlexCap-LLM (8 frames)                               24.9              40.2


specific descriptions generated by FlexCap. Unlike other baselines which use the question, FlexCap
generates the captions without having access to the question .
VQA with atypical images. We also evaluate on VizWiz, which contains visual questions asked
by people who are visually impaired. Unlike web content, in these images the objects and the
scene are not always well-centered hence this dataset contains many out-of-distribution samples
compared to typical web-crawled datasets. Nevertheless, our approach significantly outperforms
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022a) which also reports zero-shot performance on this dataset.

5.1.2    V IDEO Q UESTION A NSWERING
We also evaluate FlexCap-LLM on zero-shot video question answering datasets MSRVTT-QA and
MSVD-QA (Xu et al., 2017). The results on these benchmarks are presented in Table 2. For process-
ing the video, we sample 8 frames uniformly from the video. We pass each of these frames through
FlexCap to produce captions of objects and regions. We then combine all the object captions from
the different frames into one prompt for the LLM. We observe FlexCap-LLM significantly exceeds
the performance of the Flamingo 80B model in the zero-shot setting.These results highlight the
zero-shot effectiveness of our method, which can solve tasks in the video domain even though both
FlexCap and the LLM were not trained for those tasks.

5.2     D ENSE C APTIONING

Dataset and Evaluation Metrics. The dense captioning task is defined as producing both the re-
gions and the corresponding descriptions for each region. For this experiment, we use the Visual
Genome (Krishna et al., 2017)) dataset. In this dataset, each image is annotated with multiple


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Captioning boxes in Visual Genome dataset. FlexCap exceeds performance of other
methods. All methods have been fine-tuned on Visual Genome captions.

                                                             Method                                  mAP
                                                             FCLN (Johnson et al., 2016)             5.39
          Method                            mAP              JIVC (Yang et al., 2017)                9.31
          FCLN (Johnson et al., 2016)     27.11              COCG (Li et al., 2019)                  9.82
          CAG-Net (Yin et al., 2019)      36.29              CAG-Net (Yin et al., 2019)              10.51
          FlexCap                         43.62              TDC+ROCSU (Shao et al., 2022)           11.49
                                                             GRiT (Wu et al., 2022)                  15.52
                (a) Captioning GT Boxes
                                                             FlexCap + GRiT Boxes                    15.61
                                                                         (b) Dense Captioning


Table 4: Compliance metrics. FlexCap produces length-compliant captions for different lengths.

 Desired        Mean of      Std. Dev. of    Accuracy        Desired     Mean of      Std. Dev. of    Accuracy
 Length       Pred. Length   Pred. Length                    Length    Pred. Length   Pred. Length
      1            1.00         0.00              1.00         5          5.04           0.21           0.98
      2            2.00         0.00              1.00         6          6.05           0.21           0.95
      3            3.07         0.25              0.93         7          7.02           0.20           0.96
      4            4.02         0.13              0.98         8          8.01           0.18           0.98



bounding boxes and each box has a corresponding caption. We use the train-test splits and evalu-
ation metric as proposed in (Johnson et al., 2016). The paper proposes to use a mean of Average
Precisions (mAP) over pairwise thresholds of both IOU thresholds (0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7) and Me-
teor score thresholds (0.0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25). We use the same preprocessing of text and
boxes as mentioned in (Wu et al., 2022).
Fine-tuning FlexCap. We fine-tune the pretrained FlexCap model on the Visual Genome train split
for 60k steps with a lower learning rate of 1e − 6 at a resolution of 448 × 448.
Captioning GT boxes. Following the evaluation procedure from (Johnson et al., 2016), we evaluate
captioning of the ground-truth boxes in Visual Genome. Since this setting removes the localiza-
tion task, we have a cleaner evaluation of only the region captioning problem. The results of this
experiment are provided in Table 3a in which we show that FlexCap achieves better performance
compared to other approaches evaluated in this setting.
Captioning GRIT boxes. In this experiment, we want to compare against other approaches that
perform both localization and captioning. We are measuring how well FlexCap performs when
deployed together with an object detector. Table 3b shows FlexCap obtains better performance
compared to other approaches evaluated in this setting. Since, in our work we do not propose
any localization module we use GRIT’s (Wu et al., 2022) region proposals as the input boxes for
our model. This also allows us to directly compare our captioning capabilities against GRIT. We
find that our approach outperforms GRIT at this task even though we test at a lower resolution of
448 × 448.


5.3       A BLATIONS AND Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Compliance Metrics. In this experiment, we measure how well our model complies to the desired
caption length. To do so, we take 1000 images from MS-COCO dataset and use a random object in
the image to produce a description with different lengths. We report the average length of the pre-
dicted caption, standard deviation, and fraction of times the predicted caption has a length equal to
the desired length in Table 4. We observe that our model produces captions in a controllable manner
with minor deviations. In Figure 5, we show qualitative examples of the FlexCap model producing
different length captions for the same box. Note how the model progressively adds more informa-
tion about the object by incorporating context in the longer sentences (in the jungle), attributes (pink
flamingo kite), and alternative nouns (chevy, feline).


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Input: Image + Bounding Box Output: Length controlled captions                   Input: Image + Bounding Box Output: Length controlled captions
                            1    Elephant                                                                    1 Kite
                            2 An elephant                                                                    2 Flamingo kite
                            3 Elephant in jungle                                                             3 Pink flamingo kite
                            4 Elephant in the jungle                                                         4 Colorful flamingo beach kite
                            5 Elephant walking on a path                                                     5 Bird kite in blue sky
                            6 An elephant walking along a path                                               6 Flamingo kite at the marina bay
                            7 Standing in the woods with an elephant                                         7 Pink flamingo kite flying in the wind
                            8 The elephant was in the middle of nowhere                                      8 A pink flamingo kite flying on the beach
                            1      Cat                                                                       1 Chevy
                            2      Typing cat                                                                2 Red truck
                            3 Computer with cat                                                              3 Back of truck
                            4 Working from home feline                                                       4 Car on the highway
                            5 Cat sleeping on a computer                                                     5 The back of a truck
                            6 Cat stretching on a computer screen                                            6 The back of a red truck
                            7      Cat lying on top of a computer                                            7 The back of a red pickup truck
                            8 Cat sleeping on the keyboard of a computer                                     8 A car on the side of the road



Figure 5: Examples of1 Fisherman
                         length controlled captions generated by FlexCap. Note that attributes
                       2 Fisherman ﬁshing
(“pink flamingo kite”) and    context (“in the jungle”) are generated as the length increases.
                       3 Fisherman at sea
                                4 Man on beach ﬁshing
                                5 Person working by the boat
                                6 Fisherman in the sea of cortez
                                7 Fisherman in the sea of cortez mexico
                                8 Man ﬁshing in the shallows of the beach


Figure 6: Zero-shot Dense captioning results. We show detections and generated captions on the
Visual Genome dataset.
    Conditioning Prefix: LENGTH-4 The color is ______                           Conditioning Prefix: LENGTH-5 This is made of ______



                                                                                                                                     ceramic

                                             purple          blue
    red                    black
                                                                                                                        copper

                                                                                            wicker           metal
              blue
                                                                            concrete
                                                       orange                                                              leather



Figure 7: Extracting properties by conditioning FlexCap with prefixes. Examples of FlexCap
extracting properties of objects of different categories by using relevant prefixes. Note how we are
able to retrieve a one-word answer from the model by controlling the length of the caption.

Zero-shot Dense Captioning. We use OWL-ViTv2 to propose bounding boxes in the image. Flex-
Cap then labels each bounding box with a caption. We show some qualitative results in Fig 6. We
only show detections with a score > 0.3 to avoid clutter. These examples show how FlexCap can be
used to detect and describe objects without the need for further training on this joint task.
Extracting object properties. Not only does FlexCap allow conditioning on the box and the length
of the answer, it also allows textual prompting of a caption. We can use this property to our advantage
to extract object properties such as color and material. We show examples of this in Fig. 7.

6         R ELATED W ORK
Visual question answering (VQA), a task designed to assess if a computer can answer questions
about an image, often requires grounding visual concepts and reasoning. Although initially intro-
duced for supervised evaluation of the task (Antol et al., 2015), most recently VQA also become
one of the most powerful benchmarks for evaluating task and dataset independent visual dialog.


                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Several existing models such as ViperGPT (Sur’is et al., 2023), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022a),
BLIP (Li et al., 2022; 2023), PaLI (Chen et al., 2023) show convincing zero-shot performance on
the VQA benchmarks that rivals the supervised approaches. Unlike most previous zero-shot ap-
proaches, which tightly couple vision and language components in a single model, FlexCap gen-
erates a high-level human interpretable representation of an image and demonstrates that, through
straight-forward application of LLMs, we can achieve comparable performance with state-of-the-art
results across VQA benchmarks. Unlike others, ViperGPT (Sur’is et al., 2023), also decouples vi-
sion and language components and reinterprets visual questions with LLM generated programs, and
executes them using existing visual perception tools. Whereas, in our case we use only one power-
ful vision tool, i.e. FlexCap, to generate all the necessary information and leave the reasoning to an
LLM. In that sense, FlexCap is quite complementary to ViperGPT as it can be one of the powerful
tools that can improve the controllable visual understanding of the image for ViperGPT.
Open vocabulary object detection models like OWL-ViT (Minderer et al., 2022) and ViLD (Gu
et al., 2021) enable the user to query any given text on the image and obtain matched bounding boxes
for those queries. In these models the text is often encoded by a text encoder like CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). The text embeddings are compared with the category-
agnostic box proposals coming from the visual backbone. In this work, we use OWL-ViT’s text
and vision encoders to associate bounding boxes with text-queries to produce our training data. By
training a localized captioning model, we remove the manual step of providing per-dataset or per-
image text queries to use OWL-ViT. RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022) obtained good performance
on open-vocabulary object detection by utilizing region-level vision-language contrastive learning
on large scale data. We differ from this work as we generate the description for each bounding box
instead of associating text queries (defined manually) with bounding boxes.
Dense captioning involves localizing salient regions of the image and describing them with natu-
ral language sentences, introduced in (Johnson et al., 2016). In practice, the existing work often
produces longer and more informative descriptions of objects or their compositions using visual at-
tributes of objects (Yin et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019) or contextual and global image cues (Yang
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019). However, the richness of descriptions in this line of work are often
limited to existing image captioning datasets (Lin et al., 2014; Krishna et al., 2017). By utilizing a
large scale dataset of billions of noisy image-text pairs collected from the web (similar to (Jia et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022)), we aim to generate more diverse sentences with a focus on describing the
visual content in controllable detail using a richer visual descriptive space learned from the web.
Length-controlled image captioning has been explored in ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2022) and
LIC (Deng et al., 2020). ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2022) implements length control as a post-processing
step by changing the probability of sampling the end-of-sentence token. Hence the model is not
naturally trained with word length conditioning in mind and cannot guarantee fine-grained length
control at the level of number of words. On the other hand, LIC (Deng et al., 2020) generates length-
controllable captions by conditioning the model with learned tokens that represent different length
intervals. However there are considerable differences compared to FlexCap. First, our approach
allows for controllability at the level of image regions, while LIC only provides full image captions.
This is a significant difference, as it allows us to generate concise or detailed captions for all the
objects in the image. Second, our approach has a more precise level of caption-length control. LIC
uses a coarse subjective level of control with four or five levels of length (e.g. short, medium, long,
and longer), while our approach allows for an exact number of words to be specified.


7   C ONCLUSION


In this work we introduce FlexCap, a flexible captioning model that can describe localized regions
in an image with controllably rich captions. To train FlexCap we generate a large-scale image-box-
caption dataset that is rich in diversity of visual descriptions and their length. We achieve it by
utilizing existing web-scale noisy image-text pairs and open-vocabulary object detection models.
We show how localized rich descriptions provided by FlexCap can help us connect images and
videos to LLMs and achieve strong performance on visual question answering and dense captioning
tasks.

                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Se-
  bastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski,
  Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a vi-
  sual language model for few-shot learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.14198, 2022a. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248476411.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for Few-Shot learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.14198, 2022b.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2305, 2023.
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, et al. Pali: A jointly-scaled multilingual
  language-image model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06794, 2022.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Se-
  bastian Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan
  Puigcerver, Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish V
  Thapliyal, James Bradbury, Weicheng Kuo, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Chao Jia, Burcu Karagol
  Ayan, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Andreas Peter Steiner, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil
  Houlsby, and Radu Soricut. PaLI: A jointly-scaled multilingual language-image model. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=mWVoBz4W0u.
Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José MF Moura, Devi
  Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Visual dialog. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 326–335, 2017.
Chaorui Deng, Ning Ding, Mingkui Tan, and Qi Wu. Length-controllable image captioning. In
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
  Proceedings, Part XIII 16, pp. 712–729. Springer, 2020.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman.     The
 PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012) Results. http://www.pascal-
 network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html, 2012.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Danna Gurari, Qing Li, Abigale Stangl, Anhong Guo, Chi Lin, Kristen Grauman, Jiebo Luo, and
  Jeffrey P. Bigham. Vizwiz grand challenge: Answering visual questions from blind people. 2018
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3608–3617, 2018. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3831582.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
Ronghang Hu, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Language-conditioned graph
  networks for relational reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 10294–10303, 2019.
Drew Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Learning by abstraction: The neural state machine.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. Gqa: a new dataset for compositional question
  answering over real-world images. ArXiv, abs/1902.09506, 2019b. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:67855531.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021.
Woojeong Jin, Yu Cheng, Yelong Shen, Weizhu Chen, and Xiang Ren. A good prompt is worth
 millions of parameters: Low-resource prompt-based learning for vision-language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2110.08484, 2021.
Justin Johnson, Andrej Karpathy, and Li Fei-Fei. Densecap: Fully convolutional localization net-
  works for dense captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 4565–4574, 2016.
Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara Berg. Referitgame: Referring to
  objects in photographs of natural scenes. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical
  methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pp. 787–798, 2014.
Dong-Jin Kim, Jinsoo Choi, Tae-Hyun Oh, and In So Kweon. Dense relational captioning: Triple-
  stream networks for relationship-based captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6271–6280, 2019.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting lan-
  guage and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International journal of computer
  vision, 123:32–73, 2017.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. BLIP-2: Bootstrapping Language-Image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. January 2023.
Xiangyang Li, Shuqiang Jiang, and Jungong Han. Learning object context for dense captioning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 8650–8657, 2019.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
  question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3190–3199, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:173991173.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey
 Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen, Xiao
 Wang, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Kipf, and Neil Houlsby. Simple open-vocabulary object detection.
 In Computer Vision – ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27,
 2022, Proceedings, Part X, pp. 728–755, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2022. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-
 3-031-20079-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-20080-9 42. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
 978-3-031-20080-9_42.
Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09683, 2023.
Binh X Nguyen, Tuong Do, Huy Tran, Erman Tjiputra, Quang D Tran, and Anh Nguyen. Coarse-
  to-fine reasoning for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4558–4566, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Zhuang Shao, Jungong Han, Demetris Marnerides, and Kurt Debattista. Region-object relation-
  aware dense captioning via transformer. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2022.
D’idac Sur’is, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. ViperGPT: Visual inference via python execution
  for reasoning. ArXiv, abs/2303.08128, 2023.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
  formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07490, 2019.
Yoad Tewel, Yoav Shalev, Idan Schwartz, and Lior Wolf. Zerocap: Zero-shot image-to-text gener-
  ation for visual-semantic arithmetic. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17918–17928, 2022.
Zirui Wang, Jiahui Yu, Adams Wei Yu, Zihang Dai, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Yuan Cao. Simvlm: Sim-
  ple visual language model pretraining with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10904,
  2021.
Jialian Wu, Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Zhe Gan, Zicheng Liu, Junsong Yuan, and Lijuan
   Wang. Grit: A generative region-to-text transformer for object understanding. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2212.00280, 2022.
Dejing Xu, Zhou Zhao, Jun Xiao, Fei Wu, Hanwang Zhang, Xiangnan He, and Yueting Zhuang.
  Video question answering via gradually refined attention over appearance and motion. In ACM
  Multimedia, 2017.
Jun Xu, Tao Mei, Ting Yao, and Yong Rui. Msr-vtt: A large video description dataset for bridging
  video and language. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 5288–5296, 2016.
Linjie Yang, Kevin Tang, Jianchao Yang, and Li-Jia Li. Dense captioning with joint inference and vi-
  sual context. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2193–2202, 2017.
Guojun Yin, Lu Sheng, Bin Liu, Nenghai Yu, Xiaogang Wang, and Jing Shao. Context and attribute
  grounded dense captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6241–6250, 2019.
Yiwu Zhong, Jianwei Yang, Pengchuan Zhang, Chunyuan Li, Noel Codella, Liunian Harold Li,
  Luowei Zhou, Xiyang Dai, Lu Yuan, Yin Li, et al. Regionclip: Region-based language-image
  pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 16793–16803, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 8: Interactive demonstration of FlexCap. Please visit https://flex-cap.github.io.



A PPENDIX

A    I NTERACTIVE D EMONSTRATION OF F LEX C AP

Through the attached webpage (please see interactive_flexcap.html), we demonstrate in-
teractively how well flexible captioning works qualitatively on 40 images randomly selected from
the Visual Genome dataset. The interface is shown in Fig. 8. Once the user clicks an image on
the webpage, it shows the top-5 bounding boxes by default, but the user can draw any box to get
a description for it using FlexCap. Since we cannot pre-compute all potential bounding boxes, we
utilised OWL-ViT’s box proposal network to identify 200 boxes and captioned them with FlexCap.
The interface allows a user to draw a bounding box and then the closest pre-computed box is dis-
played if the IOU between the two boxes is above a certain threshold. We hope this interactive
demonstration shows the capabilities of the FlexCap model in detecting and describing different
objects and regions in an image.


B    I MAGE -B OX -C APTION DATASET D ETAILS

Our dataset is composed of ∼32 billion Image-Box-Caption triplets. In Figure 11, we show the
distribution of caption lengths in the generated dataset. We observe that the distribution is not
uniform. This is due to the fact that there are more n-grams of length 1 to sample than length
8. The average number of unique boxes in an image is 4.19, and the average number of captions
per box is 4.04. We show some samples from the dataset in Figure 9. The alt-text from which
the box captions are generated is provided as the title of the image. Note the alt-text gets clipped
due to display-length limits which is why the detected boxes might have captions not visible in
the displayed alt-text directly. We next discuss how captions of varying lengths are matched with
different objects in an image.
n-gram Filtering. Before matching n-grams with boxes, we filter out n-grams that do not form
informative or grammatically correct captions for boxes. This is done with three steps: 1) Remov-
ing any captions composed only of uninformative words (image, jpg, background, wallpaper, hd
wallpaper etc.) 2) Removing n-grams that begin with words with which sentences usually do not
start (of, on, in etc.) 3) Removing n-grams that finish with words with which sentences usually do
not end (a, the, to, on etc.). This step is essential to reduce noise present in the large-scale image-
text pair dataset obtained from the web. It is also important for the captioning model to produce
grammatically correct informative sentences.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Samples from the WebLI dataset Chen et al. (2022) that are used for generating our
Image-Box-Caption dataset. We only visualize a maximum of 5 boxes for each image to avoid
clutter.


C    O BJECT C LASSIFICATION

Dataset and Evaluation Metrics. In this experiment, we solely evaluate the recognition capabilities
of our model in a zero-shot manner. We evaluate how good our model is at recognizing objects at


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                        Ground Truth Class Names
Image and Bounding Box                                                                                          Ground Truth Class
                                                                    airplane cat    car dog person      tv
                                                                                                                Black Orange Rose   R
                            Predicted Only used for calculating
                            Captions evaluation metrics                            Text Encoder
                              Orange
                               BMW
                                                           Mean              Dot product to get
                                              Text
                               BMW                         Over               class similarities
                                            Encoder       Queries
                             2017 BMW
                                 i8
       FlexCap
                                                                                            Pick class with
                                                               Predicted Class car         highest similarity


Figure 10: Evaluating open-vocabulary outputs from FlexCap with the help of the CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) text encoder.


         Figure 11: Distribution of caption lengths in the Image-Box-Caption Dataset.


different scales and under occlusion in object detection datasets. To do so, we consider the problem
where an input image and the ground truth bounding box is provided as input to our model such that
it produces a short description (1-4 words) of what is contained in the bounding box. We use 2 object
detection datasets: PASCAL-VOC (Everingham et al., 2012) and MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) for
this experiment. For each of these datasets, we present 2 metrics: the classification accuracy and the
mean Average Precision (mAP) over all ground truth classes.
Mapping Predicted Captions to Classnames. Since our model produces captions for each box,
we need to map the predicted descriptive sentences to classnames. To do so, we use an off-the-shelf
text encoder (CLIP’s (Radford et al., 2021)) to match the generated captions with known object
class names. We show the full pipeline in Figure 10. We use nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al.,
2019) to produce multiple outputs. We then take the multiple predicted captions and the ground
truth class-names and pass both of these lists through the same text encoder. We then match the text
embeddings of the predictions and the class names using cosine similarity of the query embedding
and the class name embeddings. We report the results of this experiment in Table 5. Interestingly,
the more descriptions our model generates the more accurate the predictions become. We show
mAP improvements of 11% and 15.3% by just generating more caption samples per bounding box.
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) introduced the idea of using multiple prompts to get a more robust score
for the class names, we show that generating multiple captions of the same image and averaging
them provides a more accurate representation of the object as opposed to just one caption.

D    R EF COCO E XAMPLES

RefCOCO dataset Kazemzadeh et al. (2014) introduces a task which given an input text referring
to an instance of an object in an image, the output is to localize the instance the text is referring
to. It involves differentiating between instances of the same object category. On the other hand
our model is trained for the inverse task of describing a given bounding box. However, we find
images in this dataset to be good candidates to check how FlexCap describes same object classes
using different words, particularly focusing more on attributes and context rather than 2D image
positions (e.g. left, right) as is often done in RefCOCO annotations. Especially for differentiating
people FlexCap usually relies on clothing and colors. We show qualitative results in Figure 12. We


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Classification accuracy and mAP increase considerably with number of captions generated
by the model.

                                                 VOC            COCO
                         No. of Captions     Acc.     mAP    Acc.    mAP
                                1            77.1     72.5   49.3    36.1
                                2            77.2     73.2   49.7    37.0
                                5            78.5     77.7   51.6    41.8
                                10           79.1     81.0   54.3    48.1
                                15           79.7     82.1   54.8    49.8
                                20           80.0     83.4   55.2    51.4


show ground-truths (green boxes) from RefCOCO to highlight what instances were chosen. In the
first three rows, we show examples where FlexCap successfully describes different instances of the
same category. In the last row we show two examples where FlexCap does not differentiate between
different classes.


E    V ISUAL D IALOG

FlexCap-LLM can be used for the task of visual dialog Das et al. (2017). We first caption all the
objects in the image using FlexCap. Once the image has been represented as the list of objects, we
can interact with an LLM by providing the conversation turns as additional context for each query
to the LLM. We show some examples of conversations with the FlexCap-LLM system in Figure 13.
Note how the model is able to read text in the image in the leftmost figure, recognize material in
the middle figure, and localize objects of interest in the rightmost figure. As we compute the object
captions only once in the beginning of the conversations, there is no additional overhead of querying
a large VLM for each additional turn in the conversation.


F   LLM P ROMPTS

We use the following prompts for the LLM in the question-answering experiments.
OK-VQA and GQA.
Preamble:You are a helpful assistant answering questions about
images to people. You can look at the list of object detections
in the image and answer questions. The image content may not be
sufficient to answer the questions, and you may need to rely on
external knowledge resources or commonsense. In an image, many
objects were detected. They are listed in the following format:
[object descriptions] [cx, cy, w, h], where cx is x coordinate
of the center, cy is the y coordinate of the center, w is the
width and h is the height of the bounding box of that object in
the image. The list of objects is as follows:
Object representation: [captions] [cx, cy, w, h]
Question Prompt: Q: <question> Answer in one word.                      A:
VizWiz
Preamble:You are a helpful assistant answering questions about
images to people. You can look at the list of object detections
in the image and answer questions. The image content may not
be sufficient to answer the questions, and you may need to rely
on external knowledge resources or commonsense. In an image,
many objects were detected. They are listed in the following
format: [object descriptions] [cx, cy, w, h] [score], where cx is
x coordinate of the center, cy is the y coordinate of the center,


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: FlexCap on RefCOCO Dataset. For each image pair, RefCOCO ground-truth captions
are displayed on the left, and FlexCap captions are displayed on the right. Our method focuses
more on attributes and context rather than 2D image positions (e.g. left, right) as is often done in
RefCOCO annotations.



w is the width, h is the height and s is the confidence score for
the object detection. Low score means the detection is likely
inaccurate, and this often makes the question unanswerable. You


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       What is happening in the photo?              What is in this picture?                   What is in this picture?


     A plane is on the runway.
                                                  The image contains a blue bowl, a           The image contains the following
                                                  blue knitted blanket, a monster, a          objects: apples, bananas, grapes,
                                                  spoon, teeth, eyes, horns, a                kiwi fruit, lemons, mangoes,
       Which side is the airplane                                                             oranges, potatoes, tomatoes
                                                  button, a handle, cereal, food, and
       pointed? Why?
                                                  a blanket.


     The airplane is pointed to the right                                                      What is the fruit at the top left
     side of the image. This is because             What is the color of the monster?          corner of the image?
     the nose of the plane is located on
     the right side of the image, and the
     tail of the plane is located on the                                                      Brown kiwi fruit
                                                  It is a red monster with white
     left side of the image.
                                                  horns, teeth and eyes.
                                                                                               What is the price of grapes?
       What flight is it?
                                                    Where is the bowl placed on?
                                                                                              The price of grapes is not listed.

     The flight is operated by Singapore          Blue blanket
     Airlines.


                                         Figure 13: FlexCap-LLM for Visual Dialog


can answer questions as ’unanswerable’.                                                 The list of objects is as
follows:
Object representation: [captions] [cx, cy, w, h] [score]
Question Prompt: Q: <question> Answer in one word.                                            A:
MSRVTT and MSVD.
Preamble:You are a helpful assistant answering questions about
videos to people. You can look at the list of object detections
in each frame and answer questions. In a video, many objects were
detected in each frame. In frame <frame number>, the following
objects were detected:
Object representation: [captions]
Question Prompt: Q: <question> Answer in one word.                                            A:


                                                                   18
