Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROMPT T UNING WITH D IFFUSION FOR F EW-S HOT
P RE - TRAINED P OLICY G ENERALIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods harness previous experiences to
         derive an optimal policy, forming the foundation for pre-trained large-scale mod-
         els (PLMs). When encountering tasks not seen before, PLMs often utilize several
         expert trajectories as prompts to expedite their adaptation to new requirements.
         Though a range of prompt-tuning methods has been proposed to enhance the qual-
         ity of prompts, these methods frequently face restrictions due to prompt initializa-
         tion, which can significantly constrain the exploration domain and potentially lead
         to suboptimal solutions. To eliminate the reliance on the initial prompt, we shift
         our perspective towards the generative model, framing the prompt-tuning process
         as a form of conditional generative modeling, where prompts are generated from
         random noise. Our innovation, the Prompt Diffuser, leverages a conditional diffu-
         sion model to produce prompts of exceptional quality. Central to our framework is
         the approach to trajectory reconstruction and the meticulous integration of down-
         stream task guidance during the training phase. Further experimental results un-
         derscore the potency of the Prompt Diffuser as a robust and effective tool for the
         prompt-tuning process, demonstrating strong performance in the meta-RL tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Over the last few years, PLMs have demonstrated remarkable efficacy across diverse domains, in-
cluding high-resolution image generation from text descriptions (DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021),
ImageGen (Saharia et al., 2022)) and language generation (GPT (Brown et al., 2020)). The success
of PLMs in numerous applications has sparked interest in their potential application to decision-
making tasks. Moreover, the advent of the prompt-tuning technique has further empowered PLMs
to swiftly adapt to downstream tasks by fine-tuning only a small number of parameters across vari-
ous model scales and tasks. This efficient and effective adaptation process has made prompt-tuning
a promising approach for tailoring PLMs to specific decision-making scenarios.
In the realm of reinforcement learning (RL), offline decision-making assumes a critical role, facilitat-
ing the acquisition of optimal policies from trajectories gathered by behavior policies, all without re-
quiring real-time interactions with the environment. Nonetheless, offline RL encounters formidable
challenges concerning generalization to unseen tasks and the fulfillment of varying constraints, pri-
marily due to distribution shifts (Mitchell et al., 2021). Recent research efforts, such as Gato (Reed
et al., 2022) and other generalized agents (Lee et al., 2022), have explored the use of transformer-
based architectures and sequence modeling techniques to address multi-task problems in offline RL.
Utilizing prompt-tuning techniques, these methods can efficiently adapt to the target task by fine-
tuning a relatively small number of parameters. Nevertheless, it’s noteworthy that prompt-tuning
methods often exhibit sensitivity to initialization (Hu et al., 2023b; Lester et al., 2021). When a ran-
dom prompt is utilized for initialization, the PLM’s exploration may become constrained within a
limited region, leading the subsequent updating process to converge towards a sub-optimal prompt,
as empirically demonstrated in Section 3.3. This sensitivity necessitates the pre-collection of expert
trajectories, which in turn limits their applicability across a broader range of scenarios.
To eliminate the reliance on the initial prompt, we shift our perspective towards the generative model,
framing the prompt-tuning process as a form of conditional generative modeling, where prompts are
generated from random noise. This approach obviates the need to collect expert prompts, and the
final quality of generated prompts is then determined by the parameters of the generative model,
which can incorporate prior knowledge via pre-training on a fixed, pre-collected training dataset.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                               Ground Truth
              Guassian Noise                          𝜇!                  Transitions
                                       +                                                  Guidance
                                                                                                                                   Loss
               Return-to-go                                               Return-to-go
                                               Denoising Process           Timestep
                Timestep                                                                                   𝒂∗ 𝑲 ∗                            𝒂𝒕(𝟏                             𝒂𝒕


                   Timestep     𝒕     𝒕+𝟏            𝑲∗
                                                                                                                    Pre-trained Large Model
                 Return-to-go
                                         ∗
                                𝒓$ 𝒕∗ 𝒓$ 𝒕$𝟏         𝒓$ ∗𝑲∗


                    States
                                     ∗
                                𝒔𝒕∗ 𝒔𝒕$𝟏             𝒔∗𝑲∗                                              Prompt                       𝒓$ 𝒕(𝟏   𝒔𝒕(𝟏    𝒂𝒕(𝟏          𝒓$ 𝒕       𝒔𝒕            𝒂𝒕

                   Actions           ∗
                                𝒂𝒕∗ 𝒂𝒕$𝟏             𝒂∗𝑲∗


                  Transitions   𝒔𝒕∗    𝒂𝒕∗     𝒓𝒕∗            𝒔∗𝑲∗ 𝒂∗𝑲∗                    𝒓$ ∗ 𝟏   𝒔∗ 𝟏     𝒂∗ 𝟏     𝒓$ ∗ 𝟐                   𝒂∗ 𝑲∗#𝟏   𝒓$ ∗ 𝑲∗      𝒔∗ 𝑲∗        𝒂∗ 𝑲 ∗


Figure 1: Overall architecture of Prompt Diffuser. Diffuser samples transitions while conditioning
on the return-to-go and timestep tokens. These sampled transitions are then used to construct a
prompt that is fed into the PLM. The loss between the predicted actions and the actual actions is
employed to guide the denoising process, aiming to enhance the quality of the generated prompts.

However, in few-shot meta-learning environments, the quantity of offline data available from the
target task is severely limited, necessitating rapid adaptability of the generative model to these tasks
despite the small datasets. Moreover, the quality of these offline datasets typically falls short of
expert quality, where the generative model must produce prompts that exceed the quality of the fine-
tuning datasets, rather than simply generating prompts within the same distribution. Additionally,
given the physical significance of trajectory prompts, even minor perturbations in the trajectory
prompt can lead to substantial shifts in meaning (Hu et al., 2023b), highlighting the imperative need
for precision in the generated prompts. All of these factors collectively contribute to the challenges
encountered when applying this new paradigm to the prompt-tuning process.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel algorithm named Prompt Diffuser (see Figure 1)
which leverages a conditional diffusion model to produce prompts of exceptional quality. Within
our framework for prompt generation, we establish the trajectory representation of Prompt Diffuser
and adopt diffusion models to develop a generative model conditioned on returns, which ensures the
precision of the generated prompts and expedites adaptability to new tasks (detailed in Section 4).
Nevertheless, optimizing Prompt Diffuser solely with the DDPM loss can only achieve performance
on par with the original dataset (Wang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). To augment the quality of prompt
generation, we seamlessly incorporate guidance from downstream tasks into the reverse diffusion
chain. By leveraging gradient projection techniques, the downstream task guidance is incorporated
into the learning process without compromising the overall performance of the diffusion model,
which is achieved by projecting the gradient of guidance loss onto the orthogonal direction to the
subspace spanned by the diffusion loss. This novel approach successfully directs the generation of
high-quality prompts, leading to improved performance in downstream tasks.
In summary, our work introduces a novel prompt-tuning framework that leverages diffusion mod-
els to generate high-quality prompts for RL agents. By incorporating downstream task guidance
and employing gradient projection techniques, we successfully enhance the quality of generated
prompts, leading to improved performance in downstream tasks. The experiments validate the ef-
fectiveness of our approach and demonstrate its potential for generating adaptive and transferable
policies in meta-RL settings. Our contributions advance the field of prompt-tuning, providing a
promising direction for optimizing pre-trained RL agents and improving their generalization and
performance across various downstream tasks.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   O FFLINE RL AS S EQUENCE M ODELING

Offline RL has emerged as a prominent sequence modeling task and Transformer-based decision
models have been applied to this domain. The primary objective is to predict the next sequence of
actions by leveraging recent experiences, encompassing state-action-reward triplets. This approach
can be effectively trained using supervised learning, making it highly suitable for offline RL and
imitation learning scenarios. Various studies have investigated the utilization of Transformers in RL
under the sequence modeling paradigm, including Gato (Reed et al., 2022), Multi-Game DT (Lee
et al., 2022), Generalized DT (Furuta et al., 2021), Graph DT (Hu et al., 2023a), and the survey


                                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


work (Hu et al., 2022). In this paper, we propose a novel approach that builds upon the concepts of
Prompt-DT (Xu et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023b) while incorporating prompt-tuning techniques with
diffusion models to significantly enhance the model’s performance.

2.2   D IFFUSION M ODELS IN RL

Diffusion models (DMs) have emerged as a powerful family of deep generative models with applica-
tions spanning CV (Chen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a), NLP (Li et al., 2022; Bao et al., 2022), and
more recently, RL (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2022). In particular, Diffuser (Janner et al., 2022)
employs DM as a trajectory generator, effectively showcasing the potential of diffusion models in
this domain. A consequent work (Ajay et al., 2022) introduces a more flexible approach by taking
conditions as inputs to DM. This enhancement enables the generation of behaviors that satisfy di-
verse combinations of conditions, encompassing constraints and skills. Furthermore, Diffusion-QL
(Wang et al., 2022) extends DM to precise policy regularization and injects the Q-learning guidance
into the reverse diffusion chain to seek optimal actions. And Pearce et al. (2023); Reuss et al. (2023)
apply DM in imitation learning to recover policies from the expert or human data without reward
labels. Due to its capability to model trajectory distributions effectively, our study utilizes DM for
generating prompts using few-shot trajectories, thereby ensuring the precision of generated prompts.

2.3   P ROMPT L EARNING

Prompt learning is a promising methodology in NLP involving the optimization of a small number
of input parameters while keeping the main model architecture unchanged. The core concept of
prompt learning revolves around presenting the model with a cloze test-style textual prompt, ex-
pecting the model to fill in the corresponding answer. Autoprompt (Shin et al., 2020) proposes
an automatic prompt search methodology for efficiently finding optimal prompts, while recent ad-
vancements in prompt learning have incorporated trainable continuous embeddings for prompt rep-
resentation (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021). Furthermore, prompt learning techniques have
extended beyond NLP and the introduction of continuous prompts into pre-trained vision-language
models has demonstrated significant improvements in few-shot visual recognition and generaliza-
tion performance (Zhou et al., 2022b;a). In the context of RL, Prompt-tuning DT (Hu et al., 2023b)
stands out for introducing prompt-tuning techniques using a gradient-free approach, aiming to re-
tain environment-specific information and cater to specific preferences. In contrast, our approach
leverages DM to directly generate prompts, incorporating flexible conditions during the generation
process, which has resulted in notable performance improvements in the target tasks.


3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   P ROMPT D ECISION T RANSFORMER

Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been increasingly investigated in RL using the sequence
modeling pattern in recent years. Moreover, works from NLP suggest Transformers pre-trained on
large-scale datasets demonstrate promising few-shot or zero-shot learning capabilities within the
prompt-based framework (Liu et al., 2023b; Brown et al., 2020). Building upon this, Prompt-DT
(Xu et al., 2022) extends the prompt-based framework to the offline RL setting, allowing for few-
shot generalization to unseen tasks. In contrast to NLP, where text prompts can be transformed into
conventional blank-filling formats to represent various tasks, Prompt-DT introduces the concept
of trajectory prompts, leveraging few-shot demonstrations to provide guidance to the RL agent. A
trajectory prompt comprises multiple tuples of state s∗ , action a∗ and return-to-go r̂∗ , represented as
(s∗ , a∗ , r̂∗ ), following the notation in (Chen et al., 2021). Each element marked with the superscript
·∗ is relevant to the trajectory prompt. Note that the length of the trajectory prompt is usually shorter
than the task’s horizon, encompassing only essential information to facilitate task identification,
yet inadequate for complete task imitation. During training with offline collected data, Prompt-DT
utilizes τiinput = (τi∗ , τi ) as input for each task Ti . Here, τiinput consists of the K ∗ -step trajectory
prompt τi∗ and the most recent K-step history τi , and is formulated as follows:
                       ∗
          τiinput = (r̂i,1 , s∗i,1 , a∗i,1 , . . . , r̂i,K
                                                       ∗        ∗        ∗
                                                           ∗ , si,K ∗ , ai,K ∗ , r̂i,1 , si,1 , ai,1 , . . . , r̂i,K , si,K , ai,K ).   (1)


                                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Random Prompt
                                                 Expert Prompt


                              (a)                                                   (b)
Figure 2: (a) The figure of the prompt updating process, where the prompt is treated as a point, and
the updating process is simplified to identify the minimum value. (b) The performance of various
methods under different prompt initialization conditions within the Cheetah-velocity environment.

The prediction head linked to a state token s is designed to predict the corresponding action a. For
continuous action spaces, the training objective aims to minimize the mean-squared loss:
                                                       "      K
                                                                                            #
                                                           1 X             ∗              2
                         LDT = Eτ input ∼T                      (ai,m − π(τi , τi,m−1 , )) .                         (2)
                                        i          i       K m=1


3.2   D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) represent a particular class of gen-
erative models that learn the data distribution q(x) from a dataset D := {xi }. The data-generation
process is modeled through a two-stage process. In the forward diffusion chain, noise is gradually
added to the data x0 ∼ q(x) in N steps, following a pre-defined variance schedule βi , expressed as:
                                 N
                                 Y                                               p
               q(x1:N |x0 ) :=         q(xk |xk−1 ), q(xk |xk−1 ) := N (xk ;      1 − βk xk−1 , βk I).               (3)
                                 k=1

The trainable reverse diffusion chain is formulated as:
                                    N
                                    Y
      pθ (x0:N ) := N (xN ; 0, I)           pθ (xk−1 |xk ), pθ (xk−1 |xk ) := N (xk−1 ; µθ (xk , k), Σθ (xk , k)).   (4)
                                    k=1

Ho et al. (2020) propose the simplified loss function in DDPMs for the diffusion timestep k:
                                                    √        √
                          Lk = Ek,x0 ,ϵk ||ϵk − ϵθ ( ᾱk x0 + 1 − ᾱk ϵk , k)||2 ,

                                                                                                                     (5)
            Qk                 √         √
where ᾱk = i=1 (1 − βi ), ϵθ ( ᾱk x0 + 1 − ᾱk ϵk , k) represents the noise predicted by the neural
network and ϵk denotes the true noise utilized in the forward process. In this study, we harness the
formidable capacity of diffusion models to reconstruct the data distribution, denoted as q(x), for the
generation of high-precision prompts.

3.3   R ETHINKING THE RL PROMPTS

What is the essence of RL prompts? In NLP-based prompt learning, the fundamental assumption
is that large language models have acquired sufficient knowledge from their pre-training data, and
our task is to discover the most effective means of extracting this knowledge. However, in the realm
of RL, it is impractical to assemble a corpus that comprehensively encompasses the diverse environ-
ments and tasks encountered. Thus RL agent is required to imitate the provided trajectory prompts,
rather than using prompts to extract knowledge from the pre-trained model, which highlights the
importance of curating high-quality prompts and is empirically detailed in Section 5.
Why do we need to resort to generative models? When a random prompt is utilized for initializa-
tion, the PLM’s exploration may become constrained within a limited region, leading the subsequent


                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


updating process to converge towards a sub-optimal prompt, which is illustrated in a simplified man-
ner in Figure 2(a). In support of this assertion, we investigate various prompt-tuning methods with
different prompt initializations in Cheetah-vel environments. As depicted in Figure 2(b), when the
prompt is initialized with random quality, it is challenging to optimize it to expert quality, resulting
in significantly poorer performance compared to expert initialization.
These observations advocate for a novel paradigm to replace the conventional prompt-tuning ap-
proach in the field of RL. Our solution is the generative model, which initially integrates prior
knowledge through pre-training on training prompts datasets and directly generates prompts from
random noise, thereby eliminating the dependence on initial prompts.

4     M ETHOD
Our objective is to maximize rewards in the target domain using PLM and conduct experiments on
few-shot policy generalization tasks, evaluating the PLM’s capability to generalize to new tasks.
In line with suggestions from the fields of NLP and CV, fine-tuning the prompt for PLM proves
to be more effective. However, the prompt-tuning approach remains relatively unexplored in the
domain of RL, which presents new problems and challenges (Hu et al., 2023b). We formulate the
prompt-tuning process as the standard problem of conditional generative modeling (GM):
                                          " T                                             #
                                           X                                     ∗
                           max Es0 ∼ρ0               r(st , PLM(s0:t , a0:t−1 , τprompt )) ,
                             θ
                                            t=1
                                                                                                         (6)
                                             ∗              ∗
                                 where     τprompt ∼ GMθ (τinitial | C),
where condition C could encompass various factors, such as the return achieved under the trajectory,
the constraints met by the trajectory, or the skill demonstrated in the trajectory. Here we adopt the
Prompt-DT as the PLM and MLP-based diffusion model as the GM. The trajectory is constructed
based on the conditional diffusion process:
                          q(xk+1 (τ ∗ ) | xk (τ ∗ )),      pθ (xk−1 (τ ∗ )|xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ )).          (7)
Here, q denotes the forward noising process, while pθ represents the reverse denoising process.
In the following sections, we first provide a detailed explanation of our approach employing a con-
ditional diffusion model as an expressive GM for prompt generation. We then introduce diffusion
loss, which acts as the behavior cloning term, constraining the distribution of the generated prompt
to that of the training dataset. Lastly, we discuss the incorporation of downstream task guidance
during the training aiming at enhancing the quality of the generated prompt. The overall pipeline
of our Prompt Diffuser is depicted in Figure 1, providing a detailed presentation of the diffusion
formulation, the corresponding diffusion loss, and the downstream task guidance.

4.1   D IFFUSION F ORMULATION

In images, the diffusion process is applied across all pixel values in an image. Analogously, it may
seem intuitive to apply a similar process to model the states and actions within a trajectory. To
align with the input format Equation 1 required by the PLM, we formulate x0 (τ ∗ ) as the transition
sequence that encompasses states, actions, and rewards:
                                               ∗
                                                          s∗t+1           s∗t+H−1
                                                                                  
                                               st                  ···
                                 x0 (τ ∗ ) := a∗t        a∗t+1    ···    a∗t+H−1  ,                    (8)
                                               rt∗          ∗
                                                          rt+1     ···      ∗
                                                                          rt+H−1

with the condition:                             ∗         ∗                 ∗

                                               r̂t      r̂t+1     ···     r̂t+H−1
                                 y(τ ∗ ) :=                                         ,                    (9)
                                                t       t+1       ···    t+H −1
                                                PT
where y(τ ∗ ) contains the returns-to-go r̂t∗ = t′ =t rt∗′ and timesteps. Although the reward token
rt∗ is not directly utilized in the prompt formation 1, denoising the entire transition process can in-
troduce model bias towards the inherent transition dynamics (He et al., 2023). Given the trajectory
representation, one approach could involve training a classifier pϕ (y(τ ∗ ) | xk (τ ∗ )) to predict y(τ ∗ )
from noisy trajectories xk (τ ∗ ). However, it necessitates estimating a Q-function, which entails a
separate, complex dynamic programming procedure. Instead, we opt to directly train a conditional


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


diffusion model conditioned on the y(τ ∗ ) as per Equation 9. This conditioning empowers the model
with the capacity to discern distinct tasks effectively, which expedites the pre-trained model’s adap-
tation to novel tasks that exhibit analogous conditions.

4.2   D IFFUSION L OSS

With the diffusion formulation, our objective is to generate a prompt trajectory that facilitates the
rapid adaptation of the PLM to novel and unseen target tasks. By utilizing a collection of trajectory
prompts derived from these unseen tasks, our intention is to extract sufficient task-specific informa-
tion. This information is crucial for guiding the Prompt Diffuser in generating the most appropriate
and effective prompt trajectory tailored to the intricacies of the target task. Thus during the training
process, we adopt the approach from DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and add extra conditions to train the
reverse diffusion process pθ , which is parameterized by the noise model ϵθ with loss:
                                                       √               √
            LDM = Ek∼U ,τ ∗ ∼D,ϵk ∼N (0,I) [||ϵk − ϵθ ( ᾱk x0 (τ ∗ ) + 1 − ᾱk ϵk , y(τ ∗ ), k)||2 ],   (10)
where U is a uniform distribution over the discrete set as {1, . . . , N } and D denotes the initial
prompt dataset, collected by behavior policy πb .
Next, we demonstrate that the loss term LDM functions as a behavior cloning term, effectively
constraining the distribution of the generated prompt to match that of the training dataset. Suppose
x0 (τ ∗ ) is a continue random vector, and
                                   P(||x0 (τ ∗ )||2 ≤ R = N CR |τ ∗ ∼ D) = 1,                            (11)
for some arbitrarily large constant CR > 0. We denote a total variation distance between two
distributions P1 and P2 as T V (P1 , P2 ) and the upper bound of the total variation distance between
the learned and true trajectory distributions is shown below (Li et al., 2023):
                                                    r
                                                        1              d2 log3 N
                                   T V (q, p) ≤           KL(q||p) ≤ C1 √        .                       (12)
                                                        2                   N

As the diffusion timesteps N increase, the generated prompt distribution p progressively converges
towards the training dataset q, thereby ensuring the precision of the generated prompts. However, it
also imposes a limitation, as it prevents the generated prompts from surpassing the performance of
the behavior trajectories contained within the offline dataset D.

4.3   D IFFUSION G UIDANCE

To improve the quality of the prompts, we incorporate downstream task guidance into the reverse
diffusion chain during the training stage, with the objective of generating prompts that have a positive
impact on the performance of the downstream tasks. With the output from the diffusion model, the
loss for the downstream tasks can be formulated as follows:
                                             "      K
                                                                                              #
                                                 1 X
                   LDT = Eτ input ∼T                  (ai,m − PLM(x0 (τi∗ ), y(τi∗ ), τi,m ))2 .         (13)
                               i         i       K m=1

Note that x0 (τ ∗ ) is sampled through Equation 4, allowing the gradient of the loss function with
respect to the prompt to be backpropagated through the entire diffusion chain.
Nonetheless, a direct linear combination update of these two losses might lead to a deterioration in
performance, potentially owing to the competitive interaction among distinct losses, which is elu-
cidated in Section 5.4. Towards this end, we characterize the correlation between the two loss sub-
                                                                                 ⊥
spaces, employing gradient projection as the analytical tool. Specifically, let SDM = span{B} =
                                                              ⊥
span{[u1 , . . . , uM ]} represent the subspace spanned by ∇LDM , where B constitutes the bases
      ⊥
for SDM    and (·)⊥ denotes the orthogonal space (consisting of a total of M bases extracted from
    ⊥                                                                                       ⊥
∇LDM ). For any matrix A with a suitable dimension, denote its projection onto subspace SDM      as:
                                                 ProjS ⊥ (A) = ABB ⊤ ,                                   (14)
                                                      DM


where (·)⊤ is the matrix transpose. Based on the Equation 14, the final update gradient can be shown
                                      ∇L = ∇LDM + ProjS ⊥ (∇LDT )                                        (15)
                                                                  DM


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that LDM can be efficiently optimized by sampling a single diffusion step i for each data point,
but LDT necessitates iteratively computing ϵθ networks N times, which can potentially become a
bottleneck for the running time and may lead to vanishing gradients. Thus we restrict the value
of N to a relatively small value. We also provide the theoretic support for our gradient projection
technique in Appendix G.
After the training process, we adopt the low-temperature sampling technique (Ajay et al., 2022) to
produce high-likelihood sequences:
                               xk−1 (τ ∗ ) ∼ N (µθ (xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ ), k), βΣk )                   (16)
where the variance is reduced by β ∈ [0, 1) for generating better quality sequences and
µθ (xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ ), k) is constructed as:
                                              1                βk
                µθ (xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ ), k) = √ (xk (τ ∗ ) − √         ϵθ (xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ ), k))   (17)
                                              αk              1 − ᾱk
Overall, pseudocode for the conditional prompt diffuser method is given in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Prompt Diffuser
                            ∗
Require: Initial prompt τinitial  , diffuser network µθ , sample timesteps N
 1: // train the prompt diffuser
 2: for each iteration do
                            ∗               ∗
 3:    Construct the x0 (τinitial ) and y(τinitial ) by Equation 8 and Equation 9.
 4:    Compute the diffusion model loss LDM by Equation 10.
 5:    Compute the downstream task loss LDT by Equation 13.
 6:    Update the diffuser network µθ by Equation 15 if ∇LDM · ∇LDT < 0 else ∇L = ∇LDM + ∇LDT .
 7: end for
 8: // inference with prompt diffuser
 9: initialize prompt xN (τ ∗ ) ∼ N (0, I) and y(τ ∗ ) ← y(τinitial ∗
                                                                       )
10: for k = N, . . . , 1 do
11:    µ ← µθ (xk (τ ∗ ), y(τ ∗ ), k)
12:    Sample xk−1 (τ ∗ ) with µ by Equation 16
13: end for
14: Output the prompt x0 (τ ∗ ) and y(τ ∗ ) for downstream tasks.


5     E XPERIMENT
We perform extensive experiments to assess the ability of Prompt Diffuser by using the episode
accumulated reward as the evaluation metric. Our experimental evaluation seeks to answer the
following research questions: (1) Does Prompt Diffuser improve the model generalization by gen-
erating a better prompt? (2) How does the quality of the prompt datasets influence the effectiveness
of the Prompt Diffuser? (3) Does the diffusion guidance successfully facilitate the downstream task
performance without disrupting the DDPM update progress?

5.1   E NVIRONMENTS AND O FFLINE DATASETS

To ensure a fair comparison with Prompt-Tuning DT (Hu et al., 2023b), we select four distinct meta-
RL control tasks: Cheetah-dir, Cheetah-vel, Ant-dir, and Meta-World reach-v2. In the Cheetah-dir
and Ant-dir tasks, the objective is to incentivize high velocity in the goal direction. On the other
hand, the Cheetah-vel task penalizes deviations from the target velocity using l2 errors. The Meta-
World benchmark (Yu et al., 2020) includes table-top manipulation tasks that require a Sawyer robot
to interact with various objects. For our evaluation, we utilized the Meta-World reach-v2 benchmark,
which comprises 45 training tasks for pre-training the Prompt-DT and the Prompt Diffuser. Subse-
quently, the testing set, consisting of 5 tasks with different goal positions, is employed for further
fine-tuning the Prompt Diffuser. We followed the dataset construction and settings outlined in (Hu
et al., 2023b) for the meta-RL control tasks considered in this study.

5.2   BASELINES

We compare our proposed Prompt Diffuser with six baseline methods to address the aforementioned
questions. For each method, we assess task performance based on the episode accumulated reward


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results for meta-RL control tasks. The best mean scores are highlighted in bold (within
few-shot settings). For each environment, prompts of length K ∗ = 5 are utilized, and fine-tuning
is conducted using few-shot expert data collected from the target task with three different seeds.
Notably, Prompt Diffuser achieves the best average result during all few-shot fine-tuning methods.
                Prompt-DT-     Prompt-DT-        MT-ORL        Soft Prompt         Adaptor        Prompt-DT-      Prompt-        Prompt        Prompt-
                  Random         Expert                                                               FT         Tuning DT       Diffuser     DT-FT-Full
   Sizes               -            -                -           0.24K             13.49K           13.71M         0.24K          0.17M        13.71M
 Percentage            -            -                -          0.0018%            0.098%            100%         0.0018%         1.24%         100%
Cheetah-dir      935.3 ± 2.6   934.6 ± 4.4       -46.2 ± 3.4   940.2 ± 1.0        875.2 ± 4.2     936.9 ± 4.8    941.5 ± 3.2    945.3 ± 7.2   950.6 ± 1.2
Cheetah-vel     -127.7 ± 9.9    -43.5 ± 3.4     -146.6 ± 2.1    -41.8 ± 2.1       -63.8 ± 6.3      -40.1 ± 3.8    -39.5 ± 3.7   -35.3 ± 2.4   -23.0 ± 1.1
  Ant-dir       278.7 ± 38.7    420.2 ± 5.1      110.5 ± 2.2   379.1 ± 33.7       361.4 ± 5.6     425.2 ± 8.6    427.9 ± 4.3    432.1 ± 6.7   494.2 ± 2.3
MW reach-v2     457.2 ± 30.3   469.8 ± 29.9     264.1 ± 9.6    448.7 ± 41.3       477.9 ± 2.1     478.1 ± 27.8   472.5 ± 29.0   555.7 ± 6.8   564.7 ± 0.7
  Average          385.9          445.3            45.5           431.6             412.7            450.0          450.3         474.4         496.6


Table 2: Ablation on the effect of prompt initialization on the prompt-tuning methods. In the
Cheetah-vel environment, we vary the quality of both prompts and datasets across three levels:
Expert, Medium, and Random. While conventional prompt-tuning approaches are influenced by
prompt initialization, our method overcomes this limitation by treating it as a generative problem.
         Prompt                               Prompt-Tuning DT                                                   Prompt Diffuser
      Initialization       Exp. Prompt           Med. Prompt   Ran. Prompt                      Exp. Prompt       Med. Prompt    Ran. Prompt
   Exp. Dataset            -42.1 ± 1.3           -49.9 ± 1.6         -89.2 ± 5.8                -32.6 ± 1.3        -34.2 ± 2.8         -33.5 ± 2.0
   Med. Dataset            -41.4 ± 0.8           -50.3 ± 1.9         -90.3 ± 5.3                -34.2 ± 2.8        -33.5 ± 2.0         -34.4 ± 2.4
   Ran. Dataset            -41.2 ± 0.8           -50.4 ± 1.9         -90.4 ± 4.8                -33.5 ± 2.0        -33.2 ± 2.2         -32.5 ± 1.6


in each testing task. To ensure a fair comparison, all fine-tuning methods utilize the same PLM.
The baseline methods are as follows (detailed in Appendix F): (1) Prompt-DT exclusively employs
the trajectory prompt for the target task without any additional fine-tuning process during testing.
Our evaluation includes distinct experiments employing random and expert prompts. (2) MT-ORL
omits the prompt augmentation step used in Prompt-DT to construct a variant of the approach. (3)
Soft Prompt treats prompt as a ”soft prompt” and updates it using the AdamW optimizer, analogous
to a common practice in the NLP domain. (4) Adaptor plugs an adaptor module into each decoder
layer, inspired by HDT (Xu et al., 2023), except for the hyper-network used for initialization. (5)
Prompt-Tuning DT (Hu et al., 2023b) represents the first application that incorporates prompt tun-
ing techniques in the RL domain, catering to specific preferences in the target environment with
preference ranking. (6) Prompt-DT-FT fine-tunes the entire model parameters of the pre-trained
model during testing, utilizing a limited amount of data from the target task. The performance of
the full-data settings is also presented, serving as an upper bound for all fine-tuning methods.

5.3      M AIN R ESULTS

We conduct a comparative analysis between the Prompt Diffuser and the baseline methods to evalu-
ate their few-shot generalization capabilities and assess the tuning efficiency of the Prompt Diffuser
in comparison to the other fine-tuning approach. For evaluation, we employ the averaged episode
accumulated reward in the test task set as the metric. The primary results are summarized in Table
1, which presents the few-shot performance of different algorithms.
The outcomes of MT-ORL underscore its inability to attain high rewards in the target tasks, thus
highlighting the crucial role of prompt assistance in facilitating the PLM’s adaptation to these spe-
cific tasks. The comparison between random and expert prompts in Prompt-DT further accentuates
the necessity of high-quality prompts, which serves as a strong rationale for the development of our
prompt-tuning techniques. Among the parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, only Prompt-Tuning
DT manages to achieve performance comparable to Prompt-DT-FT. Importantly, our proposed ap-
proach exhibits significant performance improvements over both methods, even nearing the upper
bound established by fine-tuning conducted on the full-data settings. This serves as a vivid demon-
stration of the distinct advantages offered by our innovative prompt-tuning techniques.

5.4      A BLATION

We perform several ablation studies to examine particular aspects of our Prompt Diffuser, with a
primary focus on the meta-RL control environments. These ablation studies are designed to offer


                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


insights into essential factors related to common prompt-tuning methods, such as prompt initializa-
tion. This analysis enables us to highlight the advantages and drawbacks of our proposed approach
in comparison to other prompt-tuning techniques. More ablation study about our Prompt Diffuser
and the visualization could be found in Appendix H and I.
Prompt Initialization. Prompt initialization plays a crucial role in guiding the agent’s behavior and
shaping the learning process (Gu et al., 2021). To investigate its impact, we conduct an ablation
study in the Cheetah-vel environment. The results of this ablation study are presented in Table 2.
Compared to Prompt-Tuning DT, which exhibits sensitivity to prompt quality, the Prompt Diffuser
method displays robustness to variations in training data and prompt initialization. The key fac-
tor contributing to this robustness lies in the fundamental difference in the optimization strategies
employed by the two methods. In the case of Prompt-Tuning DT, the prompt is directly updated
during the optimization process. On the other hand, the Prompt Diffuser adopts a different ap-
proach by modeling the prompt-tuning process as conditional generative models, which are trained
on the prompt with the additional guidance of downstream task loss. This distinctive formulation
allows the Prompt Diffuser to refine and improve the prompt quality through the conditioning of
downstream task loss, even when fine-tuning with relatively poor random prompt distributions. This
finding provides valuable insights into the potential of Prompt Diffuser for prompt-tuning tasks, as
it demonstrates the ability to achieve enhanced performance without relying solely on an expert
dataset or a highly optimized initial prompt.
Diffusion Guidance. To improve the quality of the prompts, we propose a novel approach that
involves integrating downstream task guidance into the reverse diffusion chain, while carefully pre-
serving the continuity of the DDPM update progress. Leveraging the gradient projection technique,
we successfully integrate the downstream task information into the learning process without com-
promising the overall performance of the Diffusion model. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method, we conduct three additional variants with different update gradients: Equation 18
solely trains using the LDM loss without incorporating downstream guidance, Equation 19 solely
trains using the LDT to investigate the effect of guidance, and Equation 20 combines both the down-
stream task guidance loss and the LDM loss gradients in a simple manner:



         ∇L = ∇LDM                      (18)
         ∇L = ∇LDT                      (19)
         ∇L = ∇LDM + ∇LDT               (20)


Figure 3: Ablation on diffusion guidance. We establish the performance of Equation 18 as the
baseline and subsequently present the relative performance. Remarkably, our gradient projection
technique consistently yields the most favorable outcomes.
As illustrated by the outcomes depicted in Figure 3, the guidance loss assumes a pivotal role, partic-
ularly evident in the MW reach-v2 environment, where it yields robust performance. Furthermore,
the direct addition of the loss through Equation 20 results in inferior outcomes compared to ex-
clusively employing DM loss and DT loss. In contrast, our proposed method adeptly circumvents
potential conflicts between losses, thereby contributing to improved results in all environments.

6   C ONCLUSION
We introduce Prompt Diffuser, a methodology that leverages a conditional diffusion model to gen-
erate superior-quality prompts. This approach shifts the traditional prompt-tuning process towards
a conditional generative model, where prompts are generated from random noise. Through our tra-
jectory reconstruction model and gradient projection techniques, Prompt Diffuser effectively over-
comes the need for pre-collecting expert prompts and facilitates the PLM’s efficient adaptation to
novel tasks using generated prompts. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the substantial
performance advantage of our approach over other parameter-efficient methods, approaching the
upper bound in performance. We anticipate that our work will pave the way for the application of
prompt-tuning techniques in the realm of RL, offering a generative model perspective.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
  Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making?    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.15657, 2022.
Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Yue Cao, and Jun Zhu. All are worth words: a vit backbone for score-based
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12152, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. NeurIPS, 2021.
Zheng Chen, Yulun Zhang, Ding Liu, Bin Xia, Jinjin Gu, Linghe Kong, and Xin Yuan. Hierarchi-
  cal integration diffusion model for realistic image deblurring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12966,
  2023.
Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Generalized decision transformer for offline
  hindsight information matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10364, 2021.
Yuxian Gu, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Minlie Huang. Ppt: Pre-trained prompt tuning for few-shot
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04332, 2021.
Haoran He, Chenjia Bai, Kang Xu, Zhuoran Yang, Weinan Zhang, Dong Wang, Bin Zhao, and Xue-
  long Li. Diffusion model is an effective planner and data synthesizer for multi-task reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18459, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Shengchao Hu, Li Shen, Ya Zhang, Yixin Chen, and Dacheng Tao. On transforming reinforcement
  learning by transformer: The development trajectory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14164, 2022.
Shengchao Hu, Li Shen, Ya Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Graph decision transformer. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.03747, 2023a.
Shengchao Hu, Li Shen, Ya Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Prompt-tuning decision transformer with
  preference ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09648, 2023b.
Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In ICML, 2019.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Sergio Guadar-
  rama, Ian Fischer, Winnie Xu, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision trans-
  formers. NeurIPS, 2022.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.
Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Towards faster non-asymptotic convergence for
  diffusion-based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09251, 2023.
Xiang Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Diffusion-
  lm improves controllable text generation. NeurIPS, 2022.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chang Liu, Haoning Wu, Yujie Zhong, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Weidi Xie. Intelligent grimm–open-
  ended visual storytelling via latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00973, 2023a.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 2023b.
Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov, Xue Bin Peng, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Offline meta-
  reinforcement learning with advantage weighting. In ICML, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, 2021.
Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu, Ser-
  gio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating human
  behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In AAAI, 2018.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Moritz Reuss, Maximilian Li, Xiaogang Jia, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Goal-conditioned imitation
 learning using score-based diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NeurIPS, 2022.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
  Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.15980, 2020.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.
Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy
  class for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022.
Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang
 Gan. Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In ICML, 2022.
Mengdi Xu, Yuchen Lu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Ding Zhao, and Chuang Gan. Hyper-decision
 transformer for efficient online policy adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08487, 2023.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In CoRL, 2020.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning for
  vision-language models. In CVPR, 2022a.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. IJCV, 2022b.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A    D ETAILED E NVIRONMENT

We evaluate our approach on a variety of tasks, including meta-RL control tasks. These tasks can be
described as follows:

• Cheetah-dir: The task comprises two directions: forward and backward, in which the cheetah
  agent is incentivized to attain high velocity along the designated direction. Both the training
  and testing sets encompass these two tasks, providing comprehensive coverage of the agent’s
  performance.
• Cheetah-vel: In this task, a total of 40 distinct tasks are defined, each characterized by a different
  goal velocity. The target velocities are uniformly sampled from the range of 0 to 3. The agent is
  subjected to a penalty based on the l2 error between its achieved velocity and the target velocity.
  We reserve 5 tasks for testing purposes and allocate the remaining 35 tasks for training.
• Ant-dir: There are 50 tasks in Ant-dir, where the goal directions are uniformly sampled in a 2D
  space. The 8-joint ant agent is rewarded for achieving high velocity along the specified goal
  direction. We select 5 tasks for testing and use the remaining tasks for training.
• Meta-World reach-v2: This task involves controlling a Sawyer robot’s end-effector to reach a
  target position in 3D space. The agent directly controls the XYZ location of the end-effector, and
  each task has a different goal position. We train on 15 tasks and test on 5 tasks.

By evaluating our approach on these diverse tasks, we can assess its performance and generalization
capabilities across different control scenarios.
The generalization capability of our approach is evaluated by examining the task index of the training
and testing sets, as shown in Table 3. The experimental setup in Section 5 adheres to the training
and testing division specified in Table 3. This ensures consistency and allows for a comprehensive
assessment of the approach’s performance across different tasks.


Table 3: Training and testing task indexes when testing the generalization ability in meta-RL tasks.

                                             Cheetah-dir
                   Training set of size 2     [0,1]
                   Testing set of size 2      [0.1]
                                             Cheetah-vel
                   Training set of size 35    [0-1,3-6,8-14,16-22,24-25,27-39]
                   Testing set of size 5      [2,7,15,23,26]
                                                ant-dir
                   Training set of size 45    [0-5,7-16,18-22,24-29,31-40,42-49]
                   Testing set of size 5      [6,17,23,30,41]
                                        Meta-World reach-v2
                   Training set of size 15    [1-5,7,8,10-14,17-19]
                   Testing set of size 5      [6,9,15,16,20]

B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We construct our policy as an MLP-based conditional diffusion model. Following the parameteriza-
tion approach of Nichol & Dhariwal (2021), we design ϵθ as a 3-layer MLP with Mish activations,
utilizing 256 hidden units for all network layers. The input to ϵθ consists of concatenated states,
actions, and rewards from the prompt, with the return-to-go and timesteps serving as conditions. It
is important to note that different tokens possess varying ranges, necessitating their normalization


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to fall within the [-1, 1] interval, based on the respective tokens’ maximum and minimum values.
During the training phase, we employ prompts from training tasks to pre-train the diffusion model.
Subsequently, we fine-tune the diffusion model using prompts from test tasks, a strategy that effec-
tively accelerates the fine-tuning process.


C    H YPERPARAMETERS

In the case of the Prompt Diffuser, our primary focus centers around the hyperparameters associated
with the improved-diffusion (https://github.com/openai/improved-diffusion),
with comprehensive details provided in Table 4. These hyperparameters have been thoughtfully
selected to ensure the optimal performance of our proposed approach. The careful consideration
and tuning of these hyperparameters contribute to the effectiveness and robustness of the Prompt
Diffuser across various tasks and scenarios.


                          Table 4: Hyperparameters of Prompt Diffuser.

                            Hyperparameter              Value
                            Diffusion steps             100
                            Learn sigma                 False
                            Small sigma                 True
                            Sample scheduler            Uniform
                            Loss function               MSE
                            Prompt length K ∗           5
                            Return-to-go conditioning   1500 Cheetah-dir
                                                        0 Cheetah-vel
                                                        500 Ant-dir
                                                        650 MW reach-v2
                            Fine-tune epochs            20
                            Fine-tune steps             100
                            Fine-tune batches           32
                            Dropout                     0.1
                            Learning rate               1 × 10−4
                            Adam betas                  (0.9, 0.95)
                            Grad norm clip              0.25
                            Weight decay                1 ∗ 10−4


D    A BLATION ON THE GENERATIVE MODELS

Furthermore, we conduct additional experiments wherein we systematically explore the generative
model’s capabilities. The corresponding results are presented in the Table 5. It is noteworthy that
while the model generating the prompts is varied, we maintain consistency across other settings,
including the PLMs, hyperparameters, and the process of updating losses. This meticulous approach
ensures a fair and unbiased comparison.
As the results demonstrate, our approach’s superiority can be attributed to the efficacy of the dif-
fusion model. Given that both methods consider downstream task losses, the observed distinctions
between their performances can likely be attributed to inherent characteristics of the generative
model itself. This model’s capacity to generate in-distribution outcomes, closely resembling those
in fine-tuned datasets, is of paramount importance. The sensitivity of prompt perturbations to final
outcomes underscores the significance of precision in prompt generation.
While the transformation of prompt-tuning into a canonical conditional generative modeling prob-
lem alleviates the need for meticulous pre-collection of high-quality prompts, it places a consid-
erable burden on the generative model itself. This model must meet elevated precision standards
for prompt generation. However, through the strategic utilization of the highly expressive diffusion
model, our approach exhibits substantial potential within the prompt-tuning domain. This poten-


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Comparison among various generative models. Each environment is fine-tuned using the
limited trajectory samples with three random seeds.

                          Cheetah-dir   Cheetah-vel      Ant-dir     MW reach-v2   Average
              DM          945.3 ± 7.2   -35.3 ± 2.4    432.1 ± 6.7   555.7 ± 6.8    474.4
              VAE         927.2 ± 6.5   -47.3 ± 2.1    383.5 ± 9.8   511.5 ± 8.8    443.7

                                    Reverse Denoising Process


Figure 4: The visual results of the reverse denoising process. The initial samples x0 (τ ) originate
from Gaussian noise, with a prompt length of 5, represented by distinct colors.

tial is evidenced by our method’s remarkable performance, outperforming other parameter-efficient
approaches by a significant margin, as depicted in Table 1.

E    M ORE V ISUAL R ESULTS
We extend our insights into the reverse denoising process through Figure 4. As the denoising steps
increase, the differentiation between individual timesteps becomes progressively clearer. This dy-
namic visualization serves to offer a deeper comprehension of the denoising process, highlighting
how each step contributes to the refinement of the generated prompts.

F    T HE D ETAILS OF BASELINES
In this section, we describe the implementation details of the baselines:
• Prompt-DT. Prompt-DT (Xu et al., 2022) is the pioneering application of sequence-prediction
  models that achieve state-of-the-art offline meta-RL algorithms. During testing, it exclusively
  employs the trajectory prompt for the target task without any additional fine-tuning process. Our
  evaluation includes distinct experiments employing random and expert prompts. We borrow the
  code from https://github.com/mxu34/prompt-dt for implementation.
• MT-ORL. Multi-task Offline RL omits the prompt augmentation step used in Prompt-DT to con-
  struct a variant of the approach. We keep other hyperparameters and implementation details the
  same as the official version except for the prompt augmentation.
• Soft Prompt. We consider the prompt as a ”soft prompt” and update it using the AdamW opti-
  mizer, analogous to a common practice in the NLP domain. The learning rate and weight decay
  are set to 1 × 10−4 .
• Adaptor. An adaptor module is introduced to each decoder layer, inspired by HDT (Xu et al.,
  2023), except for the hyper-network used for initialization. The adaptor contains a down-
  projection layer Dl , a GELU nonlinearity, an up-projection layer Ul , and a feature-wise linear
  modulation (FiLM) layer F iLMl (Perez et al., 2018). The hidden dimension is set to 16.
• Prompt-Tuning DT. Prompt-Tuning DT (Hu et al., 2023b) represents the first application that
  incorporates prompt tuning techniques in the RL domain, catering to specific preferences in the
  target environment with preference ranking. We maintain consistency with the hyperparameters
  outlined in Hu et al. (2023b) and implement the offline settings algorithm.
• Prompt-DT-FT. We fine-tune the entire model parameters of the pre-trained Prompt-DT during
  testing, utilizing a limited amount of data from the target task. The performance of the full-data
  settings is also presented, serving as an upper bound for all fine-tuning methods. The fine-tuning


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    optimizer utilizes AdamW with a learning rate and weight decay of 1 × 10−4 . In the context
    of limited data availability, we conduct fine-tuning with 20 epochs in the few-data setting. This
    cautious approach allows us to make the most of the available data while ensuring a reasonable
    adaptation process. In contrast, in the full-data setting, the fine-tuning process is extended to 100
    epochs to facilitate comprehensive adaptation with a larger dataset.


G      T HEORETIC S UPPORT

In this section, we give the following theoretical support for our gradient projection technique for
the final performance.
We use L1 and L2 to denote LDM and LDT respectively for simplicity.
Definition 1. We define ϕij as the angle between two task gradients gi and gj . We define the
gradients as conflicting when cos ϕij < 0.
Definition 2. Consider two task loss functions L1 : Rn → R and L2 : Rn → R. We define
the two-task learning objective as L(θ) = L1 (θ) + L2 (θ) for all θ ∈ Rn , where g1 = ∇L1 (θ),
g2 = ∇L2 (θ), and g = g1 + g2 .

Motivated by the work of Yu et al. (2020) on gradient-based techniques, we present Theorem 1 in
this study. The convergence to a point where cos(ϕ) = −1 indicates a scenario where the gradi-
ents of LDM and LDT are in opposite directions. This situation typically arises when there is a
conflict between the objectives of the two loss functions. In practical implementation, our priority
is to ensure that the DM loss converges normally, even if it means sacrificing the convergence of
the DT loss to some extent. This is because the LDM loss plays a crucial role in approximating
the distribution of the existing dataset, which sets a foundational benchmark for the quality of the
generated prompts. On the other hand, convergence to L(θ∗ ) signifies that the optimization process
successfully finds the optimal point that minimizes the combined loss. This outcome is the ideal
scenario, demonstrating the effectiveness of our gradient projection technique in jointly optimizing
both loss functions.
This theoretical framework addresses a critical challenge in combining multiple loss functions, par-
ticularly when these functions have potentially conflicting gradients. Our approach ensures stable
and effective optimization, even in complex scenarios where balancing multiple objectives is neces-
sary. To enhance readability, we present the full proof for reference purposes.
Theorem 1. Assume L1 and L2 are convex and differentiable. Suppose the gradient of L is L-
Lipschitz with L > 0. Then, the gradient projection technique with step size t ≤ L1 will converge to
either (1) a location in the optimization landscape where cos(ϕ12 ) = −1 or (2) the optimal value
L(θ∗ ).


Proof. We will use the shorthand || · || to denote the L2 -norm and ∇L = ∇θ L, where θ is the
parameter vector. let g1 = ∇L1 , g2 = ∇L2 , g = ∇L = g1 + g2 , and ϕ12 be the angle between
g1 and g2 .
Our assumption that ∇L is Lipschitz continuous with constant L implies that ∇2 L(θ) − LI is a
negative semi-definite matrix. Using this fact, we can perform a quadratic expansion of L around
L(θ) and obtain the following inequality:

                                                       1
                      L(θ+ ) ≤ L(θ) + ∇L(θ)T (θ+ − θ) + ∇2 L(θ)||θ+ − θ||2
                                                       2
                                                       1
                             ≤ L(θ) + ∇L(θ)T (θ+ − θ) + L||θ+ − θ||2
                                                       2


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, we can plug in the gradient projection technique (Equation 15) by letting θ+ = θ − t · (g −
g1 ·g2        g1 ·g2
||g1 ||2 g1 − ||g2 ||2 g2 ). We then get:


                                  g1 · g2       g1 · g2        1          g1 · g2       g1 · g2
 L(θ+ ) ≤ L(θ) + t · gT (−g +            2
                                           g1 +        2
                                                         g2 ) + Lt2 ||g −        2
                                                                                   g1 −          g2 ||2
                                  ||g1 ||       ||g2 ||        2          ||g1 ||       ||g2 ||2

       (Expanding, using the identity g = g1 + g2 )

                                        (g1 · g2 )2   (g1 · g2 )2

                              2          2                                   1
        = L(θ) + t −||g1 || − ||g2 || +             +                       + Lt2 ||g1 + g2
                                          ||g1 ||2      ||g2 ||2             2
          g1 · g2       g1 · g2
        −          g1 −          g2 ||2
          ||g1 ||2      ||g2 ||2

       (Expanding further and re-arranging terms)

                        1                             (g1 · g2 )2   (g1 · g2 )2
        = L(θ) − (t − Lt2 )(||g1 ||2 + ||g2 ||2 −                 −             )
                        2                               ||g1 ||2      ||g2 ||2
                            (g1 · g2 )2
        − Lt2 (g1 · g2 −                    g1 · g2 )
                          ||g1 ||2 ||g2 ||2

                                           g1 · g2
       (Using the identity cos(ϕ12 ) =                  )
                                         ||g1 ||||g2 ||

                        1
        = L(θ) − (t − Lt2 )[(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g1 ||2 + (1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g2 ||2 ]
                        2
        − Lt2 (1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g1 ||||g2 || cos(ϕ12 )                                            (21)
       (Note that cos(ϕ12 ) < 0 so the final term is non-negative)

Using t ≤ L1 , we know that −(1 − 12 Lt) = 12 Lt − 1 ≤ 21 L(1/L) − 1 = −1       2
                                                                        2 and Lt ≤ t.
Plugging this into the last expression above, we can conclude the following:

                           1
          L(θ+ ) ≤ L(θ) − t[(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g1 ||2 + (1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g2 ||2 ]
                           2
                 − t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g1 ||||g2 || cos(ϕ12 )
                           1
                 = L(θ) − t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))[||g1 ||2 + 2||g1 ||||g2 || cos(ϕ12 ) + ||g2 ||2 ]
                           2
                           1
                 = L(θ) − t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))[||g1 ||2 + 2g1 · g2 + ||g2 ||2 ]
                           2
                           1
                 = L(θ) − t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))||g1 + g2 ||2
                           2
                           1
                 = L(θ) − t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))∥g∥2
                           2

If cos(ϕ12 ) > −1, then 12 t(1−cos2 (ϕ12 ))∥g∥2 will always be positive unless g = 0. This inequality
implies that the objective function value strictly decreases with each iteration where cos(ϕ12 ) > −1.
Hence repeatedly applying gradient projection technique process can either reach the optimal value
L(θ) = L(θ∗ ) or cos(ϕ12 ) = −1, in which case 21 t(1 − cos2 (ϕ12 ))∥g∥2 = 0. Note that this result
only holds when we choose t to be small enough, i.e. t ≤ L1 .



                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 6: The similarity and corresponding performance in the Ant-Dir-OOD environments.

                           Expert distribution    Prompt-Tuning DT      Prompt Diffuser
           Similarity      1.0                    0.9514                0.9092
           Performance     526.0 ± 1.5            540 ± 8.7             546.8 ± 9.3


H    P ROMPT D IVERSITY A SSESSMENT

We have conducted both quantitative and qualitative analyses to evaluate the diversity of the gener-
ated prompts, comparing them with baseline methods to underscore their quality and variation.

Quantitative Analysis. Our quantitative analysis utilizes the Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA)
metric (Kornblith et al., 2019), a sophisticated measure widely recognized in machine learning and
deep learning research. CKA evaluates the similarity between two sets of features or representa-
tions by comparing the alignment of their centered kernel matrices. It produces a single value that
quantifies this similarity, with higher values indicating greater resemblance.
To provide a concrete example, we examine the results from the Ant-dir-OOD environment. Here,
CKA allows us to quantitatively assess the diversity of prompts generated by different methods. By
comparing the CKA scores across various methods, we can determine the extent to which our model
generates diverse prompts in comparison to other approaches. As depicted in Table 6, it is important
to note that similarity, in isolation, is not a definitive measure of performance. However, the lower
similarity score achieved by our Prompt Diffuser, relative to baseline methods, indicates a signifi-
cant divergence from the established expert distribution. Notably, this divergence does not compro-
mise performance; in fact, our Prompt Diffuser attains the highest performance metrics among the
compared methods. This outcome not only demonstrates the effectiveness of our method but also
highlights its capability to generate diverse prompts that effectively enhance performance in offline
RL scenarios.

Qualitative Analysis. Alongside the quantitative approach, we also conduct a qualitative analysis.
This involves visually inspecting and evaluating the prompts generated by our Prompt Diffuser and
comparing them with those generated by baseline methods. This qualitative assessment provides a
more intuitive understanding of the diversity in the generated prompts.
To visualize the diversity of the prompts, we utilize the t-SNE method for dimensionality reduction
and present these prompts in a two-dimensional plane. This visual representation is shown in Figure
5. The t-SNE visualization corroborates our quantitative findings, showing that both the Prompt-
Tuning DT and Prompt Diffuser deviate from the original distribution to different extents, leading
to performance improvements.
In conclusion, through a comprehensive combination of quantitative (CKA metric) and qualitative
analyses, we have rigorously evaluated the diversity of the prompts generated by our model. The
results affirm the quality and variation in these prompts, underscoring the effectiveness of our ap-
proach in generating diverse and useful prompts for offline RL.


I   M ORE A BLATION S TUDY

Out-of-Distribution Test. To assess the OOD generalization, we have conducted tests in the Ant-
Dir environment with a specific focus on scenarios that fall outside the distribution of our training
set. The training and testing sets for this OOD evaluation are detailed as Table 7.
The results of this OOD evaluation are presented in Table 9. We restrict our comparison to PDT
(using expert prompts), Prompt-Tuning DT, and our Prompt Diffuser. The outcomes indicate that
the Prompt Diffuser demonstrates notable efficacy even in these OOD tasks. These findings suggest
that our Prompt Diffuser not only adapts to and performs well in environments it was trained on
but also exhibits commendable generalization to novel, out-of-distribution tasks. This robustness


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 5: The t-SNE visualization of different prompts in the Ant-Dir-OOD environment.


Table 7: Training and testing task indexes when testing the generalization ability in meta-RL OOD
tasks.

                                           Ant-Dir-OOD
                       Training set of size 8   [8, 13, 16, 20, 22, 26, 32, 37]
                       Testing set of size 3    [1, 4, 41]


in OOD scenarios is a crucial aspect of offline RL and speaks to the effectiveness of our model in
diverse and unforeseen environments.

Prompt Length. The majority of methods tend to set the prompt length at 5 (Hu et al., 2023b;
Xu et al., 2022), encompassing essential information to identify the distribution of the given dataset
while avoiding direct imitation. Additionally, opting for shorter prompts is more practical as longer
prompts require additional manual effort.
We have also conducted an ablation study focusing on the effects of varying prompt sizes, partic-
ularly in the context of the Cheetah-vel environment. This study aims to find an optimal balance
between the richness of information provided by longer prompts and the efficiency of the prompt
generation process. Our study explores four different prompt length settings, carefully examining
their impact on the performance of our Prompt Diffuser model. The central consideration here is
the trade-off between longer prompts, which offer more detailed target tasks information, and the
increased computational burden they impose on the diffusion loss, particularly due to the need for
more denoising iterations to accurately model the complex, extended prompt distributions. The re-
sults in Table 8 indicate that while longer prompts initially contribute to improved performance by
providing more detailed information, there is a tipping point beyond which the quality of prompt
generation begins to decline. This decline is particularly noticeable when the length of the prompt
substantially increases, yet the number of denoising iterations remains relatively low, a constraint
imposed to maintain processing speed. Interestingly, when the number of denoising iterations (N)
is increased for longer prompts (length 40), there is a noticeable improvement in performance. This
suggests that the challenge in generating high-quality prompts for longer sequences can be partially
mitigated by allowing more iterations in the denoising process.

Zero-Shot Setting. In the context of zero-shot settings, where no information about unseen tasks
is available, and the model cannot resort to task-specific prompts or undergo further fine-tuning with
few-shot prompt datasets, traditional prompt tuning and adaptor methods are not applicable. This
scenario presents a unique challenge and holds significant research value.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 8: The ablation study on the prompt length in the Ant-Dir-OOD environment.

                       Prompt Length                                      Prompt Diffuser
                       2                                                  -41.2 ± 11.2
                       5                                                  -35.3 ± 2.4
                       10                                                 -40.3 ± 7.2
                       40                                                 -45.3 ± 4.3
                       40 (with denoising number N increase)              -43.2 ± 3.3


      Table 9: The ablation study on the zero-shot setting in the Ant-Dir-OOD environment.

             Env           Prompt-DT     Prompt-Tuning DT   Prompt Diffuser   Prompt-DT    Prompt Diffuser
             Setting       few-shot      few-shot           few-shot          zero-shot    zero-shot
             Ant-Dir-OOD   526.0 ± 1.5   540.8 ± 8.7        546.8 ± 9.3       52.7 ± 1.9   329.2 ± 21.8



To rigorously assess the zero-shot performance, we conduct an OOD evaluation in the Ant-Dir
environment. This environment is specifically chosen due to its diverse range of tasks, providing
a robust testbed for our model. The performance in the Ant-Dir-OOD environment is indicative of
the model’s capability in zero-shot settings. We present a comparative analysis of the performance
in Table 9. Notably, in the zero-shot setting, the Prompt Diffuser significantly outperforms the
traditional Prompt-DT method. This outcome highlights the efficacy of our model in adapting to
new tasks even without prior exposure or task-specific tuning. However, it is important to note that
our model still falls considerably behind the performance achieved in the few-shot settings.


                                                       19
