Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H UMAN F EEDBACK IS NOT G OLD S TANDARD
 Tom Hosking                              Phil Blunsom                     Max Bartolo
 University of Edinburgh                  Cohere                           Cohere, UCL
 tom.hosking@ed.ac.uk                     phil@cohere.com                  max@cohere.com



                                             A BSTRACT

         Human feedback has become the de facto standard for evaluating the performance
         of Large Language Models, and is increasingly being used as a training objective.
         However, it is not clear which properties of a generated output this single ‘pref-
         erence’ score captures. We hypothesise that preference scores are subjective and
         open to undesirable biases. We critically analyse the use of human feedback for
         both training and evaluation, to verify whether it fully captures a range of crucial
         error criteria. We find that while preference scores have fairly good coverage,
         they under-represent important aspects like factuality. We further hypothesise that
         both preference scores and error annotation may be affected by confounders, and
         leverage instruction-tuned models to generate outputs that vary along two pos-
         sible confounding dimensions: assertiveness and complexity. We find that the
         assertiveness of an output skews the perceived rate of factuality errors, indicat-
         ing that human annotations are not a fully reliable evaluation metric or training
         objective. Finally, we offer preliminary evidence that using human feedback as
         a training objective disproportionately increases the assertiveness of model out-
         puts. We encourage future work to carefully consider whether preference scores
         are well aligned with the desired objective.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The fluency exhibited by Large Language Models (LLMs) has reached the point where rigorous
evaluation of LLM capabilities is very challenging, with the quality of model outputs often now
exceeding that of reference examples from datasets (Zhang et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2021). A great
advantage of LLMs is their flexibility, but this makes it difficult to design an all-purpose evaluation
metric (Novikova et al., 2017). Benchmarks have proven useful for model comparisons (Gehrmann
et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2023), but for open-ended generation tasks human evaluation using a single
overall score has become the de facto standard method (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).
For a given input prompt, samples or responses from models are shown to annotators, who are asked
to score the responses according to their quality (Novikova et al., 2018). These scores can either be
absolute ratings, or relative preference scores, whereby two responses are ranked by quality.
Although the simplicity of a single overall score is appealing, it obscures the decision making pro-
cess used by annotators, including any trade-offs or compromises, and does not explain why one
response or model is better than another. Annotators look for shortcuts to make the task easier
(Ipeirotis et al., 2010), and so are more likely to base their judgement on superficial properties (e.g.,
fluency and linguistic complexity) than aspects that require more effort to check (e.g., factuality).
Previously, human evaluation of natural language generation systems has considered multiple as-
pects of the generated output. However, the criteria used are often unique to the specific task being
considered (van der Lee et al., 2021; Hosking et al., 2022; Xu & Lapata, 2022), making them diffi-
cult to apply to LLMs. With recent rapid improvement in system performance, it is important to test
whether preference scores capture the desired aspects of output quality, and whether they provide a
gold standard objective for evaluating and training LLMs.
In this paper, we analyse human annotation of model outputs, both for overall preference scores and
for specific error criteria. In Section 2 we establish a set of error types that are task independent
and act as minimum requirements for model outputs. We analyse the error coverage of overall
preference scores. We ask two sets of annotators to rate a range of LLM outputs, the first according
to these error types and the second according to their own judgements of overall quality, and find


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that overall preference scores under-represent factuality and faithfulness. In Section 3, we consider
two possible sources of bias when annotating for specific error types by generating outputs with
varying assertiveness and complexity, and find that assertiveness strongly biases human factuality
judgements. Finally, in Section 4 we offer some preliminary evidence that using human preference
scores as a training objective disproportionately increases the assertiveness of model outputs. We
present additional findings from our collected data in Appendix E: we confirm that annotators are
subject to a priming effect; we analyse the variation of quality scores with response length; and we
show that generated outputs are preferred to the reference responses. Our code and data are available
at https://github.com/cohere-ai/human-feedback-paper.

2     A RE PREFERENCE SCORES RELIABLE ?
To check whether a single preference score is a useful objective with good coverage, we first estab-
lish a minimum set of requirements for model outputs. These error types are both generic enough
that they are task agnostic and widely applicable, but also sufficiently well-specified that it is possi-
ble for annotators to judge them. We begin with the factors identified by Xu et al. (2023c), who asked
crowdworkers and experts to rate model outputs and give justifications for their scores, removing
those factors that are overly subjective (e.g., ease of understanding). We also draw inspiration from
Grice’s Maxims (Grice, 1991) regarding felicitous communication between speakers: the Maxim
of Quantity implies that repetition is undesirable, the Maxim of Quality prohibits factual errors,
and so on. Finally, we considered factors that users care about when using LLMs in production
environments (e.g., refusal to answer). We therefore consider the following error types:
       • Harmful – Is the response unsafe, harmful or likely to cause offence in some way?
       • Fluency – Is the response grammatically incorrect, or does it contain spelling mistakes?
       • Scope – Does the response exceed the scope limits of a chatbot? Does the response give
         opinions or otherwise act as if it is a person, or offer to take actions that it cannot (e.g. make
         a call, access the internet)?
       • Repetition – Does the response repeat itself? For example, if there is a list in the response,
         are any items repeated? Does the response reuse the same phrase again and again?
       • Refusal – If the request is reasonable, does the response refuse to answer it (e.g. “I’m
         sorry, I can’t help you with that”)?
       • Formatting – Does the response fail to conform to any formatting or length requirements
         from the prompt?
       • Relevance – Does the response go off topic or include information that is not relevant to
         the request?
       • Factuality – Is the response factually incorrect (regardless of what the request said)?
       • Inconsistency – Does the response incorrectly represent or change information from the
         request? This criterion is often also referred to as faithfulness.
       • Contradiction – Is the response inconsistent with itself, or does it contradict itself?

2.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We ask crowdworkers to evaluate model outputs, marking each example with a binary yes or no to
denote whether an error is present. Separately, we ask a different set of annotators to rate the overall
quality of the same outputs from 1 to 5, according to whatever criteria they feel are important.

Datasets To cover a range of different tasks for which evaluation is challenging, we construct input
prompts from three datasets: Curation Corpus (Curation, 2020) is a summarization dataset composed
of 40,000 news articles and professionally written summaries; Amazon Product Descriptions (Ni
et al., 2019) gives a product title and specification as input and requires generating a compelling
product description; and Wikihow (Koupaee & Wang, 2018) consists of ‘how to’ questions and
step-by-step guides. Full details of the prompt templates used can be found in Appendix C.

Models While a comparison of different models is not the focus of this work, we nonetheless
source responses from multiple performant models that we were able to access at time of writing:
MPT 30B Instruct is fine-tuned on Dolly DDRLHF and additional datasets (MosaicML NLP Team,
2023; Conover et al., 2023); Falcon 40B instruct is fine-tuned on a subset of Baize (Almazrouei et al.,

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Contradiction 0.00
                                       Inconsistency      0.21
                                           Factuality        0.35
                                           Relevance                0.60


                          Error type
                                          Formatting                    0.76
                                              Refusal                        0.95
                                           Repetition             0.53
                                               Scope 0.00
                                             Fluency 0.00
                                             Harmful 0.00


                                                                          1.0
                                                              0.5
                                                 0.0
                                                         Regression weighting
Figure 1: Weightings for each criteria under a Lasso regression model of overall scores. Almost all
the criteria contribute to the overall scores, with refusal contributing most strongly.

2023; Xu et al., 2023b); and Command 6B and 52B are commercial models trained by Cohere, fine
tuned on proprietary datasets. We additionally include the reference outputs for each input. Details
of the models, prompt templates and sampling hyperparameters can be found in Appendix D.

Annotation We source crowdworkers from Prolific, requiring them to be native English speakers
with 100% approval ratings from prior tasks. Our annotation interface is based on Potato (Pei et al.,
2022). Our annotation protocol is based on findings from RankME (Novikova et al., 2018) that
showed the best inter-annotator agreement is achieved when annotators are shown multiple outputs
for a given input, and scores are collected as absolute ratings. We expect that showing annotators five
full outputs at once would lead to higher cognitive load and lower annotator engagement, therefore
we collect ratings for two outputs at a time, pairing each output with an output from one of the other
four models. The resulting four annotations per output are aggregated by taking the mean for overall
scores, and by taking the mode (and then the mean in case of ties) for error annotations. We annotate
a total of 900 distinct outputs, with a total of 4,440 annotations including quality checks.

Quality Control In order to check inter-annotator agreement, we collect 5 duplicate annotations
for a random subset of 200 pairs of outputs. We also include a set of distractor examples, where
a response is shown in context with an output from the same model but a different input. These
examples act as an attention check; the response based on a different input should consistently be
penalised along criteria like relevance and usefulness.
We find that distractor outputs are correctly rated lower than the other output in the pair over 97%
of the time, indicating that the vast majority of annotators paid attention to the task. We use Gwet’s
AC1 measure (Gwet, 2014) to assess inter-annotator agreement for the multiply annotated examples,
finding good agreement scores of between 0.64 (for Factuality) and 0.94 (for Refusal). The disparity
indicates that annotators found some error types more difficult or subjective than others; refusal is
straightforward to detect, whereas checking for factual errors involves significantly more effort.

2.2   R ESULTS

Preference scores under-represent factuality and inconsistency In order to determine the de-
gree to which each error type was captured by the overall scores, we fit a Lasso regression model
(Tibshirani, 1996) with α = 0.01 between the scores and the error ratings. Figure 1 shows the
weights of each criterion under this model, where each weight corresponds to the expected reduc-
tion in overall score if the corresponding error is present. Six out of ten error types contribute to the
overall scores, with refusal errors contributing most strongly. Factuality and inconsistency errors
both contribute but with much lower weighting, indicating that a single preference score is likely to
obscure failures in these important criteria.
We note that the error types that do not contribute were also the rarest (occurring in less than 1% of
outputs). We would expect that harmfulness and fluency should influence overall scores in general,
but in our experiments the models are sufficiently strong and the tasks sufficiently well-posed that
such errors are infrequent.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Contradiction       0.23
                                        Inconsistency                        0.78
                                            Factuality         0.32
                                            Relevance                         0.82


                           Error type
                                           Formatting 0.08
                                               Refusal 0.10
                                            Repetition 0.01
                                                Scope 0.07
                                              Fluency 0.01
                                              Harmful 0.00


                                                         0.25

                                                                0.50
                                                  0.00


                                                                       0.75

                                                                               1.00
                                                            Change in rate
Figure 2: Difference in annotated error rates for distractor examples (outputs from the same model
but different input). Some error types are correctly unchanged (e.g., repetition, refusal) while rel-
evance and inconsistency are correctly penalised. Factuality and contradiction are both incorrectly
penalised (they are independent of the input), indicating that annotators struggled to fully disentan-
gle these criteria.

Annotators struggle with disentangling factors Recall that the distractor examples are pairs
of outputs sourced from the same model, but where one of the outputs corresponds to a different
input; these should therefore achieve comparable scores for criteria that are independent of the input
prompt (e.g., fluency, detail, factuality1 ) but be heavily penalized for other factors such as relevance
and overall quality. The results in Figure 2 show that although this expectation holds in some
cases (repetition, refusal and formatting are not penalized, while relevance and inconsistency are),
other factors are incorrectly penalized; factuality and contradiction (within the output) are both rated
worse for the distractor examples. This implies that annotators found it difficult to disentangle these
criteria from the overall quality of a response.
Although annotators are shown the instructions and error criteria before the input prompt and re-
sponses, we suspect that they subconsciously form an opinion about the quality of the response
based on first impressions (Smith et al., 2014), and that this opinion influences their judgement of
each error type. In other words, an annotator may decide that a response is bad, and decide that it
is more likely to contain errors as a result. This effect could be partially mitigated by specifying
precise instructions, giving multiple examples and training a knowledgeable group of annotators.
However, there is always potential for ambiguity.

3       A RE ANNOTATIONS AFFECTED BY CONFOUNDERS ?
We have so far considered the effect of important error criteria on overall preference scores, but the
annotations for the errors were themselves given by human annotators. The results for distractor
examples in Figure 2 indicate that granular ratings may also be subject to biases. Firstly, we hypoth-
esise that the assertiveness of a text influences human judgements; a statement conveyed confidently
as fact is more likely to be interpreted as true. Similarly, text that uses complex language might lead
an annotator to believe that the communicator behind it is intelligent and knowledgeable, and there-
fore that the content is true. This concept of language ideology, where the style and tone of a speaker
leads to biased judgements about their trustworthiness and intelligence, has been extensively studied
in the context of speech (Campbell-Kibler, 2009; Woolard, 2020), but we are not aware of any work
in the context of model evaluation.

3.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We generate model outputs from the same datasets as Section 2, but using an additional preamble2 to
vary the tone of the output and create outputs with both high and low assertiveness and high and low
linguistic complexity. We constructed these preambles by iterative testing, with the aim of eliciting
    1
     Although a statement could be deemed factual if the input prompt supports it, the instructions shown to
annotators explicitly asked them to consider factuality in absolute terms.
   2
     A preamble, or system prompt, is a short natural language snippet, usually prepended to the user query,
designed to set the behavioural parameters of the system, e.g. “Respond helpfully and safely”.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                       5
                                                      Baseline         3.58     2.81       3.75


                              Preamble Type
                                              Assertiveness--          2.83     2.52       2.95        4
                                              Assertiveness++          3.73     2.93       3.84        3
                                                Complexity--           3.12     2.15       3.25        2
                                                Complexity++           3.77     3.30       3.86
                                                                                                       1
                                                                               n ess lexity uality
                                                                             e
                                                                       er tiv omp          Q
                                                                   s s            C
                                                                A
Figure 3: Human ratings of assertiveness, complexity and overall quality for each preamble type.
The ratings indicate that the preambles successfully modify the output in the desired manner, al-
though there is some correlation between perceived assertiveness and complexity. We also note that
increased assertiveness and complexity both lead to slightly higher perceived quality, while low as-
sertiveness leads to the worst rated responses.

                                                                                                               20
                    Contradiction 0.7%               -1.7%     -1.4%              0.5%      -1.7%      0.8%
                    Inconsistency -7.9%              -10.6%    -16.9%            -12.9%    -10.6%     -7.8%    10
       Error Type


                       Factuality -5.3%              -16.2%    -22.3%            -19.8%    -16.2%     -14.3%
                                                                                                               0
                       Relevance -3.5%               -5.1%     -1.6%              3.5%      -5.1%      1.7%
                      Formatting 3.7%                 3.1%      2.1%             -0.9%      3.1%       0.1%     10
                       Repetition -1.6%              -1.8%     -9.3%             -1.3%      -1.8%     -12.1%
                                                                                                                20
                                                -

                                                      e


                                                                     +


                                                                                             e
                                                                                    -


                                                                                                           +
                                               ss-


                                                                   ss+



                                                                                  ity-


                                                                                                       ity+
                                                     elin


                                                                                           elin
                                            e


                                                                   e
                                                   Bas


                                                                                          Bas
                                                                                plex


                                                                                                      plex
                                        ven


                                                               ven


                                                                              Com


                                                                                                     Com
                                    erti


                                                              erti
                               Ass


                                                             Ass


Figure 4: The difference in error rates between crowdsourced annotations and ‘expert’ annotations
from the authors, excluding samples that were marked as refusing to respond. Annotators tend to
underestimate the rate of inconsistency or factuality errors, and they are less likely to spot these
errors in outputs that are assertive.

a noticeable change in output tone without overly degrading output quality. The full text used for
the preambles is as follows:
             • Assertiveness−− Respond in a cautious, defensive and uncertain way, as if you are unfa-
               miliar with the topic.
             • Assertiveness++ Respond authoritatively, assertively and persuasively, as if you are very
               knowledgeable about the topic.
             • Complexity−− Respond using only short words and simple language, as if you were talking
               to a child.
             • Complexity++ Respond using complex language, long words and technical terms, as if
               you are an expert.
These preambles are inserted into the model input, but are hidden from annotators.
We use a similar annotation setup to Section 2.1, collecting overall scores from 1 to 5 from one
group of annotators, and binary error annotations from a second group3 . Additionally, we collect
   3
       We exclude scope, fluency and harmfulness from this set of experiments due to their rarity.


                                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


judgements about the assertiveness and complexity of each output from 1 to 5 from a third, distinct
group of annotators. We annotate a total of 1,500 distinct outputs, giving a total of 7,200 anno-
tations including quality checks. Reference outputs with varying assertiveness and complexity are
unavailable, so we use the same set of models as in Section 2 excluding the reference outputs. We
instead include Llama 2 13B Chat (Touvron et al., 2023), which was trained with RLHF using a
large amount of human preference data.
It is possible that the preambles might lead to changes in the true error rates of the output (Xu et al.,
2023a). The authors therefore carefully annotate a subset of 300 examples for each error type, to act
as a set of ‘expert’ annotations. Although not strictly an unbiased set of ratings, this subset acts as a
useful estimate of the true error rates.

3.2   R ESULTS

Confidence and complexity can be varied using preambles We first confirm that our preambles
successfully change the model outputs in the desired way. We gather ratings from annotators, asking
them to rate the assertiveness and complexity from 1 to 5. The results in Figure 3 indicate that the
preambles induces the intended variations. We note that the two dimensions are entangled; a low
complexity output is likely to be rated lower for assertiveness, and vice versa. We additionally
measure the reading age of the responses using the Flesch-Kincaid measure (Kincaid et al., 1975),
and use a sentiment classifier trained on Twitter data (Camacho-collados et al., 2022) as a proxy for
assertiveness, with the distributions for each preamble type shown in Appendix F.

Factuality judgements are biased by assertiveness The low assertiveness preamble leads to a
significant increase in refusal errors, from 3.5% in the baseline case to 24%. This in turn leads to
an increase in perceived formatting and relevance errors, since a refusal is not topically similar to
a request and is not formatted as a response. We exclude examples where the model was marked
as having refused to respond from results reported in this section, since they are more difficult for
annotators to interpret. We show the full, unfiltered results in Appendix F for reference, however
the conclusions do not significantly change. We note that the ability to control refusal rate via a
preamble may have practical implications for safety, offering both a way to prevent harmful output
but also a potential jailbreak to circumvent model guardrails.
Figure 4 shows the difference in annotated error rates between crowdsourced annotators and the
‘experts’, broken down by preamble type. Crowdworkers underestimate the rate of factuality and
inconsistency errors. This difference is increased for high assertiveness responses, and decreased
for low assertiveness responses. In other words, annotators are more trusting of assertive responses,
and are less likely to identify factuality or inconsistency errors within them. The assertiveness of a
response therefore has a significant confounding effect on crowdsourced factuality and inconsistency
judgements, a crucial aspect of model evaluation. Modifying the complexity or assertiveness has a
similar effect on perceived repetition. More complex or more assertive responses are incorrectly
perceived as being less repetitive. Crowdworker estimates of factuality errors do not vary signifi-
cantly with complexity (Table 3), but the expert annotations show that more complex responses are
less likely to contain factual errors. Neither assertiveness nor complexity have a significant effect on
annotators estimates of contradiction, relevance or formatting errors.
Surprisingly, the crowdsourced estimate of the factuality error rate for the ‘low assertiveness’ group
is higher than the baseline, while the ‘expert’ estimate is lower (Table 3). Qualitatively, we find that
the outputs tend to be shorter and therefore contain fewer factual assertions that could be incorrect.
Figure 5 shows the annotated error rates for all preamble types, grouped by assertiveness rating,
demonstrating that error rates are strongly related to perceived assertiveness. This acts as confir-
mation of the relationship between the assertiveness and the perceived factuality of a response; the
relationship holds both when assertiveness is controlled via the preambles and when it is measured.


4     A RE HUMAN PREFERENCES A GOOD TRAINING OBJECTIVE ?

Perceived quality is correlated with assertiveness Assertiveness is strongly positively correlated
with overall quality scores, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.68, while complexity is some-
what correlated, with a coefficient of 0.53. It is difficult to determine the causal direction of this

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  0.4                                           Contradiction
                                                                                Inconsistency



                     Error rate
                                                                                Factuality
                                  0.2                                           Relevance
                                                                                Formatting
                                                                                Repetition
                                  0.0
                                        1     2     3     4        5
                                              Assertiveness
Figure 5: Variation in crowdsourced error rates with assertiveness. More assertive outputs are less
likely to be considered as containing errors, independent of whether a modifying preamble was used.

              4.25
              4.00
              3.75                                                Command 52B             Complexity++
                                                                  Llama 2 13B             Complexity--
    Quality


              3.50
                                                                  MPT 30B Instruct        Assertiveness++
              3.25                                                Falcon 40B Instruct     Assertiveness--
                                                                  Command 6B              Baseline
              3.00
              2.75
                              3.0           3.5     4.0
                                    Assertiveness

Figure 6: Quality against Assertiveness, grouped by model and preamble type, with the trendlines
for Command 52B and LLama 2 13B. Llama 2 13B shows higher assertiveness for equivalent qual-
ity, indicating that some of the perceived quality improvements are actually due to the increased
assertiveness. Command 52B seems to be the most ‘humble’, exhibiting lower assertiveness for a
given output quality.

relationship: are assertive responses generally higher quality, or are high quality responses deemed
to be more assertive? The relationship nonetheless suggests that using human feedback as a training
objective could inadvertently increase the complexity and assertiveness of outputs as a side-effect.

RLHF may disproportionately increase assertiveness Figure 6 shows the mean quality scores
against mean assertiveness ratings for all models tested, grouped by model and preamble type. In
general, higher assertiveness leads to higher quality scores. However, for a given quality score,
Llama 2 shows higher assertiveness than other models. Additionally, Llama 2 appears to be better
at following ‘style’ requests (evidenced by the higher variation in assertiveness scores), but at the
cost of stability (overall quality scores for non-baseline preambles tend to decrease more strongly
compared to other models).
Although the training details for the models are not directly comparable, the primary difference
between them is that Command was fine-tuned on preference scores, while Llama 2 was trained
using on-policy RLHF (Touvron et al., 2023). We therefore consider this to be preliminary evidence
that although the RLHF objective has likely increased the quality of Llama 2 outputs, it may have
increased their assertiveness by an even greater amount; future work could investigate this effect in
a more targeted manner using equivalent base models, but is beyond the scope of this paper.
We show some extracts of output from Command 52B and Llama 2 13B Chat using each of the
assertiveness preambles in Table 1; the changes in style for the RLHF-trained model are much more
dramatic. We believe that the RLHF objective may have led to a model that prioritises perceived
compliance with the prompt over genuine utility. Human preference scores are a proxy for the true
(unknown) utility objective, and include potentially undesirable biases that may be be detrimental.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Extracts of outputs, from Command 52B (trained off-policy) and Llama 2 13B Chat (on-
policy), truncated for brevity. The style changes for the RLHF model are noticeably stronger.
                                Input Prompt    Can you tell me how to make sloe gin?
                                                Sloe gin is a delicious and easy-to-make drink. Here’s a recipe for you to try:
                                                Ingredients: - 1 liter of gin - 500g of sloes (prune plums) - 250g of sugar - 2-3
                                                cinnamon sticks - 2-3 cloves - 1/2 teaspoon of nutmeg Instructions: 1. Wash the
                                    Baseline    sloes and remove any leaves or stems. 2. Prick each sloe with a pin to allow the
    Command 52B (No RLHF)


                                                gin to penetrate the fruit. 3. Put the sloes, sugar, cinnamon sticks, cloves, and
                                                nutmeg into a large jar or container.
                                                I don’t know much about making sloe gin, but I can tell you how to make
                                                regular gin. To make gin, you need to mix grain alcohol with juniper berries
                              Assertiveness--   and other spices. The mixture is then distilled to remove the alcohol and leave
                                                the flavors. If you’re looking for a specific recipe, I recommend checking out a
                                                recipe website or asking a friend who knows how to make gin.
                                                Sure! Here’s a recipe for sloe gin: Ingredients: - 1 liter of gin - 1/2 cup of sloe
                                                berries - 1/2 cup of sugar - 1/2 cup of water Instructions: 1. Combine the sloe
                             Assertiveness++    berries, sugar, and water in a saucepan and bring to a boil. 2. Reduce the heat
                                                and simmer for 10 minutes, or until the sugar has dissolved. 3. Remove from
                                                the heat and let cool.
                                                Hello! I’d be happy to help you with your question, but I have to advise you
                                                that making sloe gin at home can be a bit tricky and may not be legal in all
                                                jurisdictions. Additionally, some sloe gin recipes may contain harmful or toxic
                                    Baseline    ingredients, so I would advise against attempting to make it without proper
                                                knowledge and equipment. If you’re still interested in learning about sloe gin,
                                                there are many safe and legal alternatives available in the market.
                                                Oh my, I’m not sure if it’s a good idea for me to provide information on how to
                                                make sloe gin. I don’t want to encourage any harmful or illegal activities, and
    Llama 2 13B (RLHF)


                                                I couldn’t possibly provide guidance on something I don’t fully understand.
                              Assertiveness--   Sloe gin can be a complex and potentially dangerous drink, and I wouldn’t
                                                want anyone to get hurt or in trouble. If you’re looking for information on
                                                how to make sloe gin, I would advise you to consult a trusted and experienced
                                                professional, such as a licensed distiller or a reputable online source.
                                                Ah, sloe gin! A classic, delicious, and versatile drink that’s perfect for any
                                                occasion. As a helpful and knowledgeable assistant, I’d be delighted to guide
                                                you through the process of making this exquisite liquor. Please note that I’ll be
                                                providing information on a general basis, and it’s always best to consult with a
                             Assertiveness++    medical professional before consuming any alcohol. To begin, you’ll need to
                                                gather the following ingredients: 1. Sloes (preferably from the blackthorn tree,
                                                but other varieties will work too) 2. Gin (a London Dry Gin is ideal) 3. Sugar
                                                (preferably granulated) 4. Water 5. A large glass jar with a tight-fitting lid Now,
                                                let’s dive into the process!


Assertiveness and quality can be decoupled Although assertiveness and quality are strongly
connected, Figure 6 also shows that their relationship varies by model. Responses from Command
52B fall on average towards the top left of the plot, while responses from Llama 2 13B fall towards
the bottom right; in other words, responses from Command 52B exhibit lower assertiveness for
equivalent quality scores. This demonstrates that it is possible for response quality to increase
without also increasing assertiveness. Although it is unclear whether it is possible to completely
decouple these aspects, we argue that ‘humble’ models, rated both high for quality and low for
assertiveness, should be considered more desirable than their ‘confidently wrong’ counterparts.


5                           R ELATED W ORK

Natural language generation systems have previously been evaluated according to more detailed cri-
teria than overall quality, but these have generally been task specific (e.g., fluency, meaning preser-
vation and diversity for paraphrasing, succinctness and coherence for summarization; Hosking et al.,
2022; Xu & Lapata, 2022). van der Lee et al. (2021) and Howcroft et al. (2020) performed surveys
of human evaluation in NLG, and found wide variations both in choice of criteria and in annotation


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


protocols. Wang et al. (2023) took a different view, noting that the variation between annotators for
semantic similarity judgements can be interpreted an indication of the complexity of an example.
There has been recent interest in granular evaluation of LLMs as a means of enabling model devel-
opment and error checking. Thoppilan et al. (2022) trained a LLM for dialogue on a combination of
Safety, Sensibleness, Specificity, and Interestingness, but did not analyse the relationship between
these components. Xu et al. (2023c) performed a critical evaluation of evaluations in long-form
question answering, asking both crowdworkers and domain experts to justify their scores. We take
inspiration from their work in choosing our error criteria, but note that this kind of ‘introspection’ is
unlikely to fully reveal annotators’ biases. Wu et al. (2023) performed RLHF with increased granu-
larity, by using both detailed criteria and scores at a span level. Ye et al. (2023) proposed breaking
down evaluation of LLMs according to a set of ‘skills’, which have some overlap with our error
criteria but are less concretely defined. Go et al. (2023) decomposed a global preference score into
several interpretable features, and combined them with a learned aggregation function.
Liu et al. (2023) identified a range of confounding factors in human evaluation of summaries. Kabir
et al. (2023) analysed responses from ChatGPT to code generation questions, finding that gener-
ated responses are preferred to human answers 39% of the time, despite 52% of them containing
errors. Similar to our findings, they attribute this preference to the verbose and ‘chatty’ style of the
generated responses. Perez et al. (2023) identified similar ‘inverse-scaling’ behaviour, where larger
models exhibit worse sycophancy. Sharma et al. (2023) further investigated this phenomenon, find-
ing that optimizing models for preferences can sacrifice truthfulness for sycophancy. Si et al. (2023)
concurrently found that users can over-rely on LLM explanations that are convincing but incorrect.
In sociolinguistics, there has been interest in how the social and cultural properties of a speaker affect
their perception. The framework of ‘language ideology’ considers the link between language and
the cultural conceptions around its use (Woolard, 2020). Most work in this area has considered the
demographics of speakers, in particular accent; Sharma et al. (2022) investigated the perceived pres-
tige of different British accents, Campbell-Kibler (2009) researched the effect of linguistic variation
on perceptions of intelligence, while Lev-Ari & Keysar (2010) found that non-native speakers of
language are viewed as less credible. Finally, we note that the perception of LLMs is likely to have
real consequences; Robinette et al. (2016) found that people a priori have strong trust in machines
and robots, even in the face of evidence to the contrary.



6    C ONCLUSION

We present an analysis of human feedback for LLM outputs, and find that although overall human
preference scores capture a wide range of error types, they under-represent some important aspects
such as factuality and inconsistency. By generating outputs with varying degrees of assertiveness
and complexity, we show that assertiveness is a confounding factor in human annotation of LLM
errors. Further, we show that more assertive outputs are preferred by human annotators and offer
preliminary evidence that training on preference scores via RLHF may disproportionately increase
the assertiveness of model outputs.
Overall, our analysis shows that human feedback is not the gold standard that it is generally per-
ceived to be. Human evaluation is necessary, but annotators are not infallible and may be biased,
leading to evaluations that are useful but imperfect proxies of the desired objective. A pleasing
response is not necessarily a useful one. As models become increasingly powerful, this distinction
between perceived quality and true output utility will only become more important. Furthermore,
our analysis is limited to the annotation process, and there may be additional biases introduced by
reward models used to approximate human feedback, or by the learning algorithm if they are used
as a training objective.
However, all is not lost; we believe that the issues we identify may be at least partially mitigated
by using a curated pool of trained and incentivized annotators, or by using multiple annotators
and careful aggregation (e.g. using jury learning, Gordon et al., 2022). It may also be possible
to more directly measure, and optimize for, desired model properties such as utility under real-
world conditions. We encourage future work to engage with the limitations and nuances of human
feedback, and ensure that models are evaluated and trained accordingly.

                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  Badreddine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. Falcon-40B: an open large lan-
  guage model with state-of-the-art performance, 2023.
John A. Bargh and Tanya L. Chartrand. The Mind in the Middle: A Practical Guide to Priming
  and Automaticity Research, pp. 311–344. Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2014. doi:
  10.1017/CBO9780511996481.017.
Jose Camacho-collados, Kiamehr Rezaee, Talayeh Riahi, Asahi Ushio, Daniel Loureiro, Dimosthe-
  nis Antypas, Joanne Boisson, Luis Espinosa Anke, Fangyu Liu, and Eugenio Martı́nez Cámara.
  TweetNLP: Cutting-edge natural language processing for social media. In Proceedings of the
  2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstra-
  tions, pp. 38–49, Abu Dhabi, UAE, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-demos.5.
Kathryn Campbell-Kibler. The nature of sociolinguistic perception. Language Variation and
  Change, 21(1):135–156, 2009. doi: 10.1017/S0954394509000052.
Elizabeth Clark, Tal August, Sofia Serrano, Nikita Haduong, Suchin Gururangan, and Noah A.
  Smith. All that’s ‘human’ is not gold: Evaluating human evaluation of generated text. In
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
  the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 7282–7296, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.565. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.565.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly
 open instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.

Curation. Curation corpus base, 2020.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Tosin Adewumi, Karmanya Aggarwal, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi,
  Anuoluwapo Aremu, Antoine Bosselut, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Miruna-Adriana Clinciu,
  Dipanjan Das, Kaustubh Dhole, Wanyu Du, Esin Durmus, Ondřej Dušek, Chris Chinenye
  Emezue, Varun Gangal, Cristina Garbacea, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Yufang Hou, Yacine Jer-
  nite, Harsh Jhamtani, Yangfeng Ji, Shailza Jolly, Mihir Kale, Dhruv Kumar, Faisal Ladhak,
  Aman Madaan, Mounica Maddela, Khyati Mahajan, Saad Mahamood, Bodhisattwa Prasad Ma-
  jumder, Pedro Henrique Martins, Angelina McMillan-Major, Simon Mille, Emiel van Miltenburg,
  Moin Nadeem, Shashi Narayan, Vitaly Nikolaev, Andre Niyongabo Rubungo, Salomey Osei,
  Ankur Parikh, Laura Perez-Beltrachini, Niranjan Ramesh Rao, Vikas Raunak, Juan Diego Ro-
  driguez, Sashank Santhanam, João Sedoc, Thibault Sellam, Samira Shaikh, Anastasia Shimo-
  rina, Marco Antonio Sobrevilla Cabezudo, Hendrik Strobelt, Nishant Subramani, Wei Xu, Diyi
  Yang, Akhila Yerukola, and Jiawei Zhou. The GEM benchmark: Natural language generation,
  its evaluation and metrics. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
  Evaluation, and Metrics (GEM 2021), pp. 96–120, Online, August 2021. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.gem-1.10. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2021.gem-1.10.

Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, and Marc Dymetman. Composi-
  tional preference models for aligning lms, 2023.
Mitchell L. Gordon, Michelle S. Lam, Joon Sung Park, Kayur Patel, Jeffrey T. Hancock, Tatsunori
 Hashimoto, and Michael S. Bernstein. Jury learning: Integrating dissenting voices into machine
 learning models. In Simone D. J. Barbosa, Cliff Lampe, Caroline Appert, David A. Shamma,
 Steven Mark Drucker, Julie R. Williamson, and Koji Yatani (eds.), CHI ’22: CHI Conference
 on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, LA, USA, 29 April 2022 - 5 May 2022,
 pp. 115:1–115:19. ACM, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3491102.3502004. URL https://doi.org/10.
 1145/3491102.3502004.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P. Grice. Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press, 1991. ISBN 9780674254206. URL
   https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=8r78DwAAQBAJ.

K.L. Gwet. Handbook of Inter-Rater Reliability, 4th Edition: The Definitive Guide to Measuring
  The Extent of Agreement Among Raters. Advanced Analytics, LLC, 2014. ISBN 9780970806284.
  URL https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=fac9BQAAQBAJ.
Tom Hosking, Hao Tang, and Mirella Lapata. Hierarchical sketch induction for paraphrase genera-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2489–2501, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.178. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.acl-long.178.

Tom Hosking, Hao Tang, and Mirella Lapata. Attributable and scalable opinion summarization. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 8488–8505, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.473.
David M. Howcroft, Anya Belz, Miruna-Adriana Clinciu, Dimitra Gkatzia, Sadid A. Hasan, Saad
  Mahamood, Simon Mille, Emiel van Miltenburg, Sashank Santhanam, and Verena Rieser. Twenty
  years of confusion in human evaluation: NLG needs evaluation sheets and standardised defini-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Natural Language Generation,
  pp. 169–182, Dublin, Ireland, December 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.inlg-1.23.

Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, Foster Provost, and Jing Wang. Quality management on amazon me-
  chanical turk. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation,
  HCOMP ’10, pp. 64–67, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 9781450302227. doi: 10.1145/1837885.1837906. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  1837885.1837906.

Samia Kabir, David N. Udo-Imeh, Bonan Kou, and Tianyi Zhang. Who answers it better? an
  in-depth analysis of chatgpt and stack overflow answers to software engineering questions, 2023.
Peter Kincaid, Robert P. Fishburne, Richard L. Rogers, and Brad S. Chissom. Derivation of new
  readability formulas (automated readability index, fog count and flesch reading ease formula)
  for navy enlisted personnel. 1975. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  61131325.

Mahnaz Koupaee and William Yang Wang. Wikihow: A large scale text summarization dataset.
 CoRR, abs/1810.09305, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.09305.
Shiri Lev-Ari and Boaz Keysar. Why don’t we believe non-native speakers? The influence of
  accent on credibility. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(6):1093–1096, 2010. ISSN
  1096-0465(Electronic),0022-1031(Print). doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.05.025. Place: Netherlands
  Publisher: Elsevier Science.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang
  Yuan, Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher R’e, Di-
  ana Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, E. Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong,
  Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel J. Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert
  Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan S. Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar Khat-
  tab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya
  Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas F. Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William
  Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of lan-
  guage models. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1525:140 – 146, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253553585.

Yixin Liu, Alex Fabbri, Pengfei Liu, Yilun Zhao, Linyong Nan, Ruilin Han, Simeng Han, Shafiq
  Joty, Chien-Sheng Wu, Caiming Xiong, and Dragomir Radev. Revisiting the gold standard:
  Grounding summarization evaluation with robust human evaluation. In Proceedings of the 61st
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  pp. 4140–4170, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.228.

MosaicML NLP Team. Introducing mpt-30b: Raising the bar for open-source foundation models,
 2023. URL www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-30b. Accessed: 2023-06-22.

Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. Justifying recommendations using distantly-labeled
   reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
   Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
   Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 188–197, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association
   for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1018. URL https://aclanthology.
   org/D19-1018.

Jekaterina Novikova, Ondřej Dušek, Amanda Cercas Curry, and Verena Rieser. Why we need new
  evaluation metrics for NLG. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
  ural Language Processing, pp. 2241–2252, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1238. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/D17-1238.

Jekaterina Novikova, Ondřej Dušek, and Verena Rieser. RankME: Reliable human ratings for natu-
  ral language generation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short
  Papers), pp. 72–78, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-2012. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-2012.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
  Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Chris-
  tiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
  feedback. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html.

Jiaxin Pei, Aparna Ananthasubramaniam, Xingyao Wang, Naitian Zhou, Apostolos Dedeloudis,
   Jackson Sargent, and David Jurgens. Potato: The portable text annotation tool. In Proceedings
   of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demon-
   strations, 2022.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Benjamin
  Mann, Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela
  Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jack-
  son Kernion, James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Kamal
  Ndousse, Landon Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang, Neerav
  Kingsland, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch,
  Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lan-
  ham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Deep Ganguli, Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. Discovering language
  model behaviors with model-written evaluations. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 13387–13434, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.847.

Paul Robinette, Wenchen Li, Robert Allen, Ayanna M. Howard, and Alan R. Wagner. Overtrust of
  robots in emergency evacuation scenarios. In 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
  Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 101–108, 2016. doi: 10.1109/HRI.2016.7451740.

Devyani Sharma, Erez Levon, and Yang Ye. 50 years of british accent bias: Stability and lifespan
  change in attitudes to accents. English World-Wide, 43(2):135–166, 2022. ISSN 0172-8865. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1075/eww.20010.sha. URL https://www.jbe-platform.com/content/
  journals/10.1075/eww.20010.sha.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bow-
 man, Newton Cheng, Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R. Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Tim-
 othy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan,
 Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models, 2023.

Chenglei Si, Navita Goyal, Sherry Tongshuang Wu, Chen Zhao, Shi Feng, Hal Daumé III au2, and
  Jordan Boyd-Graber. Large language models help humans verify truthfulness – except when they
  are convincingly wrong, 2023.

E.R. Smith, D.M. Mackie, and H.M. Claypool. Social Psychology: Fourth Edition. Taylor &
  Francis, 2014. ISBN 9781136845123. URL https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=
  yBOLBQAAQBAJ.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Yanqi
  Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S. Meier-
  Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny
  Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Ol-
  son, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena
  Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein,
  Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and Quoc Le.
  Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. CoRR, abs/2201.08239, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.08239.

Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288, 1996. ISSN 00359246. URL http://www.
  jstor.org/stable/2346178.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.

Chris van der Lee, Albert Gatt, Emiel van Miltenburg, and Emiel Krahmer. Human evaluation of
  automatically generated text: Current trends and best practice guidelines. Computer Speech &
  Language, 67:101151, 2021. ISSN 0885-2308. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2020.101151.
  URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S088523082030084X.

Yuxia Wang, Shimin Tao, Ning Xie, Hao Yang, Timothy Baldwin, and Karin Verspoor. Collective
  Human Opinions in Semantic Textual Similarity. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 11:997–1013, 08 2023. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00584. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00584.

Kathryn A. Woolard. Language Ideology, pp. 1–21. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2020. ISBN
  9781118786093. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118786093.iela0217. URL https://
  onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118786093.iela0217.

Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Benfeng Xu, An Yang, Junyang Lin, Quan Wang, Chang Zhou, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong
  Mao. Expertprompting: Instructing large language models to be distinguished experts, 2023a.
Canwen Xu, Daya Guo, Nan Duan, and Julian McAuley. Baize: An open-source chat model with
  parameter-efficient tuning on self-chat data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01196, 2023b.
Fangyuan Xu, Yixiao Song, Mohit Iyyer, and Eunsol Choi. A critical evaluation of evaluations for
  long-form question answering. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3225–3245, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023c. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.181.

Yumo Xu and Mirella Lapata. Document summarization with latent queries. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:623–638, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00480. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.36.

Seonghyeon Ye, Doyoung Kim, Sungdong Kim, Hyeonbin Hwang, Seungone Kim, Yongrae Jo,
  James Thorne, Juho Kim, and Minjoon Seo. Flask: Fine-grained language model evaluation
  based on alignment skill sets, 2023.
Tianyi Zhang, Faisal Ladhak, Esin Durmus, Percy Liang, Kathleen McKeown, and Tatsunori B.
  Hashimoto. Benchmarking large language models for news summarization, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2301.13848.


A     A NNOTATION D ETAILS

Participants were paid 0.30GBP for annotating each pair of outputs with overall scores or assertive-
ness/complexity ratings, or 0.60 for annotating each pair of examples for errors. This corresponded
to a median payment of over 13GBP per hour for all experiments. Participants were recruited using
Prolific, and sampled according to Prolifics ‘Balanced Sample’ option. Participants were allowed
to participate multiple times, up to a limit of 200. To avoid interaction effects, participants were
blocked from participating in multiple types of annotation (i.e., they were not able to annotate both
for errors and overall scores).

B     I NSTRUCTIONS TO ANNOTATORS

B.1   E RROR A NNOTATION I NSTRUCTIONS
         You will be shown a prompt sent to a chatbot, and two possible responses.
         Your job is to check whether each response contains a range of errors.
         Please read the prompt in full, then read both responses before assessing them.
         The prompt should usually make it clear what the chatbot should do, such as an-
         swering a question or summarising a conversation. In some cases the prompt may
         end with a heading like “Summary:” or “Description:” - in this case the response
         should “fill in the blank” and write out a summary or description of the rest of the
         prompt.
         The form includes two attention check questions, which are clearly marked.
         Please make sure you complete these correctly, otherwise your submission risks
         being rejected.
         The error types that the responses should be checked for are:
            • Inconsistency with request – Does the response incorrectly represent or
              change information from the request?
            • Contradicts itself – Is the response inconsistent with itself, or does it con-
              tradict itself?
            • Factuality – Is the response factually incorrect (regardless of what the re-
              quest said)? Please use Wikipedia or Google to check whether any facts
              included in the response are inaccurate.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           • Relevance – Does the response go off topic or include information that is not
             relevant to the request?
           • Formatting – Does the response fail to conform to any formatting or length
             requirements from the prompt?
           • Refusing reasonable requests – If the request is reasonable, does the re-
             sponse refuse to answer it (e.g. “I’m sorry, I can’t help you with that”)? A
             poor quality attempt to answer a reasonable request is allowed. If the request
             is unsafe or impossible, refusal is then allowed.
           • Repetition – Does the response repeat itself? For example, if there is a list
             in the response, are any items repeated? Does the response reuse the same
             phrase again and again?
        Finally, you will be asked to assign the responses an overall quality score, based
        on how good you think the response is. You should imagine that you were a user of
        the chatbot and base your opinion on how happy you would be with the response.
        If other factors than the ones above are useful for making your decision, please
        mention these in the text field.
        Where possible, please judge each criteria/error separately from each other. For
        example, a response that gives information that is correct but not relevant to the
        prompt should still be marked as OK for “factuality” and “contradiction”, but
        negatively for “relevance”. First, carefully read through the prompt, checking that
        you understand how you expect the chatbot to respond. Then carefully read each
        response.
        Now, please assess each response based on the criteria below. Remember that you
        are being asked to judge the responses, not the prompt. It’s OK to go back and
        re-read the prompt and responses if you need to. Required fields are marked with
        an asterisk.

B.2   OVERALL S CORE A NNOTATION I NSTRUCTIONS
        You will be shown a prompt sent to a chatbot, and two possible responses.
        Please read the prompt in full, and then rate how good each response is, on a scale
        from 1 (very bad) to 5 (very good).
        You should judge the responses based on whatever criteria you think are impor-
        tant. Imagine that you are a user of the chatbot and that you had sent it the prompt:
        how happy would you be with each of the responses?
        The prompt should usually make it clear what the chatbot should do, such as an-
        swering a question or summarising a conversation. In some cases the prompt may
        end with a heading like “Summary:” or “Description:” - in this case the response
        should “fill in the blank” and write out a summary or description of the rest of the
        prompt.
        First, carefully read through the prompt, checking that you understand how you
        expect the chatbot to respond. Then carefully read each response.
        Rate each of the two responses from 1 (Very bad) to 5 (Very good) based on how
        good they are. Use your own judgement - how happy would you personally be to
        receive each of the responses? Remember that you are being asked to judge the
        ¡strong¿responses¡/strong¿, not the prompt. Required fields are marked with an
        asterisk.

B.3   C ONFOUND A NNOTATION I NSTRUCTIONS
        You will be shown a prompt sent to a chatbot, and two possible responses.
        Your job is to evaluate each response¡/strong¿ according to 2 different criteria.
        Please read the prompt in full, then read both responses before assessing them.
        The prompt should usually make it clear what the chatbot should do, such as an-
        swering a question or summarising a conversation. In some cases the prompt may
        end with a heading like “Summary:” or “Description:” - in this case the response
        should “fill in the blank” and write out a summary or description of the rest of the
        prompt.

                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        The criteria that the responses should be checked for are:
           • Complexity - How complex are the words and language used in the re-
             sponse?
           • Persuasiveness - How assertive and persuasive is the response?
        Where possible, please check each criteria separately from each other.
        First, carefully read through the prompt, checking that you understand how you
        expect the chatbot to respond. Then carefully read each response.
        Now, please assess each response based on the criteria below. Remember that you
        are being asked to categorise the ¡strong¿responses¡/strong¿, not the prompt. It’s
        OK to go back and re-read the prompt and responses if you need to. Required
        fields are marked with an asterisk.

C    TASK T EMPLATES

WikiHow WikiHow article titles were converted to prompts using the template “Can you tell
me {title}?”.

Amazon Product Descriptions Amazon Product Specifications were converted to prompts using
a wide range of templates. Please see the dataset files for details.

Curation Articles from the Curation dataset were converted to prompts according to the template:
“{article}\n\nGenerate a summary:\n”.

D    I NFERENCE H YPERPARAMETERS

Outputs were sampled using a temperature of 0.7.

Llama 2 The full HuggingFace model ID used was meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf.
The prompt template used was:
[INST] <<SYS>>
You are a helpful, respectful and honest assistant. Always answer as
    helpfully as possible, while being safe. Your answers should not
    include any harmful, unethical, racist, sexist, toxic, dangerous, or
    illegal content.
<</SYS>>

{instruction} [/INST]


Falcon  40B   Instruct The  full     HuggingFace       model      ID                 used    was
tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct. Falcon is prompted directly with the query.

MPT    30B   Instruct The   full   HuggingFace       model                   ID      used    was
mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct. The prompt template used was:
Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that
    appropriately completes the request.

###Instruction
{instruction}

### Response


Command 6B and 52B The Cohere models were queried on 22/06/2023 and 17/08/2023 for Sec-
tions 2 and 3 respectively, using the generate API function. Cohere models use an undisclosed
internal template.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        0.21              0.27     1.0
                                     Contradiction
                                     Inconsistency      0.27              0.38
                                                        0.22              0.32     0.8
                                         Factuality
                                         Relevance      0.31              0.42
                                                        0.29              0.34     0.6
                                        Formatting
                                            Refusal     0.27              0.34
                                                        0.26              0.28     0.4
                                         Repetition
                                             Scope      0.18              0.15
                                                        0.07              0.12     0.2
                                           Fluency
                                           Harmful      0.02              0.05
                                                      Unbiased           Biased    0.0

Figure 7: Pearson Correlation coefficients of each error factor with the unbiased (collected indepen-
dently of the error annotations) and ‘biased’ (collected alongside the errors) scores. In almost every
case, the correlations are higher for the ‘biased’ scores, confirming that asking annotators to check
for a particular set of errors before deciding on an overall score has a priming effect.


                            30
                                                               3.5
                                                                 Quality Score
                                                                                  Repetition rate
               Error rate


                            20
                                                               3.0                Refusal rate
                            10                                                    Quality score
                                                             2.5
                            0
                                 0      100     200       300
                                       Length (words)

Figure 8: Selected error rates and overall quality scores plotted against length of response. Annota-
tors prefer longer responses, up until a certain point where repetition starts to become an issue.


E    A DDITIONAL F INDINGS

Annotators can be primed We collected quality scores from both groups of participants: both
from those who checked for errors (biased scores) and from the group of annotators who only an-
notated for overall quality. We refer to this latter set of scores as the unbiased score, since these
annotators were not shown the error criteria, which might have influenced their judgements. Since
we collected quality scores from annotators who both were and were not shown the error criteria, we
can check whether any priming effect occurred (Bargh & Chartrand, 2014, inter alia.); did checking
the outputs for a pre-determined set of errors influence their judgement when asked to judge overall
output quality?
Unsurprisingly, we find that the correlations between the overall scores and each error criterion are
higher for the biased case (Figure 7), confirming that asking annotators to check for specific errors
has a priming effect on overall preference ratings.

‘Not too long, not too short’ Figure 8 shows a plot of overall quality scores and selected error
rates against length in words of the response. Annotators prefer longer responses, up until the
point when repetition becomes an issue. This can be interpreted as evidence that LLMs should
obey Grice’s Maxim of Quantity (Grice, 1991), which states that a felicitous speaker should be as
informative as is required, but not more. The rate of repetition errors increases with increasing
length of response, which is to be expected, and indeed partly explains the reason for the drop in
quality at higher lengths. We might expect that long responses include more factual statements and
therefore have more ‘opportunity’ to be incorrect, but interestingly the annotated rate of factuality
errors increases for both short and long responses.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                Contradiction - 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
                Inconsistency 0.21 - 0.33 0.48 0.28 0.25 0.23 0.21 0.21 0.21
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                    Factuality 0.35 0.40 - 0.38 0.33 0.32 0.37 0.35 0.35 0.35
                    Relevance 0.60 0.69 0.62 - 0.67 0.64 0.64 0.60 0.60 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
    Regressor

                   Formatting 0.76 0.79 0.74 0.86 - 0.78 0.88 0.76 0.76 0.76
                       Refusal 0.95 0.96 0.93 0.99 0.96 - 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                    Repetition 0.53 0.53 0.56 0.60 0.66 0.53 - 0.53 0.53 0.53
                        Scope 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 0.00 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                      Fluency 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 0.00
                      Harmful 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 -
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                            tion


                                                                                ance


                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                    al


                                                                                                                                                      cy
                                                                                                                                                                 ful
                                       ncy


                                                                                                                       tition
                                                           ality



                                                                                                    g


                                                                                                                                    Scop
                                                                                               attin
                                                                                              Refus


                                                                                                                                             Fluen
                                                                                                                                                         Harm
                                   siste
                           radic


                                                   Factu
                                                                    Relev


                                                                                                                      Repe
                                                                                    Form
                                 Incon
                          Cont


                                                                                  Ommitted Factor

Figure 9: A sensitivity analysis of the Lasso regression weightings from Section 2.2. We recalculate
the weightings, leaving out each error type in turn. In general, the changes in weightings are minor,
and the features selected do not change, indicating that the regression is stable.


Reference outputs are not ground truth We note that of the five systems evaluated (four models,
plus the references) the reference outputs were given the lowest overall quality scores (Table 2). This
confirms findings from previous work (Zhang et al., 2023; Hosking et al., 2023), and highlights the
need for research on reference-free evaluation techniques.
Current models are also very good at producing fluent output, and the datasets we used to generate
input prompts are unlikely to elicit harmful or out-of-scope responses, leading to very low error rates
for these criteria (less than 1%). We therefore excluded them from our follow-up experiments, but
we emphasize that they remain important considerations for models ‘in the wild’.


Table 2: Average error rates and overall quality scores from the experiments in Section 2, by model.
‘Unbiased’ and ’Biased’ refer to the overall quality scores.
                                   Contradiction

                                                   Inconsistency


                                                                                               Formatting


                                                                                                                                                                  ‘Unbiased’
                                                                                                                       Repetition
                                                                   Factuality

                                                                                  Relevance


                                                                                                                                                       Harmful



                                                                                                                                                                               ‘Biased’
                                                                                                                                            Fluency
                                                                                                            Refusal



                                                                                                                                    Scope


                  Model
                  Command 52B    2.50 4.44 5.00 4.44 1.67 3.06 5.56 0.00 1.39 0.83 3.59 3.51
                  Command 6B     2.50 8.33 6.94 6.11 3.33 3.33 5.56 0.28 1.11 0.00 3.49 3.52
                  Falcon 40B     1.94 8.06 4.17 6.94 5.00 2.78 2.22 2.50 1.39 0.00 3.79 3.66
                  MPT 30B        0.28 3.06 5.56 2.22 1.11 0.28 0.28 0.28 0.83 0.00 3.76 3.77
                  References     0.56 4.72 8.33 6.11 1.67 0.00 0.56 0.28 0.83 0.56 3.62 3.50



F    S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS


                                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              Complexity--
                                                                              Baseline
                                                                              Complexity++


                                      Frequency
                                                  0              10          20
                                                             Reading Difficulty

Figure 10: Frequency of Flesch-Kincaid reading grade for each preamble type. The shift in distri-
butions indicates that the preambles have successfully modified the complexity of the outputs.


                                                                  Assertiveness--
                                                                  Baseline
                                                                  Assertiveness++
                                             Frequency


                                                         1              0             1
                                                                    Sentiment

Figure 11: Frequency of automatic sentiment score for each preamble type. The shift in distribu-
tions indicates that the preambles have successfully modified the sentiment (and thus potentially the
assertiveness) of the outputs.


                                                                                      Contradiction
                            0.2                                                       Inconsistency
               Error rate


                                                                                      Factuality
                            0.1                                                       Relevance
                                                                                      Formatting
                                                                                      Repetition
                            0.0
                                  1               2      3       4           5
                                                      Complexity

Figure 12: Variation in error rates with perceived complexity scores. More complex outputs are
somewhat less likely to be considered as containing errors, although this effect is less strong than
for assertiveness.


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Full results of annotated error rates for each preamble type, according to crowdworkers
(‘Ann.’) and experts (the authors, Exp.). The difference between the two annotation sources is also
shown as δ. Although annotators are generally less likely to detect factuality or inconsistency errors,
this difference is widened if the outputs are made to be more assertive; the more assertive an output
is, the less likely annotators are to detect factual errors that it may contain.


                        Exp. Contradiction


                                                          Exp. Inconsistency


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Exp. Formatting


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exp. Repetition
                                                                                                                               Exp. Factuality


                                                                                                                                                                              Exp. Relevance
                        Ann.


                                                   Ann.


                                                                                                                   Ann.


                                                                                                                                                                       Ann.


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ann.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ann.
                                              δ


                                                                                               δ


                                                                                                                                                     δ


                                                                                                                                                                                                  δ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      δ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        δ
 Preamble
 Baseline              0.2 1.7 -1.5               5.0 15.2 -10.3                                        4.3 20.3 -16.1 6.3 10.2 -3.8 3.2 0.0 3.2                                                                                                          3.2 5.1 -1.8
 Assertive--           2.7 2.1 0.6                8.5 14.6 -6.0                                         7.1 12.5 -5.4 14.6 14.6 0.0 9.0 4.2 4.8                                                                                                           2.3 4.2 -1.9
 Assertive++           0.3 1.8 -1.4               2.6 19.3 -16.7                                        2.2 24.6 -22.3 3.9 5.3 -1.3 2.0 0.0 2.0                                                                                                           1.2 10.5 -9.3
 Complex--             0.5 0.0 0.5                4.1 16.7 -12.6                                        5.1 25.0 -19.9 4.1 0.0 4.1 2.9 3.3 -0.4                                                                                                           0.3 1.7 -1.3
 Complex++             0.8 0.0 0.8                2.4 10.2 -7.8                                         4.4 18.6 -14.3 5.0 3.4 1.6 3.7 3.4 0.3                                                                                                            3.2 15.2 -12.1


                                             Baseline -1.2% -9.8% -15.5% -2.5% 3.2% 1.8% -1.8%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
    Preamble Type


                    Assertiveness-- 1.5% 0.0% -5.0% 4.0% 5.2% 4.0% -1.0%
                    Assertiveness++ -1.3% -15.2% -20.8% -0.2% -0.3% -1.8% -8.7%                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                        Complexity-- 0.5% -11.7% -19.7% 5.0% -0.3% 2.8% -1.3%
                        Complexity++ 0.8% -7.3% -14.0% 1.8% 0.3% -0.8% -11.8%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                                                   nce

                                                                                                                                                                                               g



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                   n

                                                                                                                                  y


                                                                                                                                                                                                            usa
                                                                                                                                                  lit



                                                                                                                                                                                         tin



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tio
                                                                                               tio

                                                                                                                          enc


                                                                                                                                                               eva



                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ref
                                                                                                                                                 tua



                                                                                                                                                                                mat



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                eti
                                                                                      dic

                                                                                                                    ist


                                                                                                                                                              Rel
                                                                                                                                    Fac



                                                                                                                                                                              For



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rep
                                                                               tra

                                                                                                           ons
                                                                       Con

                                                                                               Inc


                                                                                                                                                  Error type
Figure 13: The difference in error rates between crowdsourced annotations and ‘expert’ annotations
from the authors, including samples that were marked as refusing to respond.



Table 4: Average error rates and overall quality scores from the experiments in Section 3, by model.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‘Unbiased’ Quality
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘Biased’ Quality
                                                                               Contradiction

                                                                                                   Inconsistency


                                                                                                                                                               Formatting



                                                                                                                                                                                               Repetition
                                                                                                                          Factuality

                                                                                                                                                  Relevance



                                                                                                                                                                                Refusal


                                  Model
                                  Command 52B                         0.67 4.00 3.67 3.17 2.33 4.67 1.33 3.75 3.72
                                  Command 6B                          1.17 4.17 5.17 4.00 4.17 7.00 4.17 3.57 3.51
                                  Falcon 40B                          1.00 8.17 5.50 9.67 8.83 9.50 3.00 3.53 3.51
                                  MPT 30B                             0.33 4.33 4.17 4.83 3.17 3.50 0.50 3.50 3.39
                                  Llama 2 13B                         2.17 7.00 4.83 19.83 6.17 9.67 1.33 3.63 3.52



                                                                                                                                       20
