Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DYNAMIC N EIGHBORHOOD C ONSTRUCTION FOR
S TRUCTURED L ARGE D ISCRETE ACTION S PACES
 Fabian Akkerman∗†,1,† , Julius Luy∗,2,† , Wouter van Heeswijk1 , Maximilian Schiffer2,3
 1
   University of Twente (7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands)
 2
   School of Management, Technical University of Munich (80333 Munich, Germany)
 3
   Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich (85748 Garching, Germany)

                                                 A BSTRACT

              Large discrete action spaces (LDAS) remain a central challenge in reinforcement
              learning. Existing solution approaches can handle unstructured LDAS with up to a
              few million actions. However, many real-world applications in logistics, production,
              and transportation systems have combinatorial action spaces, whose size grows
              well beyond millions of actions, even on small instances. Fortunately, such action
              spaces exhibit structure, e.g., equally spaced discrete resource units. With this work,
              we focus on handling structured LDAS (SLDAS) with sizes that cannot be handled
              by current benchmarks: we propose Dynamic Neighborhood Construction (DNC),
              a novel exploitation paradigm for SLDAS. We present a scalable neighborhood
              exploration heuristic that utilizes this paradigm and efficiently explores the discrete
              neighborhood around the continuous proxy action in structured action spaces
              with up to 1073 actions. We demonstrate the performance of our method by
              benchmarking it against three state-of-the-art approaches designed for large discrete
              action spaces across three distinct environments. Our results show that DNC
              matches or outperforms state-of-the-art approaches while being computationally
              more efficient. Furthermore, our method scales to action spaces that so far remained
              computationally intractable for existing methodologies.


1        I NTRODUCTION

In deep reinforcement learning (DRL), ample methods exist to successfully handle large state spaces,
but methods to handle large discrete action spaces (LDAS) remain scarce (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021).
Off-the-shelf DRL algorithms – e.g., Deep Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013), Deep Policy
Gradients (DPG) (Silver et al., 2014), or Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
– fail to handle such LDAS, as they require in- or output nodes for each discrete action, which renders
learning accurate Q-values or action probabilities computationally intractable. Recent methods
extending off-the-shelf algorithms focus on applications with unstructured LDAS, found in, e.g.,
recommender systems or autonomous tool selection (cf. Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Chandak et al.,
2019a; Jain et al., 2020). Herein, the agent’s action space encodes an irregular set of features. To
handle LDAS, current DRL research suggests to learn a continuous policy and utilize an output
mapping to each discrete action (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Chandak et al., 2019a), which allows
solving problems with moderately large action spaces up to a few million actions. However, many
real-world problems have (combinatorial) action spaces exhibiting billions of actions even for small
problem instances. Examples are the management of order levels for items in a large warehouse
(Boute et al., 2022) and the synthesis of new chemical structures for drug design (Gottipati et al.,
2020). Current state-of-the-art techniques for LDAS cannot scale to such very large LDAS as they
define an explicit mapping for each discrete action.
Yet, many problems with combinatorial action spaces exhibit structure, e.g., equally spaced discrete
resource units in inventory replenishment (Boute et al., 2022), distance units in path planning for
autonomous vehicles (Xie et al., 2023), the movement of robot joints in a discretized action space
(Neunert et al., 2020), and traffic signal control ordered by the sequence of lanes (Li et al., 2021). With
this work, we show how to exploit such structure, eliminating the need to enumerate all actions, hence
     ∗
         Equal contribution.
     †
         Corresponding authors: Fabian Akkerman (f.r.akkerman@utwente.nl), Julius Luy (julius.luy@tum.de).


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


allowing to scale to much larger action spaces. Specifically, we propose a novel algorithmic pipeline
that focuses on structured LDAS (SLDAS) and exploits their structure by embedding continuous-to-
discrete action mappings via dynamic neighborhood construction into an actor-critic algorithm. This
pipeline overcomes the scalability limitations of the state of the art on SLDAS by bypassing explicit
action space enumeration, scaling up to action spaces of size 1073 , while showing comparable or
even improved algorithmic performance.

Related Literature To handle LDAS, some works employ factorization to reduce the action space’s
size by grouping actions into representations that are easier to learn. Examples are factorization
into binary subsets (Sallans & Hinton, 2004; Pazis & Parr, 2011; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2012), expert
demonstrations (Tennenholtz & Mannor, 2019), tensor factorization (Mahajan et al., 2021), symbolic
representations of state-action values (Cui & Khardon, 2016; 2018), or the use of value-based DRL,
incorporating the action space structure into a Q-network (Tavakoli et al., 2018; Sharma et al., 2017;
Wei et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2022). Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) approaches effectively employ factorization as well (Zhang et al.,
2020b; Kim et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021; Enders et al., 2023). Although some of these works cover
extremely large action spaces and prove to be effective for specific problem classes, the proposed
approaches require an a priori encoding for each discrete action, do not leverage the action space’s
structure, and frequently require substantial design- and parameter tuning effort (particularly in the
case of MARL).
While factorization methods reduce the number of evaluated actions, methods that leverage
continuous-to-discrete mappings consider the continuum between discrete actions, converting continu-
ous actions to discrete ones subsequently. van Hasselt & Wiering (2009) use an actor-critic algorithm,
rounding the actor’s continuous output to the closest integer to obtain a discrete counterpart. Van-
vuchelen et al. (2022) extend this concept to multi-dimensional action vectors, normalizing the actor’s
output and rounding it to the nearest discrete value. Such rounding techniques are straightforward and
computationally efficient, but may be unstable if their mapping is too coarse. Different continuous
outputs might be mapped to the same discrete action, while ignoring potentially better neighbors. To
mitigate this issue, Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015) and Wang et al. (2021) replace the rounding step by a
k-nearest neighbor search or k-dimensional tree search. While such methods allow handling both
unstructured- and SLDAS, they offer only limited scalability, necessitating the definition and storage
of the discrete action space a priori, e.g., in matrix form.
Other works aim at learning action representations. Thomas & Barto (2012) use a goal-conditioned
policy to learn motor primitives, i.e., aggregated abstractions of lower-level actions. Chandak
et al. (2019a) consider a policy that maps continuous actions into an embedding space and employ
supervised learning to identify a unique embedding for each discrete action. Follow-up works
consider combined state-action embeddings (Whitney et al., 2020; Pritz et al., 2021), or reduce the
impact of out-of-distribution actions in offline DRL by measuring behavioral and data-distributional
relations between discrete actions (Gu et al., 2022). Some works propose to learn embeddings for
all feasible actions by means of a value-based approach (He et al., 2016), or learn to predict and
avoid suboptimal actions (Zahavy et al., 2018). Chandak et al. (2019b) and Jain et al. (2020; 2022)
consider the problem of adapting an RL agent to previously unseen tasks by mapping the structure
of unseen actions to the set of already observed actions. In general, action representation learning
allows to handle unstructured and SLDAS, but requires a vast amount of data to learn accurate
representations, often hampering algorithmic performance. Moreover, scalability issues remain due
to learning dedicated representations for each action.
As can be seen, existing methods to handle SLDAS are constrained by the action space size due the
following obstacles: (i) straightforward factorization approaches require handcrafted encodings a
priori and are thus confined to enumerable action spaces, (ii) approaches that base on HRL or MARL
are highly problem-specific and rely on intense hyperparameter tuning, (iii) static mappings lack
scalability as they require to define—and store—the discrete action space a priori, (iv) learning action
representations requires a vast amount of data to obtain dedicated representations for each action.
Thus, all existing approaches are upper-bounded on the number of actions they can handle.

Contribution To close the research gap outlined above, we propose a novel algorithmic pipeline
that exploits the structure in SLDAS while maintaining or improving the state-of-the-art in solution
quality and reaching a new level of scalability to very large SLDAS. This pipeline embeds continuous-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to-discrete action mappings via dynamic neighborhood construction (DNC) into an actor-critic
algorithm. DNC is leveraged to convert the actor’s continuous output into a discrete action via a
simulated annealing (SA) search, guided by discrete actions’ Q-values derived from its critic. Our
approach has two novel components: (i) we exploit the structure of the action space using dynamic
neighborhood construction, and (ii) we employ an SA neighborhood search to improve performance.
Although our approach classifies as a continuous-to-discrete action mapping, it requires no a priori
definition of the action space. Moreover, our approach can be applied to a wide range of problem
settings as long as the respective action space exhibits structure. We benchmark our pipeline against
three state-of-the-art approaches (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Chandak et al., 2019a; Vanvuchelen et al.,
2022) and a vanilla actor critic (VAC) baseline across three environments: a maze environment, a
joint inventory replenishment, and a job-shop scheduling problem. Our results verify the performance
of our pipeline: it scales up to discrete action spaces of size 1073 , while showing comparable or
improving solution quality across all investigated environments.


2     P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION

We study discrete, sequential decision-making problems formalized as Markov decision processes
(MDPs), described by a state space S, a discrete action space A, a reward function r : S × A → R,
and transition dynamics P : S × A × S → [0, 1]. We represent states s ∈ S and actions a ∈ A by
N -and M -dimensional vectors, such that s ∈ RM and a ∈ NN . We consider multi-dimensional
action vectors to ensure general applicability, but refer to such a vector as an action in the remainder
of this paper for the sake of conciseness. We focus on regularly structured action spaces, which we
can represent with a regular tessellation of an n-dimensional hypercube or hyperrectangle. Hence, we
assume that the smallest distance between two neighboring vertices of the tesselated grid along each
dimension n, ∆an , is constant. Figures 1a and 1b visualize two examples of regularly structured
grids, that can be found in, e.g., inventory problems, wherein coordinates a1 and a2 represent the
discrete resource units of items 1 and 2 respectively (cf. Boute et al., 2022). Figure 1c exemplifies an
irregularly structured action space. Note that our method extends to a ∈ QN as long as the action
space can be represented by a regular grid. For conciseness we will refer to "regularly structured"
as "structured" action spaces and to "irregularly structured" as "unstructured" action spaces in the
remainder.


    (a) Regularly structured,        (b) Regularly structured,           (c) Irregularly structured.
    ∆a1 = ∆a2 .                      ∆a1 ̸= ∆a2 .

    Figure 1: Structured and unstructured action spaces in 2D. Each vertex represents an action.

    us denote a policy by π : S → A and the state-action value function by Qπ (s, a) =
Let P
      ∞
Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt |s, a], where γ ∈ [0, 1) denotes the discount factor. We aim to find a policy that
maximizes the objective function J = Ea∼π [Qπ (s, a)].
To introduce our method, first consider an actor-critic framework, in which an actor determines
action a ∈ A based on a policy (actor network) πθ parameterized by weight vector θ, and a critic
parameterized by w which estimates the value of this action, i.e., returns Qw (s, a). The actor is
updated in the direction suggested by the critic by maximizing the objective function J. The actor
network’s output layer contains |A| nodes, each reflecting the probability of an action a ∈ A, i.e., the
network πθ (s) encodes the policy. In many real-world problems, |A| grows exponentially with the
state dimension. In these cases, obtaining an accurate policy requires vast amounts of training data
and exploration to ensure generalization over A, making training of πθ intractable.
To bypass the need of learning accurate probabilities for each action, we will solve the following
surrogate problem in the remainder of this paper: instead of finding a discrete policy returning action


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


probabilities for each a ∈ A, we find a policy that returns continuous actions â ∈ RN and a function
f (â) = a that maps continuous actions to discrete ones. This approach allows to use off-the-shelf
policy gradient algorithms – which perform well in continuous action spaces – to learn πθ (s) and
ensures that πθ ’s output layer grows linearly with the number of entries in â.
A straightforward implementation of f would return the discrete neighboring action to â with the
highest Q-value, as proposed in Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015). Herein, the authors search for the k
closest neighbors to â over the entire action space and return the discrete action with the highest
Q-value. This requires an a priori definition of the action space, e.g., encoded as a matrix, hence
reaching memory limits if action spaces are very large. Instead of searching the entire action space, we
aim to efficiently search for an action a that maximizes Q. Formally, one can describe the underlying
optimization problem as a mixed-integer linear program (MILP); the action space structure and the
actions’ discreteness allow imposing linear constraints to bound the action vector’s entries and, hence,
for an efficient neighborhood search. Q-values are represented by deep neural networks (DNNs) to
capture non-linearities, which we can express as a MILP if the DNN solely consists of linear and
ReLU activation functions (cf. Bunel et al., 2017). Let l ∈ L = {1, . . . , L} be the index of the l-th
DNN layer and, with slight abuse of notation, dl denote neuron d ∈ Dl = {1, . . . , Dl } in layer l. Let
o be the DNN’s output node o and wdl−1 ,dl be the DNN’s weights. The outputs yl of the DNN’s
neurons and the discrete action vector elements ai ∈ a, i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, represent the MILP’s
decision variables. As we assume the discrete action space has an underlying continuous structure,
we expect the best discrete action to be close in vector distance to the continuous proxy action and
                                                ′          ′
restrict our search space accordingly. Let aui (â) and ali (â) denote upper and lower bounds on the
action vector’s elements respectively. The MILP with the main set of constraints then reads:
                                           X
                max (Qw (s, a)) = max          wdL ,o ydL                                             (1)
                 a                     ai ,ydl
                                                 dL
                  ′               ′
       s.t.    ali (â) ≤ ai ≤ aui (â),                                               ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , N } ,   (2)
               ydl ≥ 0,                                                                   ∀l ∈ L, d ∈ D,        (3)
                       |a|<Dl                           Dl
                        X                               X
               ydl ≥             wdl−1 ,dl adl−1 +                wdl−1 ,dl ydsl−1 ,           l = 2, ∀dl .     (4)
                       dl−1 =1                        dl−1 =|a|

The Objective (1) maximizes the weighted sum of outputs in the last layer, which equals Qw (s, a).
Constraints 2 describe the neighborhood of â. Constraints 3 implement the ReLU activation functions
by imposing non-negativity on the neurons’ outputs. Constraints 4 describe the transition from the
input to the second DNN layer. Here, ydsl−1 are the outputs of previous feedforward layers processing
only the state input s. We provide the full set of constraints in the supplement. The MILP bypasses
the need to store the entire action space matrix in memory, but needs to be solved in each training step
as the DNN weights change, which is costly for large DNN architectures. Accordingly, we base our
methodology in the following on efficiently finding a heuristic solution to this MILP via dynamically
constructing and searching through local neighborhoods of â.

3    M ETHODOLOGY
Figure 2 shows the rationale of our algorithm’s pipeline, which builds upon an actor-critic framework,
leveraging DNC to transform the actor’s continuous output into a discrete action. Our pipeline
comprises three steps. First, we use the actor’s output â to generate a discrete base action ā ∈ A. We
then iterate between generating promising sets of discrete neighbors A′ , and evaluating those based
on the respective Q-values taken from the critic. Here, we exploit the concept of SA (cf. Kochenderfer
& Wheeler, 2019) to guide our search and ensure sufficient local exploration. The remainder of this
section details each step of our DNC procedure and discusses our algorithmic design decisions.

Generating a Discrete Base Action We consider an actor network whose output corresponds to
the first-order µθ (s)n ∈ R and second-order σθ (s)n ∈ R moments of pre-specified distributions for
each element n ∈ {1, . . . , N } of the action vector to parameterize a stochastic policy πθ (s) with
continuous actions â. To obtain discrete base actions, we scale and round each continuous âi to the
closest discrete value, denoting the corresponding base action after rounding by ā. We refer to the
supplementary material for further details on this generation procedure.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Cont. DNC               Disc.
           State    Actor action Find neighbors action Evaluate neighbors               Disc.
             s      πθ (s) â                           Qw (s, a), a ∈ A′               action
                                 to base action ā A′                                   a∈A
                                                   Move to new A′

                      Figure 2: Pipeline for finding discrete actions in SLDAS


Generating Sets of Discrete Neighbors Within DNC, we aim to leverage neighbors of discrete
base actions, motivated by the rationale that neighborhoods of actions exhibit a certain degree of
cohesion. Specifically, when generating action neighborhoods A′ , we premise that action pairs with
small vector distances generate similar Q-values.

Definition 1 We measure action similarity within A′ via a Lipschitz constant L satisfying |Qπ (s, a)−
Qπ (s, a′ )| ≤ L∥a − a′ ∥2 for all a, a′ ∈ A′ .
                                                           |Qπ (s,a)−Qπ (s,a′ )|
Lemma 1 Action similarity L is given by          sup             ∥a−a′ ∥2        , ensuring that |Qπ (s, a)−
                                           a,a′ ∈A′ ,a̸=a′
Qπ (s, a′ )| ≤ L∥a − a′ ∥2 for all a, a′ ∈ A .′


To prove Lemma 1, we use that A′ is discrete, finite, and maps onto the real domain, and thus a finite
L exists. We refer to the supplementary material for a formal proof.
To generate discrete neighbors of ā, we perturb each action vector entry ān , n ∈ {1, . . . , N }. To do
so, we define a perturbation matrix P = (Pij )i=1,...,N ;j=1,...,2dN , with d being the neighborhood
depth. Moreover, let ϵ denote a scaling constant that allows us to look at more distant (larger ϵ) or
closer (smaller ϵ) neighbors. With this notation, the perturbation matrix P reads as follows:
          
          ϵ (⌊(j − 1)/N ⌋ + 1) ,           if, j ∈ {i, i + N, i + 2N, . . . , i + (d − 1) N },
   Pij = −ϵ (⌊(j − 1)/N ⌋ + 1 − d) , if, j ∈ {i + dN, i + (d + 1)N, . . . , i + (2d − 1) N },
          
            0,                              otherwise.
The first d · N columns of P are vectors with one non-zero entry describing a positive pertur-
bation of each entry in â, the last d · N columns describe negative perturbations. Let Ā =
(Āij )i=1,...,N ;j=1,...,2dN denote a matrix that stores ā in each of its columns. We then obtain
the perturbed matrix A = (Aij )i=1,...,N ;j=1,...,2dN as A = Ā + P , such that A’s columns form the
set A′ , yielding 2 · N · d neighbors with maximum L2 distance (d ϵ). In each perturbation, we modify
only one entry of ā, such that each perturbed neighbor has a Hamming distance of 1 and an L2
distance of up to (d ϵ) to the base action. Note that we can define ϵ individually for each dimension n,
which we omit in this description to remain concise.
The perturbation approach allows for efficient implementation and scales to very large action spaces
by design as it limits the exploration of the neighborhood of ā, which in a general case would
still increase exponentially with respect to a maximum L2 -distance of (d ϵ). Clearly, limiting the
neighborhood evaluation may incur a performance loss, but we argue that this loss is limited, as our
search procedure described in the next section is able to recover initially ignored neighbors.
Assuming that an action’s structured neighborhood relates to a locally convex J w.r.t. action
vector changes, we can show that the worst-case performance relative to base action ā is bounded
within a radius corresponding to the maximum perturbation distance (d ϵ). To formalize this, let
A′′ = {a ∈ A′ : ∥a − ā∥2 = (d ϵ)} denote the set of maximally perturbed actions with respect to ā.

Lemma 2 If J is locally upward convex for neighborhood A′ with maximum perturbation (d ϵ)
around base action ā, then worst-case performance  with respect
                                                                to    ā is bound by the maximally
perturbed actions a′′ ∈ A′′ via Qπ s, a′ ≥ min             ′′      ′
                                                                        A′ .
                                                    π
                                             ′′ ′′
                                                   Q   s, a    , ∀a  ∈
                                                 a ∈A

To prove Lemma 2 we leverage that inequality min
                                             ′′  ′′
                                                    Qπ (s, a′′ ) ≤ Qπ (s, λ(a) + (1 − λ)(a′ )),
                                                    a ∈A
with a, a′ ∈ A′′ and λ ∈ [0, 1], holds by definition of upward convexity and refer to the supplementary
material for a complete proof.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evaluating Discrete Action Neighborhoods Algorithm 1 details the evaluation of a base action’s
neighborhood and our final selection of the discrete action a that we map to â. We initially select
the discrete action within a neighborhood that yields the highest Q-value. However, our selection
does not base on a single neighborhood evaluation, but employs an iterative SA-based search scheme
to explore various neighborhoods. SA is a probabilistic search technique that facilitates to escape
local optima during a search by occasionally accepting worse actions than the best one found (cf.
Kochenderfer & Wheeler, 2019).
Specifically, Algorithm 1 works as follows. After generating a set of neighbors A′ (l.3), we utilize the
critic to obtain Q-values for a′ ∈ A′ , which includes the current base action ā and each neighbor (l.4).
Subsequently, we store the k-best neighbors in an ordered set K′ ⊆ A′ and store K′ in K, the latter
set memorizing all evaluated actions thus far (l.5). From K′ , we select action k1 , which by definition
of K′ has the highest associated Q-value, for evaluation (l.6). If the Q-value of k1 ∈ K′ exceeds the
Q-value of the base action ā, we accept k1 as new base action ā (l.8). If it also exceeds the current
best candidate action, ā∗ (l.10), we accept it as the new best candidate action. If the action k1 does
not exhibit a higher Q-value than ā, we accept it with probability 1 − exp[− (Qw (ā) − Qw (k1 )) /β]
and reduce β by cooling parameter cβ (l.12), or reject it and move to a new base action, sampled
from K (1.14). Finally, the parameter k is reduced by cooling parameter ck . Steps (l.3) to (l.15) are
repeated until the stopping criterion (l.2) has been met. We then set a = ā∗ , i.e., we use the action
with the highest Q-value found as our final discrete action. For a more detailed description of the
search process, hyperparameter tuning, and the integration of Algorithm 1 into a generic actor-critic
algorithm, we refer to the supplementary material.

Algorithm 1 Dynamic Neighborhood Construction
 1: Initialize k, β, cβ , and ck , ā ← g(â), ā∗ ← ā, K = ∅
 2: while k > 0, or β > 0 do
 3:     Find neighbors A′ to ā with Pij
 4:     Get Q-values for all neighbors in A′
 5:     Obtain set K′ with k-best neighbors, K ← K ∪ K′
 6:     k1 ← K′ , with k1 = arg maxk∈K′ Qw (s, k)
 7:     if Qw (s, k1 ) > Qw (s, ā) then
 8:          Accept k1 ∈ K′ , ā ← k1
 9:          if Qw (s, k1 ) > Qw (s, ā∗ ) then
10:              ā∗ ← k1
11:     else if rand() < exp[− (Qw (ā) − Qw (k1 )) /β] then
12:          Accept k1 ∈ K′ , ā ← k1 , β ← β − cβ
13:     else
14:          Reject k1 ∈ K′ , ā ← krand ∈ K
15:     k ← ⌈k − ck ⌉
16: Return ā∗


Discussion A few technical comments on the design of our algorithmic pipeline are in order. First,
a composed policy of the form a = πθ′ (s) = DNC(πθ (s)) is not fully differentiable. To ensure
that our overall policy’s backpropagation works approximately, we follow two steps, similar to
Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015). Step 1 bases the actor’s loss function on the continuous action â to
exploit information from the continuous action space that would have been lost if training the actor
on the discrete action â. Step 2 trains the critic using the discrete action a, i.e., the actions that were
applied to the environment and upon which rewards were observed. We detail the integration of DNC
into an actor-critic algorithm in the supplementary material. Second, one may argue that using an
iterative SA-based algorithm is superfluous, as our overall algorithmic pipeline already utilizes a
stochastic policy πθ that ensures exploration. Here, we note that utilizing πθ only ensures exploration
in the continuous action space. To ensure that subsequent deterministic steps in A, i.e., base action
generation and neighborhood selection, do not lead to local optima, we use SA to search across
different and potentially better neighborhoods in the discrete action space. Furthermore, as DNC
does not explore the neighborhood as exhaustively as, e.g., a knn or a MILP based approach, SA
ensures that potentially better neighbors are not left out. In fact, we can show that with the chosen
algorithmic design, DNC leads to improving actions in finite time.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 3 Consider a neighborhood A′ and improving actions satisfying Qπ (s, a) >
max
 ′ ′
     Qπ (s, a′ ), a ∈ A \ A′ . In finite time, DNC will accept improving actions, provided that
a ∈A
(i) β and k cool sufficiently slowly and (ii) a maximum perturbation distance (d ϵ) is set such that all
action pairs can communicate.
To prove Lemma 3, we utilize that under conditions (i) and (ii), our SA-based search can be formalized
as an irreducible and aperiodic Markov chain over A. A positive transition probability then applies to
each action pair. For a complete proof, we refer to the supplementary material.

4    E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
We compare the performance of our algorithmic pipeline (DNC) against four benchmarks: a VAC,
the static MinMax mapping proposed in Vanvuchelen et al. (2022), the k-nearest neighbors (knn)
mapping proposed in Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015), and the learned action representation (LAR)
approach proposed in Chandak et al. (2019a). To this end, VAC can be seen as a baseline, while
MinMax, knn, and LAR denote state-of-the-art benchmarks. Furthermore, to show the added value
of SA, we conduct an ablation study in which SA is removed from the solution method, which we
label with DNC w/o SA. Here, we generate a set of discrete neighbors once and return the best action
directly. We detail all of these benchmarks and respective hyperparameter tuning in the supplementary
material. We consider three different environments to analyze algorithmic performance, which we
summarize in the following. For their implementation details, we refer to the supplementary material.
First, we consider a maze environment, which is used as a testbed in state-of-the-art works on LDAS
(cf. Chandak et al., 2019a). Here, an agent needs to navigate through a maze, avoiding obstructions
and finding a goal position. The agent receives continuous coordinates on its location as input and
decides on the activation of N actuators– equally spaced around the agent– that move the agent in the
direction they are pointing at. The resulting action space is exponential in the number of actuators,
i.e., |A| = 2N . The agent incurs a small negative reward for each step and a reward of 100 when the
goal is reached. Random noise of 10% is added to every action. In addition, we consider a variation
of the maze problem, wherein we add one teleporting tile that needs to be avoided when trying to
find the goal. Landing on this tile will result in a penalty of -20 and teleport the agent back to the
starting position. With this variant, we study the policies’ ability to deal with a non-linear underlying
Q-value distribution due to the reward and Q-value jumps close to the teleporting tile.
Second, we consider a joint inventory replenishment problem (cf. Vanvuchelen et al., 2022). Consider
a retailers’ warehouse that stocks N item types i ∈ I. Each timestep, customer demand is served
from the warehouse stock and the retailer needs to decide on the ordering quantity, aiming to minimize
total costs that comprise per-item ordering costs oi , holding costs hi , and backorder costs bi . The
latter constitute a penalty for not being able to directly serve demand from stock in a time step. All
individual items i are linked together through a common order costs O. This fixed cost is incurred
whenever at least one item is ordered, i.e., this term ensures that all items need to be considered
simultaneously, since batch-reordering of multiple items is less costly. To ensure a finite decision
space, we let the agent decide on order-up-to levels, which are bound by Smax , i.e., Smax represents
the maximum of items the retailer can stock. Hence, |A| = (Smax + 1)N , which includes ordering
zero items. For all our experiments we set Smax to 66, i.e., |A| = 67N .
Third, we consider a well-known dynamic job-shop scheduling problem (see, e.g., Zhang et al.,
2020a; Wu & Yan, 2023). In this problem, a set of G jobs is allocated to N machines that can serve
up to L jobs each, yielding an action space of size |A| = LN . We consider a load-balancing variant
of this problem, for which jobs need to be balanced over heterogeneous machines. Apart from a
positive reward for each finished job, we incur negative rewards for an unbalanced allocation of jobs
over machines and for energy consumption, which is heterogeneous over machines and is affected by
the deterioration and repair of machines, as such adding stochasticity to the transition function. For
our experiments, we set G = 500, L = 100, and N = 5.

5    N UMERICAL R ESULTS
The following synthesizes the findings of our numerical studies, focusing on the scalability and
algorithmic performance of each method. All results reported correspond to runs with the best


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hyperparameters found for each method, executed over 50 seeds. We refer to the supplementary
material for detailed results and information on the hyperparameter tuning. We compare the methods’
step time and memory usage in Appendix H.

                                                                                      Table 1: Learning performance for different action space sizes |A|.

                                                                                                                                        VAC                       LAR                  knn                                     MinMax                               DNC w/o SA                           DNC
                                                                         3                                                     6
                                                                   10 < |A| ≤ 10                                                           -
                                                                   106 < |A| ≤ 109                                                         -                       -                                                                 ⃝                                                   ⃝
                                                                   |A| ≫ 109                                                               -                       -                          -                                      ⃝                                                   ⃝

Table 1 compares algorithm performance in learning policies across different action space sizes in
three environments. A checkmark denotes consistent learning of performant policies for all instances
in a given action space size, while a circle indicates consistent learning for some instances, and a
minus for none. VAC already struggles in spaces with thousands of actions, emphasizing the need
for advanced methods to handle LDAS. For 106 < |A| ≤ 109 , knn succeeds to learn a performant
policy, but LAR fails to learn. LAR learns unique embeddings for each action, which is beneficial
in unstructured action spaces where it identifies and uses a meta-structure. However, in SLDAS,
creating embeddings for every action becomes intractable. For action spaces with |A| > 109 , knn
also fails due to memory constraints. Our DNC algorithm consistently learns performant policies
across all sizes, showing robust scalability. The MinMax approach exposes difficulties in spaces
larger than 106 , as it is susceptible to getting stuck in local optima as the action space grows.
The remainder of this section focuses on algorithmic performance, i.e., the average performance
during testing. Here, we omit the analyses of algorithms that are not capable of learning performant
policies at0.04
             all for the respective environments. We report results for solving the MILP, which does
not scale beyond the maze environment, in Appendix B. For all performant benchmarks, Figure 3
shows the0.02
            expected test return evaluated after a different number of training iterations and averaged
over 50 random seeds.
The two 0.00
           figures in the top row depict the results for the maze environment. We observe that
VAC is unable to find a good policy already for “smaller” action spaces of size 212 actions. The
          0.02
other algorithms     do not differ significantly in their performance. We note that for this relatively

                                                                  0.04
                                                                                                                 VAC                LAR                           knn                                         MinMax                              DNC w/o SA                                        DNC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maze (w/ teleporting tiles) -- 2^20 actions
                                                                                                                      0.04
                                                                                                                      100          0.02           0.00
                                                                                                                                   Maze -- 2^12 actions                                 0.02 100                                   0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Total expected returns
                                                                                             Total expected returns


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                      20                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                           0   1   2        3     4     5              6           7                                           0      1      2     3 4 5                                 6    7
                                                                                                                                        Episodes (x10k)                                                                                          Episodes (x10k)
                                                         H        ,QYHQWRU\      A   DFWLRQV                                H           ,QYHQWRU\      A   DFWLRQV                                                                  Job-shop -- 10^10 actions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             35000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Total expected returns


7RWDO H[SHFWHG UHWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0       0.5         1         1.5    2
                                                                              (SLVRGHV  [  N                                                                      (SLVRGHV  [  N                                                                                     Episodes (x10k)


Figure 3: Average total expected returns during testing for 50 random seeds over the training iterations.
The shaded area represents the 2 standard deviation training seed variance corridor. (Top) maze
environment results. (Bottom) real-world environment results.


                                                                                                                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


simple environment with low reward variance and smooth Q-value distribution, the benefit of
considering neighbors to â is limited, such that DNC does not outperform MinMax but obtains a
similar performance. Hence, if continuous actions can already be accurately mapped to discrete ones,
evaluating neighbors has limited added value.
The results of the maze variant with a teleporting tile (second figure in the top row) show that methods
incorporating neighborhood information (DNC, DNC w/o SA, knn) perform better compared to
MinMax. The latter exhibits unstable learning behavior, since the coarse rounding step cannot
resolve sharp changes in Q-values caused by the teleporting tile. We conjecture that, when the
underlying Q-value distribution of a problem is non-linear, the added benefit of considering more
neighboring actions becomes more apparent. DNC is therefore able to provide high quality policies
in more complex environments, comparable to knn. This result is noteworthy, as MinMax is the only
state-of-the-art method able to scale to very large SLDAS. We note that LAR did not complete the
training required to learn action embeddings in the given time limit, hence only the first 2k episodes
are shown for LAR. In the appendix, we provide boxplots showing the performance of the final
learned policies. They suggest that convergence in the maze environment is much more stable than
perceived in Figure 3, as the observed variance is the result of the maze’s reward spread.
The bottom row of Figure 3 reports results on the inventory and job-shop environments. For the
inventory environment, we observe that only DNC is able to learn a performant policy, while VAC,
knn and LAR simply run out of memory before finding a policy, and MinMax and DNC w/o SA
converge to a considerably less performant policy. Similar to the maze environment with teleporting
tiles, the joint inventory problem has a more non-linear Q-value function due to joint order costs, and
neighboring actions can result in significantly different rewards. Hence, incorporating a neighborhood
when selecting a discrete action and adding some randomness while exploring it proves advantageous.
The results for the job-shop scheduling environment (bottom-right graph in Figure 3) confirm the good
performance of DNC. DNC outperforms its ablation DNC w/o SA and MinMax, while converging
faster. This result demonstrates (i) the added value of considering multiple neighbors instead of only
the nearest neighbor, highlighted by DNC w/o SA’s advantage over MinMax, and (ii) the benefit of
SA, highlighted by DNC’s outperformance of DNC w/o SA. We observe that MinMax still exhibits
a slight gradient at 20k episodes. To confirm that DNC outperforms MinMax after the latter’s
convergence, we present an additional visualization in Appendix H, Figure 11, providing evidence of
MinMax’s and DNC w/o SA’s convergence at comparable performance after 80k episodes.
Concluding, our experimental results show that DNC matches or surpasses current benchmarks for all
SLDAS experiments. It equals the top performance in simple scenarios and competes effectively with
knn and LAR – which use advanced learning representations – in complex cases with moderately
large SLDAS featuring non-linear reward- and Q-value distributions. For very large SLDAS, DNC
shows superior performance, since knn and LAR cannot scale beyond enumerable action spaces, and
the remaining benchmarks, MinMax and DNC w/o SA, are consistently outperformed.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present a novel algorithmic pipeline for deep reinforcement learning in environments
with structured large discrete action spaces that enables to integrate an effective continuous-to-
discrete action mapping in an actor critic algorithm. Our algorithmic pipeline shows two crucial
advantages. First, it does not require enumerating the full action space, nor does it require storing
the action space in-memory during the training process. Second, the perturbation scheme and
search procedure allow for application to a wide range of problems that exhibit a structured action
space. We compare our approach against various state-of-the-art benchmarks across three different
environments. Our results show that our pipeline overcomes the benchmark’s scalability limitations
through a dynamic neighborhood evaluation. Our pipeline scales up to action space sizes up to 1073
and shows comparable or improving solution quality across the investigated environments.
Our algorithmic pipeline shows significant benefit over benchmarks: (i) when the discrete action
space is very large yet structured; (ii) when the environment exhibits non-linearities in the reward-
and Q-function. The promising results of DNC motivate future work to explore extensions of our
pipeline to alternative neighborhood operators and selection criteria, efficient handling of infeasible
actions and constraints, or using graph neural networks to efficiently evaluate neighborhoods.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code for running DNC and all benchmarks on the studied domains can be
found in the attached supplement and at:                   https://github.com/tumBAIS/
dynamicNeighborhoodConstruction. Proofs of all lemmata can be found in the
supplement. Furthermore, the supplement details a comprehensive description considering the
implementation of DNC in a standard actor-critic algorithm. Additionally, the supplement elaborates
on the implementation of benchmarks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Yash Chandak for providing us with his implementation of the LAR approach.
Moreover, we would like to thank Georgina Nouli for the discussions that helped us to substantiate
the proofs for Lemmata 1, 2, and 3.

R EFERENCES
Dimitris Bertsimas and John Tsitsiklis. Simulated annealing. Statistical Science, 8(1):10–15, 1993.
Robert N. Boute, Joren Gijsbrechts, Willem van Jaarsveld, and Nathalie Vanvuchelen. Deep rein-
  forcement learning for inventory control: A roadmap. European Journal of Operational Research,
  298(2):401–412, 2022.
Rudy Bunel, Ilker Turkaslan, Philip H. S. Torr, Pushmeet Kohli, and Pawan Kumar Mudigonda. A
  unified view of piecewise linear neural network verification. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Yash Chandak, Georgios Theocharous, James Kostas, Scott Jordan, and Philip Thomas. Learning
  action representations for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 941–950. PMLR, 2019a.
Yash Chandak, Georgios Theocharous, Chris Nota, and Philip S. Thomas. Lifelong learning with a
  changing action set. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019b.
Hao Cui and Roni Khardon. Online symbolic gradient-based optimization for factored action mdps.
  In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3075–3081. IJCAI/AAAI Press,
  2016.
Hao Cui and Roni Khardon. Lifted stochastic planning, belief propagation and marginal map. In
 AAAI Workshops, volume WS-18 of AAAI Technical Report, pp. 658–664. AAAI Press, 2018.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Ludovic Denoyer, Philippe Preux, and Patrick Gallinari. Fast reinforcement
  learning with large action sets using error-correcting output codes for MDP factorization. In Joint
  European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 180–194.
  Springer, 2012.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Richard Evans, Hado van Hasselt, Peter Sunehag, Timothy Lillicrap, Jonathan
  Hunt, Timothy Mann, Theophane Weber, Thomas Degris, and Ben Coppin. Deep reinforcement
  learning in large discrete action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07679, 2015.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: definitions, benchmarks and
  analysis. Machine Learning, 110(9):2419–2468, 2021.
Tobias Enders, James Harrison, Marco Pavone, and Maximilian Schiffer. Hybrid multi-agent deep
  reinforcement learning for autonomous mobility on demand systems. In Nikolai Matni, Manfred
  Morari, and George J. Pappas (eds.), Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, volume 211
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1284–1296. PMLR, 2023.
Matteo Fischetti and Andrea Lodi. Local branching. Mathematical Programming, 98(1):23–47,
 2003.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sai Krishna Gottipati, Boris Sattarov, Sufeng Niu, Yashaswi Pathak, Haoran Wei, Shengchao Liu,
  Shengchao Liu, Simon Blackburn, Karam Thomas, Connor Coley, Jian Tang, Sarath Chandar, and
  Yoshua Bengio. Learning to navigate the synthetically accessible chemical space using reinforce-
  ment learning. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  3668–3679. PMLR, 2020.
Pengjie Gu, Mengchen Zhao, Chen Chen, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, and Bo An. Learning pseudometric-
  based action representations for offline reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
  Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 7902–7918. PMLR, 2022.
Ji He, Jianshu Chen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Lihong Li, Li Deng, and Mari Ostendorf. Deep
   reinforcement learning with a natural language action space. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
   Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1621–1630,
   Berlin, Germany, 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ayush Jain, Andrew Szot, and Joseph J. Lim. Generalization to new actions in reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Ayush Jain, Norio Kosaka, Kyung-Min Kim, and Joseph J Lim. Know your action set: Learning action
  relations for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Minsu Kim, Jinkyoo Park, and joungho kim. Learning collaborative policies to solve np-hard routing
 problems. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 10418–10430. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2021.
Mykel J. Kochenderfer and Tim A. Wheeler. Algorithms for Optimization. The MIT Press, 2019.
 ISBN 0262039427.
George Konidaris, Sarah Osentoski, and Philip Thomas. Value function approximation in rein-
  forcement learning using the fourier basis. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 25(1):380–385, 2011.
Zhenning Li, Chengzhong Xu, and Guohui Zhang. A deep reinforcement learning approach for traffic
  signal control optimization, 2021.
Anuj Mahajan, Mikayel Samvelyan, Lei Mao, Viktor Makoviychuk, Animesh Garg, Jean Kossaifi,
  Shimon Whiteson, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Reinforcement learning in factored action
  spaces using tensor decompositions. ArXiv, abs/2110.14538, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013.
Marius Muja and David G. Lowe. Scalable nearest neighbor algorithms for high dimensional data.
 IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 36(11):2227–2240, 2014.
Michael Neunert, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Markus Wulfmeier, Thomas Lampe, Tobias Springen-
 berg, Roland Hafner, Francesco Romano, Jonas Buchli, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller.
 Continuous-discrete reinforcement learning for hybrid control in robotics. In Leslie Pack Kaelbling,
 Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura (eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning,
 volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 735–751. PMLR, 2020.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward
 Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
  Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
  library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Pazis and Ron Parr. Generalized value functions for large action sets. In Proceedings of the
  28th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11), pp. 1185–1192, 2011.
Bei Peng, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr,
  Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised policy
  gradients. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 12208–12221. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2021.
Paul J. Pritz, Liang Ma, and Kin K. Leung. Jointly-learned state-action embedding for efficient
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information
  & Knowledge Management, CIKM ’21, pp. 1447–1456, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association
  for Computing Machinery.
Brian Sallans and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Reinforcement learning with factored states and actions. J.
  Mach. Learn. Res., 5:1063–1088, 2004.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.
Sahil Sharma, Aravind Suresh, Rahul Ramesh, and Balaraman Ravindran. Learning to factor policies
  and action-value functions: Factored action space representations for deep reinforcement learning.
  CoRR, abs/1705.07269, 2017.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 387–395, Bejing, China, 2014. PMLR.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, USA, second edition, 2018.
Shengpu Tang, Maggie Makar, Michael Sjoding, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Jenna Wiens. Leveraging
  factored action spaces for efficient offline reinforcement learning in healthcare. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Arash Tavakoli, Fabio Pardo, and Petar Kormushev. Action branching architectures for deep reinforce-
  ment learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Thirtieth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Eighth AAAI Symposium
  on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’18. AAAI Press, 2018.
Guy Tennenholtz and Shie Mannor. The natural language of actions. In Kamalika Chaudhuri
  and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6196–6205. PMLR, 2019.
Philip S. Thomas and Andrew G. Barto. Motor primitive discovery. In 2012 IEEE International
  Conference on Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL), pp. 1–8, 2012.
Hado van Hasselt and Marco A Wiering. Using continuous action spaces to solve discrete problems.
  2009 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 1149–1156, 2009.
Wouter van Heeswijk and Han La Poutré. Deep reinforcement learning in linear discrete action
 spaces. In 2020 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 1063–1074, 2020.
Nathalie Vanvuchelen, Bram de Moor, and Robert N. Boute. The use of continuous action representa-
  tions to scale deep reinforcement learning for inventory control. SSRN, 2022.
Gongju Wang, Dianxi Shi, Chao Xue, Hao Jiang, and Yajie Wang. Bic-ddpg: Bidirectionally-
  coordinated nets for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Honghao Gao, Xinheng Wang,
  Muddesar Iqbal, Yuyu Yin, Jianwei Yin, and Ning Gu (eds.), Collaborative Computing: Network-
  ing, Applications and Worksharing, pp. 337–354, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fengsheng Wei, Gang Feng, Yao Sun, Yatong Wang, Shuang Qin, and Ying-Chang Liang. Network
  slice reconfiguration by exploiting deep reinforcement learning with large action space. IEEE
  Transactions on Network and Service Management, 17(4):2197–2211, 2020.
William Whitney, Rajat Agarwal, Kyunghyun Cho, and Abhinav Gupta. Dynamics-aware embeddings.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Xinquan Wu and Xuefeng Yan. A spatial pyramid pooling-based deep reinforcement learning model
  for dynamic job-shop scheduling problem. Computers & Operations Research, 160:106401, 2023.
Jiaohong Xie, Yang Liu, and Nan Chen. Two-sided deep reinforcement learning for dynamic mobility-
   on-demand management with mixed autonomy. Transportation Science, 57(4):1019–1046, 2023.
Tom Zahavy, Matan Haroush, Nadav Merlis, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Learn what
  not to learn: Action elimination with deep reinforcement learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Cong Zhang, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, Puay Siew Tan, and Xu Chi. Learning to dispatch
  for job shop scheduling via deep reinforcement learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
  M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
  pp. 1621–1632. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020a.
Tianren Zhang, Shangqi Guo, Tian Tan, Xiaolin Hu, and Feng Chen. Generating adjacency-
  constrained subgoals in hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th In-
  ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA,
  2020b. Curran Associates Inc.


A    P ROOFS OF L EMMATA 1, 2, AND 3
                                                            |Qπ (s,a)−Qπ (s,a′ )|
Lemma 1 Action similarity L is given by           sup             ∥a−a′ ∥2        , ensuring that |Qπ (s, a)−
                                          a,a′ ∈A′ ,a̸=a′
Qπ (s, a′ )| ≤ L∥a − a′ ∥2 for all a, a′ ∈ A′ .

Proof Since the action neighborhood A′ is finite and discrete, there exists a minimum Euclidean
distance δ > 0 between any two distinct actions a, a′ ∈ A′ , i.e., ∥a − a′ ∥2 ≥ δ for a ̸= a′ .
Consider any two distinct actions a, a′ ∈ A′ and their corresponding Q-values Qπ (s, a) ∈ R and
Qπ (s, a′ ) ∈ R, with state s fixed. By the triangle inequality, we have:

                                                                   0≤
                                        |Qπ (s, a) − Qπ (s, a′ )| =
                                   |Qπ (s, a) + (−Qπ (s, a′ )) | ≤
                                   |Qπ (s, a)| + | − Qπ (s, a′ )| =
                                       |Qπ (s, a)| + |Qπ (s, a′ )| .

Let Qmax = max′ Qπ (s, a) be the maximum Q-value over all actions in A′ . From the triangle
              a∈A
inequality, it follows that |Qπ (s, a) − Qπ (s, a′ )| ≤ 2Qmax must hold.
Now, for any action pair a ̸= a′ , we have ∥a − a′ ∥2 ≥ δ and |Qπ (s, a) − Qπ (s, a′ )| ≤ 2Qmax .
                   π        π
                              (s,a′ )|                                             max
Hence, the ratio |Q (s,a)−Q
                      ∥a−a′ ∥2         is a non-negative real number bounded by 2Qδ for all a, a′ ∈
A′ satisfying a ̸= a′ . Since the action space is finite, the number of ratios is also finite, and we
bound the Lipschitz constant:

                                            |Qπ (s, a) − Qπ (s, a′ )|   2Qmax
                      L=        sup                                   ≤       .
                            a,a′ ∈A′ ,a̸=a′       ∥a − a′ ∥2              δ

Hence, L exists and is finite, providing a measure on action similarity.                                  □


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2 If J is locally upward convex for neighborhood A′ with maximum perturbation (d ϵ)
around base action ā, then worst-case performance  with respect
                                                                to    ā is bound by the maximally
perturbed actions a′′ ∈ A′′ via Qπ s, a′ ≥ min             ′′      ′
                                                                        A′ .
                                                    π
                                             ′′ ′′
                                                   Q   s, a    , ∀a  ∈
                                                       a ∈A


Figure 4 illustrates the intuition behind local convexity and our proof.

                                  J
                                            Qw (a′ )                     Potential lower
                                                            Qw (a′′ )    bound on J


                                                           Qw   (a′ )
                                                 Qw (ā)



                                         Qw (a′′ )


                                                                                  a′

Figure 4: Illustration of a locally convex neighborhood of J with respect to the perturbed actions
a′ . DNC selects actions based on Q(a′ ) and thus may return any a′ ∈ A′ . The convex property
guarantees that J(a′′ ) ≤ J(a′ ), ∀a′ ∈ A′ for some maximally perturbed action a′′ .



Proof    Evaluating arg max Qw (s, a) may return any a ∈ A′ , as Qw might have arbitrary values.
                       a∈A
Therefore, we must prove that the performance bound holds for all a ∈ A′ . Via the local convexity
of J around base action ā, we prove that worst-case performance is bound by a maximally perturbed
action in A′′ .
Let λ ∈ [0, 1], a′′ , a′′′ , a′′′′ ∈ A′′ and a′ ∈ A′ . By definition of upward convexity, the following
inequalities are satisfied.

                                                                Qπ s, a′′ =

                                                         min
                                                         ′′  ′′
                                                        a ∈A
                                         ′′
                                   π
                                                                Qπ s, a′′ ≤

                         λ min
                           ′′  ′′
                                  Q  s, a     + (1 − λ)  min
                                                         ′′  ′′
                           a ∈A                                         a ∈A
                                         λQπ (s, a′′′ ) + (1 − λ)Qπ (s, a′′′′ ) ≤
                                              Qπ (s, λ(a′′′ ) + (1 − λ)(a′′′′ )) .

This result holds ∀λ ∈ [0, 1] and all maximally perturbed actions. Now, we only need to prove
                     ′′′ ′′′′                    ′′′             ′′′′
that ∀a′ ∈ A′ ∃ (λ, a , a ) such that a′ = λ a + (1 − λ) a , i.e., that linear combination of
maximally perturbed actions can express all feasible actions a′ ∈ A′ .
Let us express neighbors via a′ = ā + Pj for some j ∈ {1, . . . , 2N d}. Moreover, let j + ∈
{N d − (N − 1), . . . , N d} be column indices corresponding to maximally positively perturbed
actions and let j − ∈ {2N d − (N − 1), . . . , 2N d} correspond to maximally negatively perturbed
actions, and let l be the index of the non-zero entry of Pj . Then, consider the maximally perturbed
actions Al.j + , Al.j − , who only differ from ā on their lth element. We can now express a′ as

                                      a′ = λ Al.j + + (1 − λ) Al.j − .                               (5)

Here, we obtain the required λ by solving Equation equation 5 for λ, for which we use the relevant
                                                         P +d ϵ
perturbed entry Plj . Solving the equation leads to λ = lj2 d ϵ , yielding a value between 0 and 1 as
−(d ϵ) ≤ Plj ≤ (d ϵ). Therefore, we can express all neighbors a′ ∈ A′ as linear combinations of
                                                      ′′             ′     ′
maximally perturbed actions; hence, min
                                      ′′   ′′
                                              Qπ (s, a ) ≤ Qπ (s, a ), ∀a ∈ A′ .                   □
                                        a ∈A


Lemma 3 Consider a neighborhood A′ and improving actions satisfying Qπ (s, a) >
max
 ′ ′
     Qπ (s, a′ ), a ∈ A \ A′ . In finite time, DNC will accept improving actions, provided that
a ∈A
(i) β and k cool sufficiently slowly and (ii) a maximum perturbation distance (d ϵ) is set such that all
action pairs can communicate.


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof The proof is structured into three steps: first, we show that DNC’s simulated annealing
procedure behaves as a non-homogeneous Markov chain that searches over the action space. We then
show that this Markov chain is aperiodic and irreducible. Finally, we show that an arbitrary action
can be reached with positive probability in a finite number of steps.
1. Simulated annealing procedure behaves as a Markov chain
We first establish the preliminaries of the simulated annealing procedure used in DNC, which is
necessary to describe the procedure as a Markov chain (cf. Bertsimas & Tsitsiklis, 1993).

      1. A is a finite discrete action set.
      2. There exists a real-valued cost function Qπ : S × A 7→ R, with a proper subset of local
         minima A∗ ⊂ A. Specifically, we associate each state-action pair with an estimated Q-value
         Qw (s, a) ∈ R. Since state s is fixed while executing the simulated annealing algorithm, we
         omit its notation moving forward.
      3. Every action a ∈ A has a non-empty neighborhood Aa ⊆ A that includes itself, such that
         |Aa | > 1 . This can be ensured by setting an appropriate maximum perturbation distance
         (d ϵ) ∈ R+ . As DNC performs perturbations on each individual entry in the action vector,
         it follows that all feasible entries (and thus all actions) in the finite action space can be
         constructed through perturbation of neighboring entries. Finally, given that the Euclidean
         distance is a symmetric metric, it follows that a′ ∈ Aa ⇐⇒ a ∈ Aa′ .
      4. When we find non-improving neighbors k1 – which happens in finite time given that
         the action space is finite – there exists a set of positive probabilities pa,a′ , a ̸= a′ that
         reflect the probability of evaluating neighbor a′ from a. The sum of probabilities satisfies
                                                                                             1
         P
             a ∈A\{a} pa,a = 1. Specifically, in (l.14) of Algorithm 1, we associate |K| to each
              ′            ′

         krand ∈ K. As mentioned, we always reach (l.14) in finite time, due to the guarantee of
         finding non-improving actions in a finite space.
      5. There is a temperature scheme β : N 7→ (0, ∞), with βt representing temperature at time
         t ∈ N and βt ≥ βt+1 , ∀t. Similarly, the scheme k : N 7→ [0, |A|] returns the number of
         neighbors kt generated at time t, with kt ≥ kt+1 , ∀t. As a preliminary for the remainder
         of the proof, the temperature must cool sufficiently slow to allow finite-time transitions
         between any a, a′ ∈ A.
      6. At t = 0, an initial action ā is given. This action is generated by the continuous-to-discrete
         mapping function g : â 7→ ā, as detailed in the paper.

Given these preliminaries, we define the simulated annealing procedure used in our DNC as a
non-homogeneous Markov chain A = A0 , A1 , A2 , . . . that searches over A. Here, At is a random
variable that denotes the accepted action after move t, i.e., At = at , at ∈ A.

Let us denote k1 = arg max (Q(s, k)) and κ = max 0, Q(s,a)−Q(s,k  β
                                                                         1)
                                                                             . Then, from the algorith-
                       k∈K′
mic outline, we derive that the probability of At+1 = a′ when At = a is given by
                                         (
                           ′
                                                                    1
                                           exp(κ) + (1 − exp(κ)) · |K| , if , a′ = k1
              P(At+1 = a |At = a) =                                                                  (6)
                                                           1
                                           (1 − exp(κ)) · |K| ,          if , a′ ̸= k1

2. Markov chain is irreducible and aperiodic
We now show that the transition probabilities of the Markov chain imply it is (i) irreducible and (ii)
aperiodic, which are necessary and sufficient conditions to prove that P(At+τ = a′ |At = a) > 0 for
some finite τ ∈ N.

     (i) Irreducibility of A: To show that the Markov chain is irreducible, suppose we set the
         maximum perturbance distance to (d ϵ) = max′
                                                       ∥a − a′ ∥2 , i.e., equaling the finite upper
                                                       a,a ∈A
         bound on perturbation. Now, suppose we wish to move between arbitrary actions a =
         (an )∀n∈{1,...,N } and a′ = (a′n )∀n∈{1,...,N } . The chosen perturbation distance ensures that
         action entries can be perturbed to any target value a′n ∈ {an − (d ϵ), . . . , an + (d ϵ)}. By
         perturbing each entry an individually, we can reach a′ within N steps, as Equation equation 6
         ensures a positive probability of accepting such perturbations. To generalize the established


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         result, observe that we may relax to (d ϵ) ≤ max
                                                       ′
                                                          ∥a − a′ ∥2 and can construct a similar
                                                                  a,a ∈A
         rationale for some smaller d that satisfies communication between action pairs as well.
    (ii) Aperiodicity of A: As we accept non-improving actions with a probability < 1 and ∃a∗ ∈ A∗
         with no improving neighbors, a one-step transition probability P(At+1 = a∗ |At = a∗ ) > 0
         is implied by Equation equation 6. By definition of aperiodicity, identifying one aperiodic
         action suffices to prove that the entire Markov chain is aperiodic.

3. All actions are reachable with positive probability in finite time
We have shown that the Markov chain is irreducible and aperiodic, proving that all actions belong to
the same communicating class. By the Perron-Frobenius theorem, ∀(a, a′ ), there exists a finite τ
such that P(At+τ = a′ |At = a) = (P τ )aa′ > 0, where (P τ )aa′ is a τ -step transition matrix.
This result shows that there is a positive probability of reaching action a′ from action a in τ steps.
Thus, given sufficiently large perturbation distances and an appropriate cooling scheme, DNC enables
to find improving actions outside the initial neighborhood.                                        □

B    F ULL SET OF MILP CONSTRAINTS AND FURTHER RESULTS
In addition to Constraints 2 to 4, the following constraints are required to describe the DNN (∀l ≥ 3)
                                           X
                                ydl ≥             wdl−1 ,dl ydl−1                                  (7)
                                              dl−1 ∈Dl−1

                                    ydl ≤zdl M                                                           (8)
                                                                   X
                                    ydl ≤(1 − zdl ) M +                      wdl−1 ,dl ydl−1             (9)
                                                                dl−1 ∈Dl−1
                                              P
                                                dl−1 ∈Dl−1 wdl−1 ,dl ydl−1
                                     zdl ≥                                                              (10)
                                                  P        M
                                                     dl−1 ∈Dl−1 wdl−1 ,dl ydl−1
                                     zdl ≤1 +                                                           (11)
                                                                 M
                             zdl ∈ {0, 1} .                                                             (12)
These technical constraints are required to describe and ensure consistency of the ReLU values of
the DNN, as described in Bunel et al. (2017) or van Heeswijk & La Poutré (2020). Moreover, to
further bound and efficiently solve the MILP, we introduce the following branching constraints,
which bounds the maximum Hamming distance k between the base action ā and the resulting optimal
action ā∗ , hence, further restricting the neighborhood and consequently the search space (Fischetti &
Lodi, 2003):
                 X                   ′       X           ′            X
                                                                                          −
          k≥            µj (ā∗ − alj ) +         µj (auj − ā∗ ) +            µj (a+
                                                                                    j + aj ),      (13)
                         ′                            ′                          ′        ′
              j:āj =alj                      j:āj =au
                                                      j                      j:ak        u
                                                                                j <āj <aj

               1
where µj = au′ −al′ and
              j      j
                                                                                      ′            ′
                                     −                     −
                  ā∗j = āj + a+
                                j − aj ;          a+
                                                   j ≥ 0, aj ≥ 0;             ∀j : alj < ā∗j < auj .   (14)

We report results for two approaches involving solving the MILP. We solve the MILP using Gurobi
10.00 and report results on the maze environment with an action space size of 212 in Figure 5.
Figure 5a shows the results for solving the MILP during both training and testing (pure MILP) as
well as the results of using DNC during training and solving the MILP during testing only. We refer
to the latter approach as hybrid. First, we observe that if we solve the MILP during both training and
testing, the time limit is reached before convergence (cf. Figure 5a). When using the hybrid approach,
we observe a worse performance compared to DNC. This performance difference between DNC
and hybrid may be explained by the fact that DNC is able to find more distant actions in terms of
Hamming and/or Euclidean distance by means of the SA procedure, whereas the MILP is confined to
the original neighborhood’s bounds. The results indicate that DNC benefits from the SA procedure’s
ability to escape the initial (user-defined) perturbation boundaries in case the best neighbor happens
to be outside them.


                                                           16
               6000


 Total expec
       4000
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

               2000
                 0                   VAC                     LAR             knn             MinMax                            DNC w/o SA               DNC             MP            Hybrid

                      0                             2
                                                   100           4            6     8 10100 12
                                                                     Maze -- 2^12 actions
                                                                                                                                                       14           16
                                                                                                                                        Maze (w/ teleporting tiles) -- 2^20 actions

                                                   80                         Episodes (x1k)80



                          Total expected returns


                                                                                                      Total expected returns
                                                   60                                                                          60
                                                                                                                               40
                                                   40
                                                                                                                               20
                                                   20
                                                                                                                                0
                                                    0
                                                                                                                               20
                                                         0   1       2       3     4     5      6     7                             0      1      2     3 4 5             6      7
                                                                         Episodes (x10k)                                                              Episodes (x10k)

                                      (a) Maze, 12 actuators, pure MILP                                                             (b) Maze, 20 actuators &
                                                 and hybrid.                                                                         teleporting tiles, hybrid.

Figure 5: Average total expected returns during testing for 50 random seeds over the training iterations
in the maze environment, including the performance of MILP and a hybrid approach. The shaded
area represents the 2 standard deviation training seed variance corridor.


C          E NVIRONMENTS

Maze Our implementation follows the implementation as described in Chandak et al. (2019a). We
set the episode length to 150 steps and provide a reward of −0.05 for each move and 100 for reaching
the target. The target, wall, and initial agent position follow the illustration in Figure 6a. Here, the
red dot represents the agent with the actuators, the grey areas are walls which the agent cannot move
through, and the yellow star is the target area. The agent cannot move outside the boundaries of the
maze. Whenever a wall or outside boundary is hit, the agent does not move and remains in the same
state. Action noise was added to make the problem more challenging. On average 10% of the agent
movements are distorted by a noise signal, making the agents’ movements result in slightly displaced
locations. In Figure 6b we report the variation of the maze environment, wherein the agent starts in
the lower right corner, receives a reward of +100 when reaching the target, a reward of -0.05 for each
step, and a reward of -20 when entering the teleporting tile (grey rectangle in the middle). When
entering the teleporting tile the agent’s position is reset to the lower right corner. This environment
has the same action noise as in the original maze environment.


                                     (a) Maze with wall.                                                                       (b) Maze with teleporting tile in the middle.

                                                             Figure 6: Illustration of the maze environment.



Inventory Replenishment We mostly follow the implementation as detailed in Vanvuchelen
et al. (2022), wherein they consider a retailer managing uncertain demand for different items in its
warehouse. Compared to them, we run shorter episodes to decrease the computational burden. The
costs per item i ∈ I are as follows: holding costs hi = 1, backorder costs bi = 19, ordering costs
oi = 10 and the common order costs are O = 75. The order-up-to levels are set to the range [0, 66].
We sample the demand rate from the Poisson distribution, with half of the items having a demand rate
of λi = 10, and the other half of the items λi = 20. We initialize all inventory levels to 25. Every


                                                                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


episode comprises 100 timesteps. The reward function can be denoted by:
                              N
                              X
                                        +         −

                       Rt =         hi Ii,t + bi Ii,t + oi ai + O1{PN                ,                (15)
                                                                      i=1 qi,t >0}
                              i=1
        +        −
where Ii,t and Ii,t indicate all positive and negative stock levels, respectively. 1{PN qi,t >0} is the
                                                                                      i=1
indicator function that indicates if at least one product is ordered.

Job-shop scheduling Each machine i has a different energy consumption per job. Whenever the
number of jobs on a machine is higher than 75% or lower than 50% of L (the maximum number of
jobs per machine) the machine’s deterioration factor wi is increased or reduced, respectively. The
deterioration factor directly impacts the efficiency of machines, and hence, it affects the energy
consumption per job. We consider the increase in deterioration to be caused by wear, i.e., over-use,
and the reduction of the deterioration to be achieved through machine repair, which are only possible
when the utilization of the machine is low. Deterioration and repairs are stochastic and drawn from
a uniform distribution. Deterioration causes an increase of the deterioration factor, bounded by
∆wi ∈ [0.05, 0.4]. Repair causes a decrease in deterioration factor, ∆wi ∈ [−0.4, −0.05]. The
deterioration factor wi is multiplied by the energy consumption bi to obtain the energy consumption
per job. The deterioration factor wi of all machines is 1.0 in the first time step, and can never drop
below 1.0 through repairs. We bound the energy consumption per machine by M . The reward
function is given by:
                                    N
                                    X
                            Rt =        (ai p − min{ai bi wi , M }) − σ(a),                        (16)
                                    i=1
where ai are the number of jobs allocated to machine i, p is the reward for each finished job, and
σ(a) is the load-balancing reward that provides a negative reward for an unbalanced allocation using
the standard deviation of the allocated jobs to machines. We set the reward factors to p = 3 and
M = 100. The value of L is 100. We sample the energy consumption bi per machine from the
uniform distribution, with bounds [1.0, 2.0]. The results in the paper correspond to a problem with
N = 5 machines.

D    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Integration of DNC in an actor-critic algorithm Algorithm 2 details the integration of DNC into
an actor-critic reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm. Specifically, we initialize the network weights
w and θ of the critic and actor respectively (l.1), and set hyperparameters such as the Gaussian σ and
the critic- and actor learning rates αcr and αac (l.2). After initializing a state s (l.4), we loop through
each time step of an episode (l.5). We obtain a continuous action â by sampling it from πθ according
to the learned µθ and σ of a Gaussian distribution and the hyperparameter θ (l.6). Next, we obtain
a discrete action ā∗ by applying DNC (l.7), whose details are provided in Algorithm 1 in the main
body of the paper. We then apply ā∗ to the environment, observe reward r and next state s′ (l.8).
                                                                                             ′
We obtain the next state’s continuous action â′ (l.9) and then its discrete action ā∗ (l.10). Using
losses based on the observed TD-error (l.11), we update critic (l.12) and actor (l.13) weights. Note
                                                          ′
that we use both â and a TD-error based on ā∗ and ā∗ , hence using slightly off-policy information
to compute the actor loss. However, since in practice DNC does not move far away from â, using
off-policy information in the actor weight update does not heavily impact on learning stability.

Details on the Neural Network Architecture When applying a deep network architecture, we
use two hidden layers with ReLU activation functions for both actor and critic for DNC and all
benchmarks. In Section F we provide further details for the architecture per environment. For all
environments, we use a tanh output layer for the actor and do not bound the output of the critic.
We train the actor and critic based on the stochastic gradient descent algorithm implemented in
PyTorch and use a Huber loss to train the critic and ensure stable weight updates.

Other Implementation Details We employ a discretization function g(â) to obtain a discrete base
action ā from the continuous action â.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Actor critic pseudo-code with DNC.
 1: Initialize network weights w, θ
 2: Set hyperparameters: σ, αcr , αac
 3: for each episode do
 4:     Initialize s
 5:     for each time step t do
 6:          â ← πθ (s) (based on σ)
 7:          ā∗ = DNC(â) (see Algorithm 1)
 8:          Apply ā∗ to environment, observe reward r, and successor state s′
 9:          â′ ← πθ (s′ ) (based on σ)
                 ′
10:          ā∗ = DNC(â′ )
                                 ′
11:          δ = r + γ Q(s′ , ā∗ , w) − Q(s, ā∗ , w)
12:          w ← w − αcr ∇w δ
13:          θ ← θ + αac δ ∇θ log πθ (s, â)


                                 clip(â) − cmin
                         g(â) =                 · (amax − amin ) + amin
                                  cmax − cmin
with
                                            
                                            cmin ,     if â < cmin ,
                                  clip(â) = cmax ,     if â > cmax ,
                                              â,
                                            
                                                        otherwise,
denoting a clipping function, as similar to Vanvuchelen et al. (2022). The discretization function
has multiple hyperparameters that need to be selected based on (i) the output layer activation
function, and (ii) the action dimension. These hyperparameters are cmin , cmax , amin , and amax . Since
the action is sampled from a distribution, an action might overflow and result in non-existent
actions, hence, clipping is required. Each value needs to be set to an appropriate value. We use
cmin = −1, cmax = 1 for clipping, since we employ a tanh activation function for the output layer.
The values for amin and amax are set depending on the environment; we use [0, 1] for maze, [0, 66] for
the inventory environment, and [0, 100] for the job-shop environment.
We represent states across all environments by means of a Fourier basis as described in Konidaris
et al. (2011) and applied in Chandak et al. (2019a). In the maze environment we use a Fourier basis
of order three with coupled terms. For the inventory and job-shop environments, we use decoupled
terms to maintain a reasonable state vector size.

E      B ENCHMARKS
We consider four benchmarks and an ablation: VAC, MinMax (MinMax), knn, LAR, and DNC
without SA. For a full and detailed explanation of the benchmarks, we refer to Sutton & Barto (2018),
Vanvuchelen et al. (2022), Dulac-Arnold et al. (2015), and Chandak et al. (2019a), respectively. Here,
we restrict ourselves to a short description of each benchmark and explain how we embed these
benchmarks in an actor-critic algorithm similar to Algorithm 2.

VAC We employ a standard actor-critic method as baseline. For this method we employ a categorical
policy, i.e., π describes the probability of taking action a when being in state s. We denote the
policy by π(a|s) to emphasize that π is a distribution. VAC’s implementation follows Algorithm 2,
as detailed above, with the only difference that we obtain the discrete action directly from the actor,
instead of obtaining a continuous action and subsequently using DNC.

MinMax The MinMax benchmark uses an actor-critic framework, in which the actor outputs a
continuous action vector and function g is applied in the same way as for DNC. We obtain the
algorithm corresponding to MinMax by exchanging DNC in lines 7 and 10 of Algorithm 2 by g.

knn The knn approach uses an approximate nearest neighbor lookup (Muja & Lowe, 2014) to find
discrete neighbors in the space A based on continuous action â. The mapping function h finds the k


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


nearest discrete neighbors in terms of Euclidean distance:
                                      hk (â) = arg min∥a − â∥2 .
                                                 a∈Ak

After finding k neighbors, the neighbor with highest Q-value is chosen and applied to the environment,
using a similar approximate on-policy rationale as applied for DNC. Note that the critic is only used
to select an action after all neighbors have been generated. In Section F we present different values
of k, over which we search for the best performing hyperparameter setting for knn. To embed knn in
an actor-critic algorithm, we modify Algorithm 2 in lines 7 and 10 as follows: instead of applying
                                                                                                  ′
DNC, we search for the k-nearest neighbors of â and â′ , and, subsequently, obtain ā∗ and ā∗ by
selecting the neighbor with highest Q-value.

LAR To setup the LAR benchmark, we use the code that implements the work presented in
Chandak et al. (2019a) and that was kindly shared with us. In the following we briefly describe the
algorithm. Before training the RL agent, we apply an initial supervised learning process to learn
unique action embeddings e′ ∈ Rl for each discrete action a. We use a buffer that stores state, action,
and successor state transition data to feed the supervised learning model. We set the maximum
buffer size to 6e5 transitions and obtain these transitions from, e.g., a random policy. The supervised
loss is determined using the KL-divergence between the true distribution P(at |st , st+1 ) and the
estimated distribution P̂(at |st , st+1 ), which describe probabilities of taking an action at at time step
t when having a certain state tuple (st , st+1 ). Across all environments, we use a maximum of 3000
epochs to minimize the supervised loss. We note here that the training process always converged
before reaching the 3000 epochs limit. We detail the different sizes of the two-layer neural network
architecture, used in the supervised learning procedure, in Section F. Moreover, note that the size of
e may be both larger or smaller than the discrete action’s size. It is up to the user to determine the
embedding size, hence, it is a hyperparameter whose values we also report in Section F.
Following the initial supervised learning process, we proceed in a similar manner to Algorithm 2.
First, we obtain e from the continuous policy π (cf. line 6 in Algorithm 2). Second, we find
the embedding e′ closest to e based on an L2 distance metric and look up the discrete action a
corresponding to e′ (cf. line 7 in Algorithm 2). At the end of each step of the episode, we update the
continuous representations e′ of a by performing one supervised learning step.

DNC without SA Algorithm 3 details the DNC algorithm without the SA procedure, as used for
our ablation study. First, we obtain a discrete base action ā (l.1) and find its discrete neighbors by
DNC (l.2). We obtain the critic’s Q-values (l.3), and subsequently select the action with the highest
Q-value (l.4).

Algorithm 3 Dynamic Neighborhood Construction w/o SA
 1: Initialize ā ← g(â), ā∗ ← ā,
 2: Find neighbors A′ to ā with Pij
 3: Get Q-values for all neighbors in A′
 4: ā∗ ← A′ , with ā∗ = arg maxa∈A′ Qw (s, a)
 5: Return ā∗



F    H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section, we detail the hyperparameter settings used across the different environments. To this
end, we provide an overview of hyperparameter settings in Table 2 and discuss specific settings that
we use over all environments. N/A indicates that the respective method did not yield a performant
policy for any hyperparameter setting.
We applied a search over the reported set of values in Table 2 (column "Set of values") to choose the
best hyperparameter setting. Note that a value of zero nodes of the critic and actor layer corresponds
to a shallow network. Moreover, we do not report hyperparameter settings for MinMax separately, as
its only hyperparameter corresponds to cmin and cmax , which we set to the minimum, resp. maximum
value of the actor’s output layer as described in Section D.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We study both (i) learning the second moment of the Gaussian distribution, σ, and (ii) setting σ to a
constant value. In Table 2, a † indicates that σ was learned by the actor. We found that a constant σ
often led to faster convergence without performance loss.
The DNC-specific parameters are (i) the neighborhood depth d, (ii) the k-best neighbors to consider,
(iii) the acceptance probability parameter β, and (iv) the cooling parameter c. We do not tune β,
and set it to an initial value of 0.99. The cooling parameter expresses by how much the parameter k
and β are decreased every iteration of the search, in terms of percentage of the initial values of both
parameters. We set k respective to the size of neighborhood |A′ |.

                            Table 2: Hyperparameters, set of values, and chosen values.

                                                                                        Chosen values
           Hyperparameters                  Set of values         Maze       Maze w/ teleport tiles   Inventory   Job-shop
                                            −2    −3     −4            −2              −2                 −3
           αcr (critic learning rate)   {10 , 10 , 10 }               10             10                 10         10−4
           αac (actor learning rate)    {10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 }         10−2           10−2               10−4      5 · 10−5
 Overall


           σ                              {†, 0.25, 0.5, 1}             1              1                  1            1
           # actor NN nodes/layer         {0, 32, 64, 128}              0              0                  64           0
           # critic NN nodes/layer        {0, 32, 64, 128}             32             32                 128          32
 knn LAR


           |e|                           {0.5 |s|, |s|, 2 |s|}         |s|            |s|                n/a         n/a
           # supervised NN nodes               {0, 64}                  0              0                 n/a         n/a
           k                               {1,2,20,100}                2              100                n/a        n/a
           d                                 {1,2,5,10}                1              1                  10         10
 DNC


           k                                {10%,50%}                 10%            10%                10%        10%
           c                            {10%,25%,50%,75%}             25%            25%                10%        10%



G          C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES
Our experiments are conducted on a high-performance cluster with 2.6Ghz CPUs with 56 threads
and 64gb RAM per node. The algorithms are coded in Python 3 and we use PyTorch to construct
neural network architectures (Paszke et al., 2019). For the maze environment, having relatively long
episodes, the average training time was 21 CPU hours. The inventory and job-shop environments
took on average 12 and 10 CPU hours to train, respectively.

H          C OMPLEMENTARY R ESULTS
In this section, we provide complementary results that support the statements in the main body of
the text. First, we present the memory usage and step times of the studied methods over different
problem sizes. Next, we show additional convergence curves and boxplots for the maze environment
which clarify the performance difference between the various methods. We conducted an additional
robustness study with randomized initial agent positions for the maze environment, show evidence
of MinMax’s and DNC w/o SA’s convergence below DNC’s average performance in the job-shop
scheduling problem, and provide exploration heatmaps for the maze environment.

Memory consumption DNC exhibits a consistent memory usage, even as the complexity of tasks
increases, which is beneficial in real-world implementations with limited hardware. Our results,
presented in Table 3, show that while the memory requirements for kNN, LAR, and VAC rise
substantially when scaling from a maze of size 212 (maze with 12 actuators) to 1010 (job-shop
scheduling problem), the memory consumption for DNC remains stable at 68 to 73 MB. The memory
consumption in the case of kNN, LAR, and VAC is driven by the need to set up a matrix containing
all discrete actions. For example, in the case of the job-shop scheduling problem this would be a
matrix with 5 rows and 1010 columns. We obtained the consumed memory using the Python profiler
guppy.

Algorithm step time Figure 7 depicts each algorithm’s step time, i.e., the average duration of
obtaining a decision from the policy and applying it to the environment, within an episode during


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Required MB heap consumed per algorithm for the the maze and job-shop environment. The
action space size is displayed in parentheses in the top row.

                                                     Algorithm                   Maze (212 )                       Maze (220 )                               Job-shop (1010 )
                                                     DNC                            68 MB                             68 MB                                          73 MB
                                                     DNC w/o SA                     68 MB                             68 MB                                          73 MB
                                                     MinMax                         68 MB                             68 MB                                          73 MB
                                                     kNN                            68 MB                            252 MB                                     373,000 MB
                                                     LAR                            68 MB                            252 MB                                     373,000 MB
                                                     VAC                            68 MB                            252 MB                                     373,000 MB


testing. As we apply DNC during both testing and training, the reported step times also apply during
training. Our findings suggest that while SA increases training time, its benefits in terms of search
quality may outweigh these computational costs, especially if the action space is too large for other
neighborhood-based methods to (i) learn at all due to memory restrictions (kNN, LAR) or (ii) learn
less performant policies (MinMax, DNC w/o SA) due to inaccurate mappings. During training, longer
running times are acceptable as the focus is on model accuracy and learning, not speed. In testing
and practical implementation, DNC offers step times in the range of milliseconds to a few hundredths
of a second, hence remaining practical for real-time decision-making. Note that step time metrics
depend on system specifications and may vary with different hardware and software efficiencies.
                                0.0030                                                                                0.0030

                                0.0025                                                                                0.0025

                                0.0020                                                                                0.0020

                                0.0015                                                                                0.0015

                                0.0010                                                                                0.0010
                                                      VAC

                                                            LAR

                                                                     knn

                                                                                  MinMax


                                                                                                                                                          MinMax
                                                                                            DNC w/o SA

                                                                                                             DNC


                                                                                                                                           knn


                                                                                                                                                                                DNC w/o SA


                                                             (a) Maze 212 .                                                      (b) Maze w/ teleporting tiles 220 .                                        DNC


                                                            '1&


                                                                                                                                                 '1&


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '1&
               0LQ0D[


                              '1& Z R 6$


                                                                                              0LQ0D[


                                                                                                                    '1& Z R 6$


                                                                                                                                                                                             0LQ0D[


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '1& Z R 6$


              (c) Inventory 20 items.                                                      (d) Inventory 40 items.                                                                                          (e) Job-shop.

Figure 7: Average step time in seconds in the maze, inventory, and job-shop environment over 50
seeds during testing.


Additional convergence curve To further illustrate the results in the maze environment with
teleporting tiles, we provide an additional graph that shows the convergence curves excluding DNC
w/o SA in Figure 8. As can be seen, the confidence intervals of DNC and MinMax overlap only
slightly, with DNC converging to a considerably more narrow variance corridor.

Testing performance for the maze environment Since the confidence intervals for the maze
domains overlap, it is difficult to clearly observe performance differences. Therefore, we show
boxplots of the total expected returns for the final learned policy, i.e., the policy found in the last
training episode, in Figure 9. If the agent finds the goal, the episode’s total reward is close to 100. If
the agent does not find the goal, it is -7.45, due to the small negative step rewards collected over an
episode. Consider, for example, DNC in Figure 9a, wherein the agent finds the goal in 49 out of 50
seeds and in one seed the agent fails to do so. The failed seed is an outlier. This example explains the
large confidence intervals as shown in the convergence curves. In this example, the standard deviation
already amounts to ≈ 15, even though there is only one outlier.


                                                                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 100          Maze (w/ teleporting tiles) -- 2^20 actions

                                                                 80


                                        Total expected returns
                                                                 60
                                                                 40
                                                                 20
                                                                   0
                                                                 20
                                                                          0         1       2     3 4 5           6     7
                                                                                                Episodes (x10k)

Figure 8: Average total returns during testing for 50 random seeds over the number of training
iterations in the maze environment with teleporting tiles for DNC and MinMax. The shaded area
represents the 2 standard deviation training seed variance corridor.

                  100                                                                             100

                   80                                                                              80

                   60                                                                              60

                   40                                                                              40
                   20                                                                              20
                    0                                                                               0



                                                                                                            knn


                                                                                                                      MinMax


                                                                                                                               DNC w/o SA


                                                                                                                                            DNC
                        VAC

                                LAR

                                      knn

                                                                 MinMax

                                                                               DNC w/o SA

                                                                                            DNC


                              (a) Maze – 212 actions.                                                    (b) Maze (w/ teleporting tiles) – 220
                                                                                                         actions.

      Figure 9: Total expected returns during testing for 50 random seeds in the final episode.


Maze environment with randomized initial positions To test the robustness of learned policies,
we conducted further testing of the final policy in a maze environment featuring random starting
positions. To this end, we used the policies obtained for each seed on the original environment (with
a fixed initial position) and executed these policies over 100 episodes with random initial positions.
We took the average performance of these 100 episodes and again averaged over the random seeds.
The resulting outcomes, detailed in Figure 10, show no significant deviation from earlier results in
terms of performance and variance over seeds, implying that DNC learned a robust policy.

                  100                                                                              100

                   80                                                                               80

                   60                                                                               60
                                                                                                    40
                   40
                                                                                                    20
                   20
                                                                                                     0
                    0
                                                                                                    20
                        VAC

                                LAR

                                      knn

                                                                 MinMax

                                                                               DNC w/o SA

                                                                                            DNC


                                                                                                            knn


                                                                                                                      MinMax


                                                                                                                               DNC w/o SA


                                                                                                                                            DNC


                              (a) Maze – 212 actions.                                                    (b) Maze (w/ teleporting tiles) – 220
                                                                                                         actions.

Figure 10: Total returns during testing for 50 random seeds in the final episode, using random initial
positions.



Convergence for MinMax and DNC w/o SA in the job-shop scheduling problem In Figure
11 we report the convergence graphs of MinMax’s and DNC w/o SA’s average performance in the
job-shop scheduling problem over 80k episodes to provide evidence of their convergence below
DNC’s average performance.


                                                                                                  23
                    Total ex
                               15000
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                               10000
                                                                        MinMax           DNC w/o SA
                                 50000                                           10                20
                                                                           Job-shop -- 10^10 actions
                                                                                                             30    40   50
                                                        35000
                                                        30000
                                                                                                  Episodes (x1k)


                               Total expected returns
                                                        25000
                                                        20000
                                                        15000
                                                        10000
                                                        5000
                                                                0   1      2     3     4     5    6    7   8
                                                                                Episodes (x10k)

Figure 11: Average total expected returns during testing for 50 random seeds over the training
iterations in the job-shop scheduling problem, MinMax and DNC w/o SA only. The shaded area
represents the 2 standard deviation training seed variance corridor.


Maze heatmaps We visually compare policies for the standard maze environment. Figure 12 shows
exploration heatmaps for all methods (excluding the ablation) for the 12 actuator setting of the maze
environment without teleporting tiles. Here, the more frequently a location is visited, the brighter
the color, i.e., from least visits to most visits: black-red-orange-yellow. We note that at the start of
training, the movement of the agent is still random. However, as the policies converge, a clearer path
becomes visible, given the 10% action noise. VAC is unable to handle the large action space and gets
stuck in the lower left corner. knn and MinMax eventually find a comparable policy that reaches the
goal state, albeit the shortest path is not found. It seems that both policies learned to stay far away
from the wall, as hitting the wall often results in getting stuck. Both LAR and DNC found a policy
that tracks more closely around the wall, hence taking a shorter path to the goal state. However, LAR
got stuck at the lower boundary of the grid for a number of episodes, whereas DNC displayed more
productive learning behavior.


                                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Heatmap VAC                   (b) Heatmap knn                (c) Heatmap MinMax


                        (d) Heatmap LAR                     (e) Heatmap DNC

Figure 12: Exploration heatmap over all training episodes of each method for the 12 actuator case.


                                                25
