Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H YPER F IELDS : T OWARDS Z ERO -S HOT G ENERATION
OF N E RF S FROM T EXT

Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review


Figure 1: HyperFields is a hypernetwork that learns to map text to the space of weights of Neural
Radiance Fields (first column). On learning such a mapping, HyperFields is capable of generating
in-distribution scenes (unseen during training) in a feed forward manner (second column), and for
unseen out-of-distribution prompts HyperFields can be fine-tuned to yield scenes respecting prompt
semantics with just a few gradient steps (third column).

                                            A BSTRACT
         We introduce HyperFields, a method for generating text-conditioned Neural Radi-
         ance Fields (NeRFs) with a single forward pass and (optionally) some fine-tuning.
         Key to our approach are: (i) a dynamic hypernetwork, which learns a smooth
         mapping from text token embeddings to the space of NeRFs; (ii) NeRF distilla-
         tion training, which distills scenes encoded in individual NeRFs into one dynamic
         hypernetwork. These techniques enable a single network to fit over a hundred
         unique scenes. We further demonstrate that HyperFields learns a more general
         map between text and NeRFs, and consequently is capable of predicting novel
         in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenes — either zero-shot or with a few
         finetuning steps. Finetuning HyperFields benefits from accelerated convergence
         thanks to the learned general map, and is capable of synthesizing novel scenes 5
         to 10 times faster than existing neural optimization-based methods. Our ablation
         experiments show that both the dynamic architecture and NeRF distillation are
         critical to the expressivity of HyperFields.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in text-to-image synthesis methods, highlighted by the works of Ramesh
et al. (2021); Yu et al. (2022), have ignited interest in achieving comparable success in the
field of text-to-3D synthesis. This interest has grown in tandem with the emergence of Neu-
ral Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021b; Jain et al., 2021), which
is a popular 3D representation for this task, due to their ability to robustly depict complex 3D scenes.

To date, most text-conditioned 3D synthesis methods rely on either text-image latent similarity
matching or diffusion denoising, both which involve computationally intensive per-prompt NeRF
optimization (Jain et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022). Extending these methods to
bypass the need for per-prompt optimization remains a non-trivial challenge.

We propose to solve this problem through a hypernetwork-based neural pipeline, in which a
single hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016b) is trained to generate the weights of individual NeRF
networks, each corresponding to an unique scene. Once trained, this hypernetwork is capable
of efficiently producing the weights of NeRFs corresponding to novel prompts, either through
a single forward pass or with minimal fine-tuning. Sharing the hypernetwork across multiple


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview. Our training pipeline proceeds in two stages. Stage 1: We train a set of single
prompt text-conditioned teacher NeRFs using Score Distillation Sampling. Stage 2: We distill these
single scene teacher NeRFs into the hypernetwork, through a photometric loss between the renders
of the hypernetwork with the teacher network, which we dub our distillation loss.

training scenes enables effective transfer of knowledge to new scenes, leading to better gener-
alization and faster convergence. However, we find that a naive hypernetwork design is hard to train.

Our method, HyperFields, overcomes these challenges through several design choices. We propose
predicting the weights of each layer of the NeRF network in a progressive and dynamic manner.
Specifically, we observe that the intermediate (network) activations from the hypernetwork-
predicted NeRF can be leveraged to guide the prediction of subsequent NeRF weights effectively.

To enhance the training of our hypernetwork, we introduce an alternative distillation-based
framework rather than the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) used in Poole et al. (2022); Wang
et al. (2022). We introduce NeRF distillation, in which we first train individual text-conditioned
NeRF scenes (using SDS loss) that are used as teacher NeRFs to provide fine-grained supervision
to our hypernetwork (see Fig. 2). The teacher NeRFs provide exact colour and geometry labels,
eliminating any potentially noisy training signals.

Our NeRF distillation framework allows for training HyperFields on a much larger set of scenes
than with SDS, scaling up to 100 different scenes without any degradation in scene quality. A
potential explanation for this is that SDS loss exhibits high variance in loss signals throughout
different sampling steps. This instability in the loss likely contributes to the challenge of training
the hypernetwork on multiple scenes.

Once trained, our model can synthesize novel in-distribution NeRF scenes in a single forward
pass (Fig. 1, second column) and enables accelerated convergence for out-of-distribution scenes,
requiring only a few fine-tuning steps (Fig. 1, third column). We clarify our use of the terms
“in-distribution” and “out-of-distribution” in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 respectively. These results
suggest that our method learns a semantically meaningful mapping. We justify our design choices
through ablation experiments which show that both dynamic hypernetwork conditioning and NeRF
distillation are critical to our model’s expressivity.

Our successful application of dynamic hypernetworks to this difficult problem of generalized text-
conditioned NeRF synthesis suggests a promising direction for future work on generalizing and
parameterizing neural implicit functions through other neural networks.

2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Our work combines several prominent lines of work: neural radiance fields, score-based 3D synthe-
sis, and learning function spaces using hypernetworks.

2.1   3D R EPRESENTATION VIA N EURAL R ADIANCE F IELDS
There are many competing methods of representing 3D data in 3D generative modeling, such as
point-clouds (Nichol et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2021), meshes (Michel et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022;
Metzer et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022), voxels (Sanghi et al., 2021; 2022), and signed-distance
fields (Wang et al., 2021; Yariv et al., 2021; Esposito et al., 2022). This work explores the popular
representation of 3D scenes by Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Xie
et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022). NeRFs were originally introduced to handle the task of multi-view


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reconstruction, but have since been applied in a plethora of 3D-based tasks, such as photo-editing,
3D surface extraction, and large/city-scale 3D representation (Gao et al., 2022).

There have been many improvements on the original NeRF paper, especially concerning training
speed and fidelity (Chen et al., 2022a;b; Müller et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021a).
HyperFields uses the multi-resolution hash grid introduced in InstantNGP (Müller et al., 2022).
2.2 S CORE -BASED 3D G ENERATION
While many works attempt to directly learn the distribution of 3D models via 3D data, others
opt to use guidance from 2D images due to the significant difference in data availability. Such
approaches replace the photometric loss in NeRF’s original view synthesis task with a guidance
loss. The most common forms of guidance in the literature are from CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
or a frozen, text-conditioned 2D diffusion model. The former methods seek to minimize the cosine
distance between the image embeddings of the NeRF’s renderings and the text embedding of the
user-provided text prompt (Jain et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Jain et al., 2021).

Noteworthy 2D diffusion-guided models include DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) and Score
Jacobian Chaining (SJC) (Wang et al., 2022), which feed noised versions of images rendered from
a predicted NeRF into a frozen text-to-image diffusion model (Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and
StableDiffusion Rombach et al. (2021), respectively) to obtain what can be understood as a scaled
Stein Score (Liu et al., 2016). Our work falls into this camp, as we rely on score-based gradients
derived from StableDiffusion to train the NeRF models which guide our hypernetwork training.

Specifically, we use the following gradient motivated in DreamFusion:
                          ∇θ L(ϕ, g(θ)) ≜ Et,c w(t)(ϵ̂ϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵ) ∂x

                                                                         ∂θ )
                                                                                                  (1)
which is similar to the gradient introduced in SJC, the key difference being SJC directly predicts
the noise score whereas DreamFusion predicts its residuals. We refer to optimization using this
gradient as Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), following the DreamFusion authors. More recently
following works are directed at improving 3D generation quality (Wang et al., 2023; Metzer et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023), while our focus is on an orthogonal problem of improving generalization
and convergence of text to 3D models.

Connections to ATT3D: We note that our work is concurrent and independent of ATT3D (Lorraine
et al., 2023). We are similar in that we both train a hypernetwork to generate NeRF weights for a
set of scenes during training and generalize to novel in-distribution scenes without any test time
optimization. However also demonstrate accelerated convergence to novel out-of-distribution
scenes, requiring only a few optimization steps. We clarify on our use of terms in-distribution and
out-of-distribution in Sec. 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.

We primarily differ in the input and the application of the hypernetwork. Our hypernetwork
generates the MLP weights of the NeRF, while ATT3D outputs the weights of the hash grid in
their InstantNGP model. We condition our hypernetwork on the text prompt and activations of the
generated NeRF MLP (Sec. 3), while ATT3D is conditioned on just the text prompt.

Finally, ATT3D is built on Magic3D (Lin et al., 2022) which is a proprietary and more powerful
text-to-3D model than the publicly available stable DreamFusion model (Tang, 2022) that we use.
In contrast we plan to open-source our code and trained model.

2.3 H YPER N ETWORKS
Hypernetworks are networks that are used to generate weights of other networks which perform the
actual task (task performing network) (Ha et al., 2016a). Many works attempt to use hypernetworks
as a means to improve upon conditioning techniques. Among these, some works have explored
applying hypernetworks to implicit 2d representations (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2017;
Alaluf et al., 2021), and 3D representations (Sitzmann et al., 2019; 2021; Chiang et al., 2021). Very
few works apply hypernetworks to radiance field generation. Two notable ones are HyperDiffusion
and Shape-E, which both rely on denoising diffusion for generation (Erkoç et al., 2023; Jun &
Nichol, 2023). HyperDiffusion trains an unconditional generative model which diffuses over


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: The input to the HyperFields system is a text prompt, which is encoded by a pre-trained
text encoder (frozen BERT model). The text latents are passed to a Transformer module, which
outputs a conditioning token (CT). This conditioning token (which supplies scene information) is
used to condition each of the MLP modules in the hypernetwork. The first hypernetwork MLP (on
the left) predicts the weights W1 of the first layer of the NeRF MLP. The second hypernetwork MLP
then takes as input both the CT and a1 , which are the activations from the first predicted NeRF
MLP layer, and predicts the weights W2 of the second layer of the NeRF MLP. The subsequent
scene-conditioned hypernetwork MLPs follow the same pattern, taking the activations ai−1 from
the previous predicted NeRF MLP layer as input to generate weights Wi for the ith layer of the
NeRF MLP. We include stop gradients (SG) so stabilize training.
sampled NeRF weights, and thus cannot do text-conditioned generation. Shap-E diffuses over latent
codes which are then mapped to weights of a NeRF MLP, and requires teacher point clouds to train.
Due to the memory burden of textured point clouds, scene detail is not well represented in Shap-E.
Both of these methods have the same limitations of slow inference due to denoising sampling. In
contrast, our method predicts NeRF weights dynamically conditioned on the 1) text prompt, 2) the
sampled 3D coordinates, and 3) the previous NeRF activations.

An interesting class of hypernetworks involve models conditioned on the activations or inputs of the
task-performing network (Chen et al., 2020). These models take the following form: let h, g be the
hypernetwork and the task performing network respectively. Then W = h(a), where W acts as
the weights of g and a is the activation from the previous layer of g or the input to the first layer
of g. These are called dynamic hypernetworks as the predicted weights change dynamically with
respect to the layer-wise signals in g. In the static hypernetwork case, W = h(e) where W is still the
weights of g but e is learned and is independent of the input to g. Our work explores the application
of dynamic hypernetworks to learning a general map between text and NeRFs.

3   M ETHOD
Our method consists of two key innovations, the dynamic hypernetwork architecture and NeRF
distillation training. We discuss each of these two components in detail below.
3.1 DYNAMIC H YPERNETWORK
The dynamic hypernetwork consists of the Transformer T and MLP modules as given in figure
3. The sole input to the dynamic hypernetwork is the scene information represented as a text
description. The text is then encoded by a frozen pretrained BERT model, and the text embedding
z is processed by T . Let conditioning token CT = T (z) be the intermediate representation used to
provide the current scene information to the MLP modules. Note that the text embeddings z can
come from any text encoder, though in our experiments we found frozen BERT embeddings to be
the most performant.



                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition to conditioning token CT, each MLP module takes in the activations from the previous
layer ai−1 as input. Given these two inputs, the MLP module is tasked with generating parameters
Wi for the ith layer of the NeRF MLP. For simplicity let us assume that we sample only one 3D
coordinate and viewing direction per minibatch, and let h be the hidden dimension of the NeRF
MLP. Then ai−1 ∈ R1×h . Now the weights Wi ∈ Rh×h of the ith layer are given as follows:
                                    Wi = MLPi (CT, ai−1 )                                         (2)
The forward pass of the ith layer is:
                                        ai = Wi ∗ ai−1                                            (3)
where ai ∈ R1×h and * is matrix multiplication. This enables the hypernetwork MLPs to generate
a different set of weights for the NeRF MLP that are best suited for each given input 3D point
and viewing direction pair. This results in effectively a unique NeRF MLP for each 3D point and
viewing direction pair.

However training with minibatch size 1 is impractical, so during training we sample a non-trivial
minibatch size and generate weights that are best suited for the given minibatch as opposed to the
above setting where we generate weights unique to each 3D coordinate and viewing direction pair.

In order to generate a unique set of weights for a given minibatch we do the following:
                                   ai−1 =      µ(ai−1 )                                           (4)
                                    Wi =    M LPi (CT, ai−1 )                                     (5)
Where µ(.) averages over the minibatch index. So if the minibatch size is n, then ai−1 ∈ Rn×h , and
ai−1 ∈ R1×h and the forward pass is still computed as given in equation 3. This adaptive nature of
the predicted NeRF MLP weights leads to the increased flexibility of the model. As shown in our
ablation experiments in Fig. 6a, it is an essential piece to our model’s large scene capacity.

3.2   N E RF D ISTILLATION
As shown in figure 2, we first train individual DreamFusion NeRFs on a set of text prompts,
following which we train the HyperFields architecture with supervision from these single-scene
DreamFusion NeRFs.

The training routine is outlined in Algorithm 1, in which at each iteration, we sample n prompts and
a camera viewpoint for each of these text prompts (lines 2 to 4). Subsequently, for the ith prompt
and camera viewpoint pair we render image Ii using the ith pre-trained teacher NeRF (line 5). We
                                                                                              ′
then condition the HyperFields network ϕhf with the ith prompt, and render the image Ii from
     th
the i camera view point (line 6). We use the image rendered by the pre-trained teacher NeRF as
the ground truth supervision to HyperFields (line 7). For the same sampled n prompts and camera
                       ′      ′                                                 ′    ′
viewpoint pairs, let I1 to In be the images rendered by HyperFields and I1 to In be the images
rendered by the respective pre-trained teacher NeRFs. The distillation loss is given as follows:
                                            Pn           ′
                                                  (Ii − Ii )2
                                     Ld = i=1                                                     (6)
                                                   n
We observe through our ablations in Fig. 6b that this simple distillation scheme greatly helps Hy-
perFields in learning to fit multiple text prompts simultaneously, as well as learn a more general
mapping of text to NeRFs.

4     R ESULTS
We evaluate HyperFields by demonstrating its generalization capabilities, out-of-distribution con-
vergence, amortization benefits, and ablation experiments. In Sec. 4.1 and Sec. 4.2 we evaluate the
model’s ability to synthesize novel scenes, both in and out-of-distribution. We quantify the amorti-
zation benefits of having this general model compared to optimizing individual NeRFs in Sec. 4.3.
Finally, our ablations in Sec. 4.4 justify our design choices of dynamic conditioning and NeRF
distillation training.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Zero-Shot In-Distribution Generalization.. During training, the model observes every
individual shape and color, but we hold out a subset of color/shape combinations. During inference,
the model generalizes by generating scenes for the held out combinations zero-shot. For example,
“red chair” is an unseen combination, but the model is able to generalize from individual instances
of “red” and “chair” from training. The faded scenes are generated from the training set, while the
bright scenes are zero-shot predictions of the held-out prompts.


4.1   I N -D ISTRIBUTION G ENERALIZATION

Our method is able to train on a subset of the colour-shape combinations, and during inference
predict the unseen colour-shape scenes zero-shot, without any test time optimization. Fig. 4 shows
the results of training on a subset of combinations of 9 shapes and 8 colours, while holding out 3
colours for each shape. Our model generates NeRFs in a zero-shot manner for the held-out prompts
(opaque scenes in Fig. 4) with quality nearly identical to the trained scenes.

We call this in-distribution generalization as both the shape and the color are seen during training
but the inference scenes (opaque scenes in Fig.4) are novel because the combination of color and
shape is unseen during training. Example: “Orange toaster” is a prompt the model has not seen
during training, though it has seen the color “orange” and the shape “toaster” in its training set.



                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We quantitatively evaluate the quality of our zero-shot               Top-1 Top-3 Top-5 Top-6 Top-10
predictions with CLIP retrieval scores. The support          Unseen 57.1      85.7   85.7   90.4    95.2
set for the retrieval consists of all 72 scenes (27 unseen   Seen   69.5      88.1   94.9   94.9    96.6
and 45 seen) shown in Fig. 4. In Table 1 we compute
the top-k retrieval scores by CLIP similarity. The ta-       Table 1: CLIP Retrieval Scores: We report
ble reports the average scores for Top-1, 3, 5, 6, and       the average retrieval scores for the scenes
10 retrieval, separated by unseen (zero-shot) and seen       shown in Fig. 4. The small difference in
prompts. The similarity in scores between the unseen         scores between the seen and unseen scene
and seen prompts demonstrates that our model’s zero-         prompts indicates that our zero-shot gener-
shot predictions are of similar quality to the training      ations are of similar quality to the training
scenes with respect to CLIP similarity.                      scenes.


Figure 5: Finetuning to out-of-distribution prompts: unseen shape and or unseen attribute.
Our method generates out-of-distribution scenes in at most 2k finetuning steps (row 1), whereas the
baseline models are far from the desired scene at the same number of iterations (rows 2 and 3).
When allowed to fine-tune for significantly longer (rows 4 and 5) the baseline generations are at best
comparable to our model’s generation quality, demonstrating that our model is able to adapt better
to out-of-distribution scenes.

4.2   ACCELERATED O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION C ONVERGENCE
We further test HyperFields’s ability to generate shapes and attributes that it has not seen during
training. We call this out-of-distribution inference because the specified geometry and/or attribute
are not within the model’s training set.

We train our model on a rich source of prompts, across multiple semantic dimensions (material,
appearance, shape). The list of prompts used is provided in the appendix material section D using
NeRF distillation loss. Post training, we test our model on the prompts in Fig. 5. The prompts
are grouped based on whether both shape and attribute are unseen (column 1, Fig. 5) or just the
shape is unseen (column 2, Fig. 5). For example, in “gold blender” both material “gold” and shape
“blender” are unseen during training.



                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since these prompts contain geometry/attributes that are unseen during training, we do not expect
high quality generation without any optimization. Instead, we demonstrate that fine-tuning the
trained HyperFields model on SDS loss for the given the out-of-distribution prompt can lead to
accelerated convergence especially when compared to the DreamFusion baselines.

We consider two baselines, 1) Stable Dreamfusion (S): Publicly available implementation of
Dreamfusion trained from Scratch, 2) Stable Dreamfusion (P): Stable Dreamfusion model
Pre-trained on a semantically close scene and finetuned to the target scene. The motivation in using
Stable Dreamfusion (P) is to have a pre-trained model as a point of comparison against HyperFields
model.

We show out-of-distribution generation results for 8 different scenes in Fig. 5. The inset images
in the upper left of row 1 of Fig. 5 are the scenes generated zero-shot by our method, with no
optimization, when provided with the out-of-distribution prompt. The model chooses the semantic
nearest neighbour from its training data as the initial guess for out-of-distribution prompts. For
example, when asked for a “golden blender” and “glacier knife”, our model generates a scene with
“tiger striped toaster”, which is the only related kitchenware appliance in the model sees during
training. We pretrain the Stable Dreamfusion(P) baselines to the same scenes predicted by our
model zero-shot. The pretrained scenes for Stable Dreamfusion(P) are given as insets in the upper
left of row 3 and 5 in Fig. 5.

By finetuning on a small number of epochs for each out-of-distribution target scene using score
distillation sampling, our method can converge much faster to the target scene than the baseline
DreamFusion models. In row 2 and 3 of Fig. 5, we see that both Dreamfusion(S) and (P), barely
learn the target shape for the same amount of training budget as our method. In rows 4 and 5 of
Fig. 5 we let the baselines train to convergence, despite which the quality of the longer trained
baseline scenes are worse or at best comparable to our model’s generation quality. On average we
see a 5x speedup in convergence. Additionally in Sec. E of the appendix we have a user study
favourably comparing our generation to that of the baselines.

Importantly, DreamFusion(P) which is pre-trained to the same zero-shot predictions of our model
is unable to be fine-tuned to the target scene as efficiently and at times get stuck in suboptimal local
minima close to the initialization (see “yarn skateboard” row 3 and 5 in Fig. 5). This demonstrates
that HyperFields learns a semantically meaningful mapping from text to NeRFs that cannot be ar-
bitrarily achieved through neural optimization. We further explore the smoothness of this mapping
through interpolation experiments in Sec. H of the appendix.
4.3 A MORTIZATION B ENEFITS
The cost of pre-training HyperFields and individual teacher NeRFs is easily amortized in both
in-distribution and out-of-distribution prompts. Training the teacher NeRFs is not an additional
overhead; it’s the cost of training a DreamFusion model on each of those prompts. The only
overhead incurred by our method is the NeRF distillation training in stage 2 (Fig. 2), which takes
roughly two hours. This overhead is offset by our ability to generate unseen combinations in a
feedforward manner.

For comparison, the DreamFusion baseline takes approximately 30 minutes to generate each test
scene in Fig. 4, totaling ∼14 hours for all 27 test scenes. In contrast, after the 2 hour distillation
period, our model can generate all 27 test scenes in less than a minute, making it an order of
magnitude faster than DreamFusion, even with the distillation overhead.

Our method’s ability to converge faster to new out-of-distribution prompts leads to linear time-saving
for each new prompt. This implies a practical use case of our model for rapid out-of-distribution
scene generation in a real world setting. As shown in Fig. 5, the baseline’s quality only begins to
match ours after 3-5x the amount of training time.
4.4 A BLATIONS
The main contribution in our Dynamic Hypernetwork architecture is that the weights of the ith layer
of the NeRF are generated as not only as a function of prompt but also as a function of activations
from the (i − 1)th layer. We show that using the activations from the previous layer in generating


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Dynamic Hypernet Packing. Without dynamic condi-            (b) NeRF Distillation. We compare our pack-
tioning (“Static Hypernet”), the hypernetwork packing ability   ing results when training the model from Fig. 4
is highly limited. We show 4 scenes packed using SDS, and       with score distillation (“No NeRF Distillation”)
the static hypernet collapses the origami/glacier attributes    versus our NeRF distillation method (“Ours”).
and stained glass/plaid attributes.                             The iterative optimization of score distillation
                                                                causes similar objects such as pot and vase to
                                                                be guided towards the same common geometry.


subsequent weights is crucial. Without it our model’s ability to pack multiple scenes is heavily
reduced. In Fig. 6a row 2 (“Without Dynamic Hypernetwork”), shows that even in the simple case
of 4 scenes the version of the hypernetwork which does not use previous activations for predicting
the NeRF weights collapses the “glacier” and “origami” styles together and the “plaid” and “stained
glass” styles together.

If we attempt to pack the dynamic hypernetwork using just Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) from
DreamFusion, we experience a type of mode collapse in which the SDS optimization guides similar
shapes towards the same common geometry. This also hinders the expressiveness of the hypernet-
work and its ability to generate fine-grained, distinct geometry across different scenes. See Fig. 6b
for an example of this mode collapse when attempting to train HyperFields with just SDS (no NeRF
Distillation) over the set of scenes shown in Fig. 4.
4.5 L IMITATIONS
There are a few key limitations of HyperFields. First, the quality of the scenes used in training and
consequently the quality of the generalization scenes is constrained by the quality of the teacher
NeRFs. Any systematic artifacts in the teacher NeRFs will be learned by the hypernetwork. Second,
the dynamic hypernetwork while allows for flexibility in representation of various scenes consumes
a large amount of GPU RAM making our model trainable only on 48GB or hihger GPU RAMs.
Finally, our model cannot generate scenes zero-shot without any optimization in an open vocabulary
setting, and this is an interesting avenue for future research.

5    C ONCLUSION
We present HyperFields, a novel framework for generalized text-to-NeRF synthesis, which can pro-
duce individual NeRF networks in a single feedforward pass. Our results highlight a promising step
in learning a general representation of semantic scenes. Our novel dynamic hypernetwork architec-
ture coupled with NeRF distillation learns an efficient mapping of text token inputs into a smooth
and semantically meaningful NeRF latent space. Our experiments show that with this architecture
we are able to fit over 100 different scenes in one model, and predict high quality unseen NeRFs
either zero-shot or with a few finetuning steps. Comparing to existing work, our ability to train on
multiple scenes greatly accelerates convergence of novel scenes. We plan on publishing our code
and trained model shortly with an ArXiv release. In future work we would like to explore the possi-
bility of generalizing the training and architecture to achieving zero-shot open vocabulary synthesis
of NeRFs and other implicit 3D representations.

R EFERENCES
Yuval Alaluf, Omer Tov, Ron Mokady, Rinon Gal, and Amit H. Bermano. Hyperstyle: Stylegan
  inversion with hypernetworks for real image editing, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2111.15666. 3
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance
  fields, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09517. 3
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance
  fields, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09517. 3
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation, 2023. 3
Yinpeng Chen, Xiyang Dai, Mengchen Liu, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and Zicheng Liu. Dynamic
  convolution: Attention over convolution kernels. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11030–11039, 2020. 4
Pei-Ze Chiang, Meng-Shiun Tsai, Hung-Yu Tseng, Wei-sheng Lai, and Wei-Chen Chiu. Stylizing
  3d scene via implicit representation and hypernetwork, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2105.13016. 3
Ziya Erkoç, Fangchang Ma, Qi Shan, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. HyperDiffusion: Generat-
  ing Implicit Neural Fields with Weight-Space Diffusion, March 2023. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2303.17015. arXiv:2303.17015 [cs]. 3
Stefano Esposito, Daniele Baieri, Stefan Zellmann, André Hinkenjann, and Emanuele Rodolà. Kilo-
  neus: A versatile neural implicit surface representation for real-time rendering, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10885. 2
Kyle Gao, Yina Gao, Hongjie He, Dening Lu, Linlin Xu, and Jonathan Li. Nerf: Neural radiance
  field in 3d vision, a comprehensive review, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.
  00379. 2, 3
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106, 2016a.
  3
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks, 2016b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1609.09106. 1
Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Avatarclip:
  Zero-shot text-driven generation and animation of 3d avatars. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 41(4):1–19, 2022. 2
Ajay Jain, Matthew Tancik, and Pieter Abbeel. Putting nerf on a diet: Semantically consistent few-
  shot view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 5885–5894, October 2021. 1, 3
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T. Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. 2022. 1, 3
Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. Shap-E: Generating Conditional 3D Implicit Functions, May 2023.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02463. arXiv:2305.02463 [cs]. 3
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10440, 2022. 1, 3
Qiang Liu, Jason D. Lee, and Michael I. Jordan. A kernelized stein discrepancy for goodness-of-fit
  tests and model evaluation, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03253. 3
Jonathan Lorraine, Kevin Xie, Xiaohui Zeng, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Towaki Takikawa, Nicholas Sharp,
  Tsung-Yi Lin, Ming-Yu Liu, Sanja Fidler, and James Lucas. Att3d: Amortized text-to-3d object
  synthesis. arXiv, 2023. 3
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2211.07600. 2


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12663–12673, 2023. 3
Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and Rana Hanocka. Text2mesh: Text-driven
  neural stylization for meshes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03221, 2021. 2
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934. 1, 2
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4):102:1–102:15, July
  2022. doi: 10.1145/3528223.3530127. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.
  3530127. 3, 13
Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system
  for generating 3d point clouds from complex prompts, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2212.08751. 2
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.
  07871. 3
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14988. 1, 2, 3
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020. 3
Nasim Rahaman, Aristide Baratin, Devansh Arpit, Felix Draxler, Min Lin, Fred A. Hamprecht,
  Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. On the spectral bias of neural networks. 2018. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.1806.08734. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.08734. 13
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2102.12092. 1
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021. 3
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sal-
  imans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image dif-
  fusion models with deep language understanding, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2205.11487. 3
Aditya Sanghi, Hang Chu, Joseph G Lambourne, Ye Wang, Chin-Yi Cheng, and Marco Fumero.
  Clip-forge: Towards zero-shot text-to-shape generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02624, 2021.
  2
Aditya Sanghi, Rao Fu, Vivian Liu, Karl Willis, Hooman Shayani, Amir Hosein Khasahmadi, Sri-
  nath Sridhar, and Daniel Ritchie. Textcraft: Zero-shot generation of high-fidelity and diverse
  shapes from text, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01427. 2
Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1906.01618. 3
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien N.P. Martel, Alexander W. Bergman, David B. Lindell, and Gordon Wet-
  zstein. Implicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
  3


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, William T. Freeman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Fredo Du-
  rand. Light field networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02634. 3


Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast con-
  vergence for radiance fields reconstruction, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.
  11215. 3


Jiaxiang Tang.            Stable-dreamfusion:      Text-to-3d      with   stable-diffusion,    2022.
   https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion. 3, 13


Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A. Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation, 2022. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2212.00774. 2, 3


Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus:
  Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10689. 2


Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023. 3, 15


Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany, Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico
  Tombari, James Tompkin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in visual comput-
  ing and beyond, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.11426. 2


Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. Volume rendering of neural implicit surfaces,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12052. 2


Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoctrees for real-
  time rendering of neural radiance fields, 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.
  14024. 3


Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelNeRF: Neural radiance fields
  from one or few images. In CVPR, 2021b. 1


Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana Parekh, Xin
   Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich
   text-to-image generation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10789. 1


Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten
  Kreis. Lion: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation, 2022. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2210.06978. 2


Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-voxel
  diffusion, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03670. 2


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    M ODEL D ETAILS
Baselines: Our baseline is 6 layer MLP with skip connections every two layers. The hidden di-
mension is 64. We use an open-source re-implementation Tang (2022) of DreamFusion as both our
baseline model and architecture predicted by HyperFields, because the original DreamFusion works
relies on Google’s Imagen model which is not open-source. Unlike the original DreamFusion, the
re-implementation uses Stable Diffusion (instead of Imagen). We use Adam with a learning rate of
1e-4, with an epoch defined by 100 gradient descent steps.
HyperFields: The architecture is as described in Figure 2 in the main paper. The dynamic hyper-
network generates weights for a 6 layer MLP of hidden dimension 64. The transformer portion of
the hypernetwork has 6 self-attention blocks, each with 12 heads with a head dimension of 16. We
condition our model with BERT tokens, though we experiment with T5 and CLIP embeddings as
well with similar but marginally worse success. Similar to the baseline we use Stable Diffusion for
guidance, and optimize our model using Adam with the a learning rate of 1e-4. We will release
open-source code of our project in a future revision of the paper.
We use the multiresolution hash grid developed in InstantNGP Müller et al. (2022) for its fast in-
ference with low memory overhead, and sinusoidal encodings γ to combat the known spectral bias
of neural networks (Rahaman et al., 2018). The NeRF MLP has 6 layers (with weights predicted
by the dynamic hypernetwork), with skip connections every two layers. The dynamic hypernetwork
MLP modules are two-layer MLPs with ReLU non-linearities and the Transformer module has 6
self-attention layers. Furthermore, we perform adaptive instance normalization before passing the
activations into the MLP modules of the dynamic hypernetwork and also put a stop gradient operator
on the activations being passed into the MLP modules (as in figure 3).

B    PACKING


Figure 7: Prompt Packing. Our dynamic hypernetwork is able to pack 9 different objects across 12
different prompts for a total of 108 scenes. Dynamic hypetnetwork coupled with NeRF distillation
enables packing these scenes into one network.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Fine-Tuning In-Distribution: seen shape, seen attribute, unseen combination. During
training, the model observes every shape and color, but some combinations of shape and attribute
remain unseen. During inference, the model generalizes by generating scenes that match prompts
with previously unseen combinations of shape and attribute, with small amount of finetuning (atmost
1k steps).


Figure 9: Generalization Comparison. We train a single HyperFields model and compare Sta-
ble DreamFusion. “Stable DreamFusion (F)” indicates finetuning from an initialized DreamFusion
model. “Stable DreamFusion (S)” indicates the DreamFusion model trained from scratch. Zero-shot
results and initializations are shown in the upper left of “Ours” and “Stable DreamFusion (F)”, re-
spectively. Above each column indicates the number of training epochs for each method add figures
in the upper left.


C    I N -D ISTRIBUTION G ENERALIZATION WITH C OMPLEX P ROMPTS
For additional attributes (“plaid”, “Terracotta” etc.), our model produces reasonable zero-shot pre-
dictions, and after fewer than 1000 steps of finetuning with SDS is able to produce unseen scenes
of high quality. We show these results in Fig. 8 with 8 objects and 4 styles, where 8 shape-style
combinational scenes are masked out during training (opaque scenes in Fig. 8).

D    O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION C ONVERGENCE
In Fig 5 we show the inference time prompts and the corresponding results. Here we provide the
list of prompts used to train the model: “Stained glass chair”, “Terracotta chair”, “Tiger stripes
chair”, “Plaid toaster”, “Terracotta toaster”, “Tiger stripes toaster”, “Plaid bowl”, “Terracotta bowl”,
“Tiger stripes bowl”, “Stained glass couch”, “Plaid couch”, “Tiger stripes couch”, “Stained glass
pot”, “Terracotta pot”, “Tiger stripes pot”, “Stained glass vase”, “Plaid vase”, “Tiger stripes vase”,
“Stained glass table”, “Plaid table”, “Terracotta table”.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: BERT Token Interpolation. We show results of interpolating the BERT tokens corre-
sponding to the prompts “yellow chair” and “purple chair”. In contrast, interpolation on the level of
the hypernetwork (“HyperNet”) is smoother than interpolating the BERT tokens.


Since the training prompts dont contain shapes such as “Blender”, “Knife”, “Skateboard”, “Shoes”,
“Strawberry”, “Lamppost”, “Teapot” and attributes such as “Gold”, “Glacier”, “Yarn”, “Victorian”,
we term the prompts used in Fig 5 as out-of-distribution prompts–as the model does not see these
shapes and attributes during training.

E    U SER S TUDY
In order to get a quantitative evaluation of our generation quality for the out-of-distribution prompts
we conduct a human study where we ask participants to rank the render that best adheres to the
given prompt in descending order (best render is ranked 1). We compare our method’s generation
with 33 different DreamFusion models. 1 is trained from scratch and the other 32 are finetuned from
checkpoints corresponding to the prompts in section D. Of these 33 models we pick the best model
for each of the out-of-distribution prompts, so the computational budget to find the best baseline for
a given prompt is almost 33x that our of method. Note each of these models, including ours, are
trained for the same number of steps. We report average user-reported rank for our method and the
average best baseline chosen for each prompt in Tab. 2. We outrank the best DreamFusion baseline
consistently across all our out-of-distribution prompts.

                             Golden Yarn      Yarn      Plaid     Plaid      Strawberry
             Model
                             Blender Shoes Skateboard Skateboard Lamppost with tiger stripes
       Our Method (↓)         1.30 1.07       1.32       1.29      1.36          1.12
Best DreamFusion Baseline (↓) 2.50 2.40       2.33       1.75      2.0           2.25

Table 2: Average User-Reported Ranks (N=450): We report the average rank submitted by all
users for our method, and compute the average rank for all 33 of the baselines. We report the
average rank of the best performing baseline for each prompt. Our method is consistently preferred
over the best baseline, despite the best baseline consuming 33x more computational resources than
our method to find.


F    BERT T OKEN I NTERPOLATION
Another option for interpolation is to interpolate the input BERT embeddings fed in the our Dynamic
HyperNet. We show results in Fig. 10 where we interpolate across two chair colors in a Dynamic
HyperNet trained on only chair colors. The interpolation is highly non-smooth, with a single inter-
mediate color shown at δ = 0.4 and discontinuities on either end at δ − 0.3 and δ = 0.5. On the
other hand, our HyperNet token interpolation shown in Figure 10 demonstrates a smooth and grad-
ual transition of colors across the interpolation range. This demonstrates that our HyperNet learns a
smoother latent space of NeRFs than the original BERT tokens correspond to.

G    H YPER F IELDS WITH P ROFLIC D REAMER T EACHERS
We demonstrate that HyperFields is capable of learning several high quality scenes with complex
prompts. Following the training pipeline in Fig. 2, in stage 1 we first train a separate Prolific Dreamer
model for each of prompt we want the HyperFields model to learn (Wang et al., 2023). After
training the separate Prolific Dreamer model, in stage 2 we use them as teacher model and train our


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Distilling Prolific Dreamer into HyperFields: Demonstrates that HyperFields can
be made to learn high quality complex scenes simply by using better teacher model like Prolific
Dreamer.


HyperFields model by distilling the teacher Prolific Dreamer into HyperFields. Consequently, we
see that HyperFields is able to learn several high quality complex scenes. In Fig. 11, we show a
handful of the several scenes learned by a single HyperFields model.
In addition to the scenes in Fig. 11, we show 30 more scenes learned by a single HyperFields model
in Fig. 12. We train a single HyperFields model to learn in total 50+ scenes (we show 38 of those
scenes Fig. 11, Fig. 12)

H        A DDITIONAL A BLATION ON DYNAMIC H YPERNETWORK
We train both the model used in figure 13 simultaneously on prompts ‘Wooden Table’ and ‘Origami
Chair’, we see that our model easily learns to generate both these scenes, while the model without
the dynamic hypernetwork suffers from lack flexibility and consequently make the geometries of the
‘Wooden table’ and ‘Origami Chair’ similar.

I        A LGORITHM FOR TRAINING H YPER F IELDS
                           Algorithm 1: Training HyperFields with NeRF Distillation

Require: T = {T1 , T2 , · · · TN }                                                          ▷ Set of text prompts
Require: C                                                                           ▷ Set of Camera view points
Require: θ1 , θ2 , · · · θN                                                                  ▷ pre-trained NeRFs
Require: ϕHF                                                                   ▷ Randomly initialized HyperFields
Require: R                                                                     ▷ Differentiable renderer function
 1: for each step do
 2:     Tl , Tm ,Tn ∼ T                                                            ▷ Sample text prompts from T
 3:     for Ti ∈ {Tl , Tm ,Tn } do
 4:         Ci ∼ C
 5:         Ii = R(θi (Ci ))                                         ▷ ith nerf renders image for given camera Ci
               ′
    6:      Ii = R(ϕHF (Ti , Ci ))                                              ▷ Condition ϕHF on ith prompt
                               ′ 2
    7:       Li = (Ii − Ii )
    8:    end for
    9:
                    P
          Ld =            Li
                   i∈{l,m,n}
10: end for

J        A DDITIONAL O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION R ESULTS
To add more variability to our OOD (out-of-distribution) results from Fig. 5 we add animal prompts.
We consider ‘wooden squirrel’ and ‘squirrel playing flute’, for both these prompts the geometry


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Additional Prolific Dreamer scenes distilled into HyperFields: depicting various
complex poses of animals, thereby underscoring the ability of a single HyperFields model to learn
multiple complex scenes.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Ablation over dynamic hypernetwork: We see that our dynamic hypernetwork can
generate origami chair and wooden table, while when trained without our dynamic hypernetwork
the model suffers from mode collapse and makes the origami chair have a geometry similar to the
wooden table.


Figure 14: Ablation over dynamic hypernetwork: We see that our dynamic hypernetwork can
generate origami chair and wooden table, while when trained without our dynamic hypernetwork
the model suffers from mode collapse and makes the origami chair have a geometry similar to the
wooden table.


generated by HyperFields seems to be better than the StableDreamFusion outputs in our opinion.
The corresponding renders are in Fig 14. These prompts are OOD because the model has not seen
the attribute wooden and playing flute in its training set. We optimize our HyperFields model using
SDS loss.


                                                18
