Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UAL E VAL : Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION FOR M ODEL
I MPROVEMENT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Quantitative evaluation metrics have played a central role in measuring the
         progress of natural language systems (NLP) systems like large language models
         (LLMs) thus far, but they come with their own weaknesses. Given the complex
         and intricate nature of real-world task, a simple scalar to quantify and compare
         models is a gross trivialization of model behavior that ignores its idiosyncrasies.
         As a result, scalar evaluation metrics like accuracy make the actual model im-
         provement process an arduous one. It currently involves a lot of manual effort
         which includes analyzing a large number of data points and making hit-or-miss
         changes to the training data or setup. This process is even more excruciating
         when this analysis needs to be performed on a cross-product of multiple models
         and datasets. In this work, we address the shortcomings of quantitative metrics by
         proposing our method Q UAL E VAL, which enables automated qualitative evalua-
         tion as a vehicle for model improvement. Q UAL E VAL provides a comprehensive
         dashboard with fine-grained analysis and human-readable insights to improve the
         model. We show that utilizing the dashboard generated by Q UAL E VAL improves
         performance by up to 12% relatively on a variety of datasets, thus leading to agile
         model development cycles both on open-source and closed-source models and on
         a variety of setups like fine-tuning and in-context learning. In essence, Q UAL E-
         VAL serves as an automated data-scientist-in-a-box. Given the focus on critiquing
         and improving current evaluation metrics, our method serves as a refreshingly new
         technique towards both model evaluation and improvement.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The recent success of large language models (LLMs) while can be attributed to data and compute
scaling, has also been the result of evaluation metrics that allow benchmarking and comparison of
models. However, multiple experts have pointed out that these metrics are not sufficient to under-
stand the behavior of LLMs and that they are not a good proxy for real-world performance Liu &
Liu (2008); Novikova et al. (2017). While this has created a wave of research work that proposes
evaluation metrics, the epidemic of poor evaluation has worsened. Scalar metrics cannot capture the
nuances of model behavior, thus making model improvement a time-consuming process. This forces
model developers to rely on an army of data scientists and engineers to iterate on models, especially
in real-world settings.
In this work, we use “quality over quantity” as a guiding principle to propose our method Q UAL E-
VAL , which uses qualitative evaluation to address the issues with quantitative metrics. Given a model
that is being developed for a task, Q UAL E VAL serves as an automated data scientist by analyzing
the dataset and the model’s predictions to create a comprehensive dashboard containing fine-grained
analysis of the model’s behavior (Figure 1). The dashboard is accompanied by natural language
actionable insights that can be applied to improve the model. Q UAL E VAL thus significantly saves
the time and effort of the model developers while serving as a comprehensive and faithful evaluator.
Q UAL E VAL’s algorithm can be broken down into three steps (Figure 2): (1) Attribute discovery:
Automatic discovery of domains and sub-tasks in the dataset. (2) Attribute assignment: Utilize a
novel flexible linear programming solver to assign attributes to instances in the dataset and analyze
the performance of the model on different attributes to create a human-readable dashboard. (3) In-
sight generation: Parse the generated dashboard to provide natural language insights that improve


                                                  1
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Sub-task and domain discovery                                           Pro ciency breakdown
                     Sub-tasks                                 Domains                                     Sub-tasks


            Alignment between skill usage                      Domain insights
                                                     The model performs best in Mathematical
                                                     Operations and Sorting, while Conditional
                                                  Statements and Boolean Operations have lower             Domains
                                                   scores. The model also shows good utilization
                                                      of domains such as Tuple Manipulation.


                                                               Sub-task insights
                                                  Highest scores for Generate Python syntax and
                                                      Understand test cases. It displays good
                                                  alignment with the ground-truth for skills Parse
                                                      descriptions and variable assignments.


fi


     Figure 1: Q UAL E VAL goes beyond a single scalar metric and provides a dashboard that helps under-
     stand the model’s performance in a fine-grained manner. The dashboard visualizes the performance
     of the davinci-3 model on MBPP.


     the model. Q UAL E VAL’s end-to-end pipeline is completely automated and requires no human inter-
     vention.
     Q UAL E VAL is task-agnostic and we demonstrate its potency on a wide range of tasks including
     code generation, dialogue summarization, and multiple-choice question answering. Q UAL E VAL’s
     novel algorithm automatically discovers highly relevant domains and sub-tasks, such as “mathemati-
     cal operations” and “sorting” for code generation and “Identify the participants” and “Recognize the
     main topic” for dialogue summarization. Q UAL E VAL’s flexible linear programming solver generates
     highly accurate assignments, with an 84% and 90% accuracy for domains and sub-tasks assignments
     when judged by humans. Taken together, Q UAL E VAL allows the model developer to identify the
     sub-tasks and domains they need to target while improving the model in the next iteration. For ex-
     ample, on the MBPP dataset for code generation, while the model performs well overall, it performs
     poorly on the sub-task of “Implement Algorithms”, which can be quickly caught and fixed.
     Q UAL E VAL’s dashboard is highly interpretable and actionable. We demonstrate that insights from
     Q UAL E VAL can be used to precisely improve the performance of the open-source Llama 2 model
     on the selected domains of a dialog summarization task. For instance, the ROUGE-2 score of the
     Llama 2 model on the “Employment/Professional skills” and the “Career job interview” domains
     increases by 12 percentage points relatively after applying the insights from Q UAL E VAL. This al-
     lows practitioners to precisely target the domains and sub-tasks they want to improve and therefore
     could enable unprecedented agility in the model development lifecycle. We additionally improve
     the ROUGE-2 score of the closed-source curie model from OpenAI by a 10 percentage point rela-
     tively by utilizing Q UAL E VAL’s insights to improve the quality of in-context samples and therefore
     illustrate how practitioners can quickly improve black-box models with Q UAL E VAL. Therefore,
     insights from Q UAL E VAL are faithful and actionable and can be effortlessly exploited for model
     improvement.
     Our contributions are as follows: (1) We propose the first qualitative evaluation framework for
     LLMs. (2) We introduce a novel and faithful flexible linear programming-based algorithm to auto-
     matically and accurately assign attributes to input instances. (3) We demonstrate that the generated
     insights are actionable and useful for agile model improvement.


                                                                2
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        1   Attribute discovery              2     Attribute assignment                      3   Insight generation

                                                                                            Model evaluation dashboard
                                                  d1 d2 d3 d4
                                         …
        Instance       Ground truth
            x1               y1
                                         …
                                                      l11        l12       l13        l14

            x2
             .
                             y2.                      l21        l22       l23        l14
             .                 .
             .                 .

            xk               yk          …            lk1        lk2       lk3        lk4


                   ℰ                                  Flexible LP solver                                ℰ
                                                  N             li,j = 2
                                                                                                The model struggles with
                                                      li,j ≤ 2 |       | pj (1 + ϵ)
                                                 ∑
                        s1, …, sm
        Domains         Subtasks                                                              Mathematical Operations and

        d1, …, dn                                j=1 li,j ≥ 2 |        | pj (1 − ϵ)
                                                                                              Sorting, but manages well with
                                                                                                 Conditional Statements.



    Figure 2: Q UAL E VAL automatically discovers domains and sub-tasks from input data through an
    evaluator LLM, E. Q UAL E VAL then automatically assigns 2 domains and 2 sub-tasks to every
    sample in the dataset by solving a flexible linear program. Finally, Q UAL E VAL generates a compre-
    hensive dashboard and presents interpretable and actionable insights for practitioners.

𝒟
    2       M ETHODOLOGY
    2.1     F ORMULATION

    Quantitative evaluation Quantitative evaluation, which is the standard approach to evaluating
    models, is typically based on averaging the value obtained by using a metric to evaluate instances
    of the dataset independently. Formally, given a dataset D comprising of instances containing inputs
    (xi ) and ground truth outputs (yi ), a proficiency metric M, and a model f , then:
                                                      D := {(xi , yi )}N  i=1
                                                      ŷi := f (xi )
                                                     M : (xi , yi , yˆi ) → R
                                                                        |D|
                                                         1 X
                              Quantitative evaluation =         M(xi , yi , yˆi )
                                                        |D| i=1


    Qualitative evaluation Qualitative evaluation is based on holistically evaluating the model’s per-
    formance in a fine-grained manner rather than relying on a single scalar value. This could include
    plots with breakdown of scores for different domains, unique qualitative samples, and human-
    readable explanations that improve the model. Thus, Q UAL E VAL outputs a detailed dashboard that
    describes the intricate nature of the model’s performance. Formally, let V be the vocabulary of the
    language of the dashboard (here, English) and I be the set of all possible visualizations. Let E be an
    evaluator LLM which generates the dashboard. Then, the output of Q UAL E VAL is given by:
                                                                            N                    ⋆
                                                 E : {xi , yi , yˆi }i=1 → (V ∪ I)

                                                                         N
                            Qualitative evaluation = E {xi , yi , yˆi }i=1


    2.2     Q UAL E VAL : Q UALITATIVE EVALUATION

    Q UAL E VAL consists of multiple steps that help provide interpretable and actionable insights and we
    break them down below.


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Attribute discovery Given the dataset D, Q UAL E VAL uses an evaluator LLM (E) to automatically
discover relevant domains and sub-tasks, d1 · · · dN and t1 · · · tN in the dataset. We refer to these
domains and sub-tasks as attributes. Specifically, we prompt E with the dataset and a task instruc-
tion signifying how to solve the dataset (InstrD ) to generate the attributes (see A.3 for the exact
prompt). Given that datasets can have a large number of instances and LLMs have context length
limits, we iteratively sample k instances from the dataset and repeat the prompting process |D|      k times
to generate a large list of attributes (d1 · · · dM , t1 · · · tL ). To ensure that we choose high-quality at-
tributes, we prune the list of candidates in an iterative process by reducing the size by a factor of
p > 1 in each turn and repeating the process until we have N attributes. In each step, we prompt E
to shrink the list by choosing the best attributes from the previous list of candidates. Therefore, this
iterative scalable procedure allows Q UAL E VAL to discover attributes in arbitrarily large data across
a wide range of tasks, notwithstanding the context window limitations of E.

Attribute assignment Q UAL E VAL performs attribute assignment (d1 · · · dN and t1 · · · tN ) by
scoring the “affinity” or relevance of each instance with different attributes. Let sdomain
                                                                                     i,j    and stask
                                                                                                 i,j
denote the domain and sub-task affinity scores, where i ∈ {1 · · · |D|} and j denotes the number of
attributes ({1 · · · N }).
We use a novel flexible linear programming solver to perform the attribute assignment by ensuring
the following properties: (1) An instance is assigned 2 domains and sub-tasks each so that we can
give concrete insights. (2) The number of assignments to an attribute is proportional to the prior
probability of the attribute. This ensures that rare attributes are not ignored. (3) Choose the assign-
ments with maximum affinity for each instance. We achieve the above wish-list by formulating the
attribute assignment as a linear programming (LP) problem.
Given the affinity scores and the prior probabilities, pi , we assign every sample to 2 domains and 2
sub-tasks. However, we want the assignments to respect the prior probabilities i.e. ratio of the num-
ber of assignments to all the attributes should be equal to the ratio between the prior probabilities.
We enforce this by constraining the number of assignments to an attribute to be pi × |D| × 2.
Let l be the assignment matrix, where li,j = 1 indicates that the ith sample is assigned to the j th
attribute and li,j = 0 indicates otherwise. Let pj be the prior probability of the j th attribute. To
accommodate for the noisiness in an automated method, we make the prior probability constraint
flexible by adding some slack, ϵ × pj × |D| × 2 (ϵ = 0.1), so that Q UAL E VAL has some wriggle
room to change the attribute probability distribution in favor of better assignments. Therefore, to
enforce the prior probability constraint, we sum across the columns of l and constrain the sum to be
between 2 × |D| × pj × (1 − ϵ) and 2 × |D| × pj × (1 + ϵ). To ensure we assign each sample to 2
attributes, we sum across the rows of l and constrain the sum to be 2. We formalize the LP as:
                              N X
                              X N
                                             domain/task
                        max             li,j si,j
                          l
                              i=1 j=1
                                  N
                                  X
                                        li,j = 2    ∀i ∈ {1 · · · |D|}
                                  j=1
                                  N
                                  X
                                        li,j ≤ 2 ∗ |D| ∗ pj ∗ (1 + ϵ) ∀j ∈ {1 · · · N }
                                  i=1
                                  N
                                  X
                                        li,j ≥ 2 ∗ |D| ∗ pj ∗ (1 − ϵ) ∀j ∈ {1 · · · N }
                                  i=1
                                        li,j ∈ {0, 1} ϵ < 1 ∀i, j ∈ {1 · · · N }


 We perform an expert verification of the attribute assignments by sampling 100 samples from the
dataset and asking three machine learning practitioners if both the domain and sub-task assignments
are correct and find that they are indeed correct on average 84% and 90% of the time.
Once we have the assignments, we evaluate each instance using the proficiency metric M for each
domain and sub-task to get M(xi , yi , yˆi ). We use the assignments to breakdown the proficiency
metric by domains and sub-tasks and automatically generate visualizations that help understand the
model’s fine-grained performance.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Prior over categories
                                              7YFXEWOW                                                                 (SQEMRW
                    Implement Math Operations     Generate Python Syntax                                              Sorting               Mathematical Operations
                   Implement Algorithms                                                               Sequence Analysis 6%
                                            7% 13%                                                                      7%               15%
                                        8%                                                              Tuple Manip.
                 Handle Loops/If-Else 8%           11% Variable Assignments                                          7%
                                                                                                     String Manip. 8%                           14% Number Manip.
             Optimize for Efficiency 8%                          11% Parse Description
                                                                                                                         9%
                                        11%                                                         Bool Operations               12%
                  Understand Test Cases           11%                                                                    11% 11%       List Manip.
                                              11%    Handle Data Types                             Conditional Statements      Data Processing
                     Validate Against Test Cases

                                                                Prior over categories
                                                 7YFXEWOW                                                             (SQEMRW
                                Extract relevant details         Identify the participants           Food & restaurant ordering            Employment & professional skills
                    Extract important questions        7%     12%                                   Environmental issues       7%
                                                  8%                                                                     8%             15%
                                                                           Understand the topic           Education
            Comprehend specific statements 9%                       11%                                               8%
                                                                                                                                               14% Career & job interviews
                                                                       11% Recognize main topic   Outdoor activities 8%
                      Summarize concisely 10%
                                                                                                                         8%               11%
                                                 10%             11%                                Food & hospitality                          Social interactions
                                                        10%                                                                    9%    11%
               Understand conversational context                       Recognize roles
                                   Extract key information                                              Leisure & recreation           Work environment



    Figure 3: Prior probabilities of domains and sub-tasks on the MBPP and DialogSum datasets


Measuring sub-task skill alignment For several datasets, predicting the right answer is not good
enough, and producing an answer that uses the same sub-tasks as the ground truth is important. We
call this skill alignment and compute it by measuring the correlation between the sub-task affinity
scores of the ground truth and the model prediction (higher values implying higher skill alignment).

Insight generation Q UAL E VAL then leverages the visualizations from previous stages to generate
useful and actionable insights as a natural language output. We prompt E with the data from the prior
probability, proficiency breakdown, and skill alignment visualizations to generate useful insights
(See A.3 for exact prompt). We integrate all the visualizations and insights into a human-readable
dashboard depicted in Figure 1.


3    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets We evalaute Q UAL E VAL on three datasets: MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) (sanitized), Di-
alogSum (Chen et al., 2021), and MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) (clinical knowledge split). We
use the same evaluation splits as the original papers and use the test splits for MBPP and MMLU
and use the validation split for DialogSum.
Models We use both closed and open-sourced models: curie, davinci-2, and davinci-3 models
from OpenAI and Llama 2 (13 billion chat models (Touvron et al., 2023)). We use a temperature of
0.9 for all models and use 2 randomly sampled in-context samples when prompting curie, davinci-2,
and davinci-3. We instantiate E with the gpt-3.5-turbo model (OpenAI, 2023).
Evaluation Metrics We use the pass@1, ROUGE-2, and accuracy as proficiency metrics for
MBPP, DialogSum, and MMLU respectively.


4    R ESULTS

We systematically present the different visualizations in our reportcard. We first present the at-
tributes (domains and sub-tasks) discovered by Q UAL E VAL, and visualize their prior probabilities.
To holistically understand the model’s performance and identify areas of improvement, we leverage
the attribute assignments generated by our flexible LP solver, li , to visualize the average proficiency
score of the samples assigned to an attribute. Finally, we present a concise natural language output
listing interpretable and actionable insights from the model’s performance.


                                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              GT Domain
                                 Microbiology
                                              Distribution                       QualEval Domain Distribution
                                   Biochemistry                                              Microbiology
                                   Medicine                               Immunology and allergies                       Dentistry
                                                5% 4%                       Diagnostic imaging      6%
                                                                                                        6%
            Social & Preventive Medicine 4%                      Dental                                           21%
                                          5%               32%                                  6%
                        Pharmacology 6%                                       Pharmacology 6%
                            Anatomy 6%                                                                                    9% Dental hygiene
                                                                              Ophthalmology 6%
                                         6%                                                    7%
                            Physiology                                                                                  8%
                                            6%           10%                        Obstetrics                               Dental procedures
                                                 8% 9%         Surgery                               8%           8%
                 Obstetrics & Gynaecology                                                                    9%
                                                                                  Pediatric illnesses                  Dental anatomy/prosthetics
                                       Pathology      Pediatrics                                    Pediatrics


Figure 4: Q UAL E VAL faithfully discovers and scores attributes. We compare the domain priors
discovered by Q UAL E VAL(right) with the ground truth domain annotations (left) in the MedMCQA
dataset and find a high degree of alignment.


4.1   P RIOR OVER D OMAINS AND S UB - TASKS

Q UAL E VAL automatically discovers relevant domains and sub-tasks in the evaluation data and auto-
matically discerns their prior probabilities. Figure 3 presents the prior probabilities of the domains
and sub-tasks in the MBPP and DialogSum datasets We find that the MBPP dataset comprises of a
large set of samples that involve domains like mathematical/numerical operations (29%) and list ma-
nipulation (12%) while domains like sorting (6%) and tuple manipulation (7%) are less prevalent.
Interestingly, Q UAL E VAL captures fine-grained nuances by including closely related yet different
sub-tasks like “Implement mathematical operations” and “Implement algorithmic operations”, giv-
ing practitioners a more nuanced understanding of their evaluation data.
Further, we note that the DialogSum dataset is dominated by samples involving domains like em-
ployment and professional skills (15%) and career and job interviews (14%), while domains like
education and outdoor activities are less prevalent (8% and 8% respectively). Though the hospitality
domain is also frequent, it is listed under two fine-grained domains, “Food and restaurant ordering”
(7%) and “Food and hospitality” (8%), which further highlights Q UAL E VAL’s ability to capture fine-
grained nuances. The evaluation also suggests the dominance of sub-tasks that involve identifying
the participants (12%), understanding and recognizing the main topic (22% ), and recognizing the
roles in the conversation (11%), which are conceptually important sub-tasks for accurately summa-
rizing a daily conversation between two people.

Faithfulness of priors While most datasets do not have ground truth annotations for the domains
and sub-tasks, Pal et al. (2022) introduces a multiple-choice question answering dataset, MedM-
CQA, collected from real-world medical exam questions, and importantly includes domain anno-
tations. We randomly sample 250 questions from the MedMCQA dataset and leverage Q UAL E-
VAL to discover domains and find the prior probabilities. We compare the prior probabilities from
Q UAL E VAL with the ground truth domain annotations from MedMCQA in Figure 4. We find that
the domain priors from Q UAL E VAL are highly aligned with the ground truth annotations (“Pedi-
atrics” (9% vs 9%), “Obstetrics and Gynecology”(6% vs 7%), and “Pharmacology”(6% vs 6%)
and “Microbiology”(4% vs 6%)). Interestingly, Q UAL E VAL splits the “Dental” domain into more
precise domains such “Dentistry”, “Dental Hygiene”, “Dental procedures”, and “Dental anatomy”,
further highlighting Q UAL E VAL’s ability to capture hierarchies and nuances in the data.

4.2   P ROFICIENCY CATEGORIZED BY D OMAINS AND SUB - TASKS

Figure 5 highlights the proficiency of the davinci-3 model on domains like sorting, mathematical
operations, and data processing and on sub-tasks like handling data types, understanding test cases,
and generating Python syntax. Analysis from Austin et al. (2021) also suggests that models on
MBPP perform well on “coding interview” type questions which generally involve data structures,
sorting, list manipulation, and data processing, which aligns with Q UAL E VAL’s output.
 Austin et al. (2021) also suggests that models struggle with samples related to advanced math prob-
lems and samples with multiple sub-problems. This conforms with Q UAL E VAL’s proficiency break-
down which reveals that the model struggles with samples involving the “Implement algorithms” and


                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                          4VSJMGMIRG] F] GEXIKSV]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4VSJMGMIRG] F] GEXIKSV]
                                                                                                        Subtasks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Domains                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Subtasks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Domains
              0.90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8
              0.85


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.7
              0.80
     pass@1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pass@1
              0.75


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Provide accurate information

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Analyze the correct answer choice

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Interpret clinical information

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Identify symptoms/conditions

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Applying knowledge from example data

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Interpret multiple choice questions

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Analyze medical tests

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Recognize key concepts in clinical biology


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Diagnostic tests

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Physiology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Clinical biology


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Anatomy & physiology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Neurology

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Treatment options



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medical procedures

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cell Biology
              0.70
              0.65
              0.60
                            Implement Algorithms

                                                       Variable Assignments

                                                                              Optimize for Efficiency

                                                                                                        Parse Description

                                                                                                                                      Validate Against Test Cases

                                                                                                                                                                              Generate Python Syntax

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Understand Test Cases

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Handle Data Types


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sequence Analysis

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conditional Statements

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bool Operations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tuple Manip.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    List Manip.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Data Processing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mathematical Operations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sorting
Figure 5: Proficiency breakdown for different sub-tasks and domains in the MBPP and MMLU
(clinical knowledge) datasets.

           Alignment between usage of skills                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alignment between usage of skills                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Baseline
           1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Targeted augmentation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Comprehend specific statements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Extract important questions
           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Handle Loops/If-Else
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Implement Algorithms


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Extract relevant details
                                                                                                                                                          Validate Against Test Cases


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Optimize for Efficiency
                                                                                                              Understand Test Cases


           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Extract key information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Identify the participants


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Summarize concisely
                                                                               Variable Assignments
                 Generate Python Syntax


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rouge
Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Recognize main topic                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Distance



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Understand the topic
                                                   Parse Description


           0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.14
           0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.13
           0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Employment/         Career/       Social interactions
                                                                                                             (a)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  professional skills job interview


Figure 6: (Left) Model calibration analysis of the davinci-3 model on MBPP and DialogSum.
(Right) Q UAL E VAL enables precise model improvement on the selected domains. We leverage
insights from Q UAL E VAL to improve the ROUGE-2 of the three domains by ≈ 2 percentage points.


“Variable assignments” sub-tasks and the “Conditional statements” and “Sequence Analysis” do-
mains, which are often leveraged to solve math problems and samples with multiple sub-problems.
Q UAL E VAL is task-agnostic and potent in niche domains such as clinical data. Figure 5 demon-
strates high proficiency of the davinci-3 model on the cell biology and medical procedures do-
mains and sub-tasks related to analyzing and processing medical test data and recognizing key
terms/concepts in clinical biology. However, the model struggles with sub-tasks related to providing
accurate information and analyzing the correct answer choice.


5                A NALYSIS

5.1                             S KILL ALIGNMENT BETWEEN MODEL GENERATIONS AND GROUND TRUTH

While proficiency metrics like pass@k, BLEU, and ROUGE are able to judge the proficiency of a
model, they do not provide insights about model calibration, i.e., whether the model is leveraging
the expected subtasks when generating responses. Model calibration is a unique lens to understand
model performance, as practitioners could understand how the model generates accurate responses
and understand whether the model is generating novel or unexpected solutions.
We therefore measure the calibration of a model by measuring the distance between the affinity
scores of model generations and ground truth responses across different subtasks for samples above a
certain proficiency threshold (set to 1 and 0.14 for the MBPP and DialogSum datasets respectively).
We measure the distance between the affinity scores by measuring the fraction of samples where the
difference between the affinity scores of the generation and the ground truth is greater than 1. A low
distance implies a high alignment between the skills utilized in the model generation and the ground
truth response.
Figure 6 highlights the correlation between model generations and ground truth responses for the
davinci-3 model on the MBPP and DialogSum datasets. The model on average is highly calibrated


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


across most attributes on both datasets barring the subtasks about implementing algorithms and han-
dling loops and conditionals. This therefore entails that either the model uses or excludes loops and
conditionals when the ground truth response excludes or uses loops and conditionals respectively.
We find similar behavior on the DialogSum dataset, where the model is highly calibrated across
most attributes, barring subtasks related to extracting relevant details and important questions.

5.2    Q UALITATIVE S AMPLES

Q UAL E VAL automatically yields re-
vealing and interesting qualitative              Prompt         Write a python function to find
                                                                the element that appears only
                                                                                                  Write a function that takes in a list and Write a python function to count true
                                                                                                  element and checks whether all items booleans in the given list
                                                                once in a sorted array.           in the list are equal to the given
samples. To generate revealing qual-                                                              element.
                                                                def search(arr):                  def check_element(list, element):        def count(lst):
itative samples, we identify sam-                                                                   check_element =                           return sum(lst)
                                                                  n = len(arr)
ples where the affinity scores of the            Ground Truth                                          all(v== element for v in list)
                                                                                                    return check_element
                                                                  XOR = 0
ground truth response and model gen-                              for i in range(n):

eration are not aligned. This results in                             XOR = XOR ^ arr[i]

an automatic way to generate samples                              return (XOR)
                                                                def search(arr):                  def check_element(list, element):      def count(list1):
where the model is not calibrated.                                 n = len(arr)
                                                                                                    flag = True                             c=0
                                                 Output                                             for i in list:                          for i in range(0,len(list1)):
                                                                   for i in range(0, n - 1, 2):        if (i != element):
                                                                                                      if list1[i] == True:
Figure 7 shows qualitative samples                  if arr[i] != arr[i + 1]:
                                                                                      flag = False         c=c+1

from the MBPP dataset generated by                      return arr[i]
                                                                                      break
                                                                             return flag
                                                                                                   return c


the davinci-3 and davinci-2 models.              return arr[n - 1]

The first two examples are generated
from davinci-3. In the first example
(left), the ground truth program uses Figure 7: Qualitative samples from the MBPP dataset re-
XOR to test for uniqueness, while the trieved through Q UAL E VAL.
generation uses a loop to check for
uniqueness. In the second example
(center), the ground truth program uses an in-built Python function to check equality whereas the
model loops through the input to check the condition. Therefore, these examples further validate the
finding in the prior section which suggests that the model is not calibrated for handling loops and
conditionals.
Interestingly, the final example (right), generated by the davinci-2 model, generates a more robust
solution than the ground truth! The ground truth solution assumes that the input is a list of booleans,
while the model generation can accept any list with any data type. The test cases for this sample do
not test for edge cases and therefore the ground truth program is technically correct.

5.3    M ODEL I MPROVEMENT VIA Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION : A CASE STUDY

We use the actionable insights from Q UAL E VAL to improve models on a variety of settings on the
DialogSum dataset. We first leverage insights from Q UAL E VAL to precisely improve the proficiency
on selected domains by fine-tuning a 13 billion parameter Llama 2 model (See A.1) Finally, we
demonstrate Q UAL E VAL’s potential for improving model performance through in-context learning.

Model improvement via fine-tuning For this setting, we try to simulate a real-world use case
by choosing a relatively small training set. We first leverage Q UAL E VAL’s flexible LP solver to
also generate domain assignments for training samples. We choose a base set of 250 training sam-
ples. We then augment the training set by adding 250 samples from the “Employment/Professional
skills”, “Career/job interview” and “Social interactions” domains, with an equal proportion. For
the baseline, we use the same training set but randomly augment the training set with 250 samples.
We then train the off-the-shelf Llama model on both datasets and evaluate the proficiency of the
model on the three selected domains. Figure 6 (right) visualizes the proficiency of the domains for
both datasets and we find that the model trained on the augmented dataset is more proficient on all
the augmented domains, with the ROUGE-2 score improving by ≈ 2 percentage points across all
domains. Therefore, the attribute assignments generated by Q UAL E VAL can be cleverly utilized to
precisely improve model proficiency on selected attributes.

Improved in-context learning In-context learning is an important paradigm for customizing
closed-source black box models. Therefore, selecting the appropriate incontext samples is crucial.


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, practitioners rely on smaller models for faster and cheaper inference, and their often lim-
ited context windows further highlight the importance of selecting high-quality in-context samples.
We leverage Q UAL E VAL to generate high-quality in-context samples for the curie model. Due to
the context window limitation of the curie model and the relatively long instances of DialogSum,
we use a single few-shot in-context sample. We use our evaluator LLM, E, to generate affinity
scores of all domains for the evaluation samples, but we do not use the ground truth generations
for this setting to avoid leaking the ground truth. We also calculate the domain affinity scores for
all training samples and set the most aligned training sample for each evaluation sample as the in-
context sample. Compared to randomly sampling in-context samples from the train set, our method
improves ROUGE-2 by a percentage point (10% to 11%) and demonstrates Q UAL E VAL’s versatility
in improving models across a variety of settings – both fine-tuning and in-context.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Model Debugging/Improvement Prior work has attempted to address the problem of model de-
bugging and improvement. Zhang et al. (2018) propose to evaluate different pairs of models on
separate evaluation splits to understand model behavior. They also generate feature-level impor-
tance scores from “symptom” instances provided by humans. Graliński et al. (2019) introduce a
model-agnostic method to find global features that “influence” the model evaluation score, allowing
practitioners to exclude problematic features. Lertvittayakumjorn & Toni (2021) develop a frame-
work to generate explanations for model predictions to allow humans to give feedback and debug
models. Ribeiro et al. (2020) presents a framework to generate test cases at scale to evaluate model
robustness, but constrains the test cases to be generated from simple templates and lexical trans-
formations. Abid et al. (2022) propose a framework to generate counterfactual explanations for
model errors to enable a better understanding of model behavior. Chen et al. (2023) introduce Self-
Debugging, a method to enable a large language model to debug the predicted computer program
through few-shot demonstrations. While these works provide limited insights into model behavior,
they often require significant human intervention to understand model behavior and do not provide
precise actionable insights for model improvement. Finally, these works are constrained to simple
classification and regression tasks or single domains like code generation and do not provide a broad,
task-agnostic, fully automated framework for model interpretation and improvement for real-world
tasks.

Automatic Evaluation of Machine Learning Models Automatic evaluation metrics, based on
lexical overlap, such as BLEU Papineni et al. (2002), ROUGE Lin (2004), METEOR Banerjee
& Lavie (2005) have helped researchers evaluate and compare models on a variety of language
tasks. Recent work has proposed to use machine learning models to evaluate other machine learning
models. Methods like Zhang et al. (2019); Fu et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2023) use pre-trained
language models to evaluate the quality of generated text and therefore rely more or semantics than
lexical overlap. While these automated metrics have expedited research progress by eliminating
human effort from evaluation, they have limited evaluation to a single scalar metric and therefore
fail to provide a holistic and comprehensive understanding of model performance.

Issues with quantitative metrics Multiple studies have pointed out that quantitative metrics are
not sufficient to understand the behavior of LLMs and that they are not a good proxy for real-world
performance Liu & Liu (2008); Novikova et al. (2017); Reiter & Belz (2009); Liu et al. (2016).
While these studies advocate better quantitative metrics, the focus of our study is to propose a new
framework based on qualitative evaluation.

7   C ONCLUSION
We propose Q UAL E VAL, a qualitative evaluation framework that provides a comprehensive way of
evaluating models with a keen eye on model improvement. Rather than rely on scalar quantitative
metrics that ignore the nuanced behavior of the model, Q UAL E VAL thoroughly tests the model and
provides actionable insights to improve the model iteratively. We show that these insights are indeed
faithful and lead to up to 12% relative improvement. Our work is the first step towards building a
data-scientist in a box for faster model iteration.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
Our work provides a potent way to ensure that certain tasks performed by data scientists can be
automated. While this reduces the burden on them, it is also possible that it reduces the need to have
a very large group of them on a certain project. This might have workforce implications. But the
intention of the study is to show that with the current LLMs, we can improve evaluation by making
it comprehensive.

R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Mert Yuksekgonul, and James Zou. Meaningfully debugging model mistakes us-
  ing conceptual counterfactual explanations. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 66–88. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
  abid22a.html.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with im-
  proved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic
  and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pp. 65–72,
  Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/W05-0909.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models
  to self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.
Yulong Chen, Yang Liu, Liang Chen, and Yue Zhang. Dialogsum: A real-life scenario dialogue sum-
  marization dataset. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP
  2021, pp. 5062–5074, 2021.
Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei Liu. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2302.04166, 2023.
Filip Graliński, Anna Wróblewska, Tomasz Stanisławek, Kamil Grabowski, and Tomasz Górecki.
   GEval: Tool for debugging NLP datasets and models. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop
   BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 254–262, Florence,
   Italy, August 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-4826.
   URL https://aclanthology.org/W19-4826.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Piyawat Lertvittayakumjorn and Francesca Toni. Explanation-based human debugging of NLP mod-
  els: A survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1508–1528, 2021.
  doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00440. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.90.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Chia-Wei Liu, Ryan Lowe, Iulian V Serban, Michael Noseworthy, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle
  Pineau. How not to evaluate your dialogue system: An empirical study of unsupervised eval-
  uation metrics for dialogue response generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08023, 2016.
Feifan Liu and Yang Liu. Correlation between rouge and human evaluation of extractive meeting
  summaries. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, short papers, pp. 201–204, 2008.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jekaterina Novikova, Ondrej Dusek, Amanda Cercas Curry, and Verena Rieser. Why we need new
  evaluation metrics for NLG. In Martha Palmer, Rebecca Hwa, and Sebastian Riedel (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017, pp. 2241–2252. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/d17-1238. URL https://doi.org/
  10.18653/v1/d17-1238.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt, 2023. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Medmcqa: A large-scale
  multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Gerardo Flo-
  res, George H Chen, Tom Pollard, Joyce C Ho, and Tristan Naumann (eds.), Proceedings of
  the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, volume 174 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 248–260. PMLR, 07–08 Apr 2022. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v174/pal22a.html.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for auto-
  matic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA,
  July 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040.
Ehud Reiter and Anja Belz. An investigation into the validity of some metrics for automatically eval-
  uating natural language generation systems. Computational Linguistics, 35(4):529–558, 2009.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy: Be-
 havioral testing of nlp models with checklist. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4902–4912, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Jiawei Zhang, Yang Wang, Piero Molino, Lezhi Li, and David S Ebert. Manifold: A model-agnostic
   framework for interpretation and diagnosis of machine learning models. IEEE transactions on
   visualization and computer graphics, 25(1):364–373, 2018.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluat-
  ing text generation with bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Sumit Agarwal, and Graham Neubig. Codebertscore: Evaluating code
  generation with pretrained models of code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05527, 2023.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   L LAMA FINE - TUNING

We use LoRA to efficiently fine-tune the Llama-13b model. We try two learning rates (2e-4 and
1e-3) and train for up to 300 steps with a batch size of 4.

A.2   M ISCELLANEOUS

We set N to be 15, p to be 4, and k to be 5 in our experiments.

A.3   P ROMPTS USED IN Q UAL E VAL

A.4   DASHBOARDS


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 MBPP

 Given the following examples, What are relevant domains for the following programs? Focus on the example programs BUT be
 general. Structure the response as a numbered list.

  Given the example programs, What are specific ATOMIC sub-tasks a machine learning model need to be competent at for the
 underlying task? Focus on the example programs BUT be general. [IMPORTANT] Do NOT list the overall task as a subtask and be
 GENERAL. Structure the response as: Subtask:. Generate a numbered list.

DialogSum

Given the following conversations, What are relevant domains for the data? Focus on the example data BUT be general. Structure the
response as a numbered list.

Given the example conversations, What are specific sub-tasks a machine learning model need to be competent at for the underlying
task? Focus on the example data BUT be general. [IMPORTANT] Do NOT list the overall task as a subtask and be GENERAL.
Structure the response as: Subtask:. Generate a numbered list.",

 MMLU(Clinical Knowledge)

Given the following examples, What are relevant domains for the data? Focus on the example data BUT be general. Structure the
response as a numbered list.

 Given the example questions and answers on clinical biology, What are sub-tasks a machine learning model need to be competent
at to be a good medical assistant. Focus on the example data BUT be please be general. For instance. [IMPORTANT] Do NOT list the
overall task as a subtask and be GENERAL while being GROUNDED in the example data. Structure the response as: Subtask:
<subtask>. Generate a numbered list.



                                Figure 8: Prompt used for discovering attributes


     Given the input to a language model, Rate to what degree the input belong to each of the following
     domains. Rate on a scale of 1-5, with 5 being compeletely belongs and 1 being not belonging at
     all. \n. [Important] For each domain, format the output as, [Domain 1: <domain>, Score: <score>,
     Evidence: <Evidence for score>] 'n' [Domain 2: <domain>, Score: <score>, Evidence: <Evidence
     for score>] 'n' [Domain N: <domain>, Score: <score>, Evidence: <Evidence for score>]. [Important]
     Make sure to include concrete evidence based on the input to JUSTIFY the score. Remember you
     are an ACCURATE, FAITHFUL, CRITICAL and FAIR judge \n'.'",

     Given the input to a language model, Rate to what degree each of the following subtasks are
     needed to successfully understand and complete the task. Rate on a scale of 1-5, with 5 being
     very used and 1 being not used at all. \n. [Important] For each subtask, format the output as
     [Subtask 1: <subtask>, Score: <score>, Evidence: <Evidence for score>] 'n' [Subtask 2:
     <subtask>, Score: <score>, Evidence: <Evidence for score>] 'n' [Subtask N: <subtask>,Score:
     <score>; Evidence: <Evidence for score>]. [IMPORTANT] Do NOT add '\n' between subtask, score
     and explanation. [Important] Make sure to include concrete evidence based on the input to
     JUSTIFY the score. Remember you are an ACCURATE, FAITHFUL, CRITICAL and FAIR judge \n'.


                                   Figure 9: Prompt used for scoring attributes


                                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     System: Given a holistic picture of the performance of a machine learning
     model, you are asked to summarize the model's overall performance.
    Given the above information, please write a brief summary highlighting important information. Please be
    precise and concise but please be comprehensive.

    A machine learning model is tasked with the following task: {task_instruction}

    These are the {subtasks/domains} for the task: {list of subtasks/domains}

    In the evaluation data, these are the importance scores of the

    Subtask/Domains: {json.dumps(prior probabilities of subtasks and domains)}

    The following scores show how well the model performs on the subtasks/domains:
    {json.dumps(proficiency_scores of subtasks and domains)}

    The following distance demonstrates how much the domains/subtasks are actually used for generating
    the output when they are requried to generate the input. Therefore, a low distance implies that the model
    is utilizing the category when it needs to: {json.dumps(correlation_scores of category)}. [Important]
    Lower distance implies the {category} is leveraged when it needs to be used.


                             Figure 10: Prompt used for generating insights


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Figure 11: MBPP - davinci-2
                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Figure 12: MBPP - davinci-3
                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 14: DialogSum - davinci-2
                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 15: DialogSum - davinci-3
                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Figure 16: MMLU (Clinical Knowledge) - curie


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Figure 17: MMLU (Clinical Knowledge) - davinci-2


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Figure 18: MMLU (Clinical Knowledge) - davinci-3


                                             21
