Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 LMRL G YM : B ENCHMARKS FOR M ULTI -T URN R E -
INFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH L ANGUAGE M ODELS
    Anonymous authors
    Paper under double-blind review


                                            A BSTRACT
         Large language models (LLMs) provide excellent text-generation capabilities, but
         standard prompting and generation methods generally do not lead to intentional
         or goal-directed agents and might necessitate considerable prompt tuning. This
         becomes particularly apparent in multi-turn conversations: even the best current
         LLMs rarely ask clarifying questions, engage in explicit information gathering,
         or take actions now that lead to better decisions after multiple turns. Reinforce-
         ment learning has the potential to leverage the powerful modeling capabilities of
         LLMs, as well as their internal representation of textual interactions, to create ca-
         pable goal-directed language agents. This can enable intentional and temporally
         extended interactions, such as with humans, through coordinated persuasion and
         carefully crafted questions, or in goal-directed play through text games to bring
         about desired final outcomes. However, enabling this requires the community to
         develop stable and reliable reinforcement learning algorithms that can effectively
         train LLMs. Developing such algorithms requires tasks that can gauge progress on
         algorithm design, provide accessible and reproducible evaluations for multi-turn
         interactions, and cover a range of task properties and challenges in improving rein-
         forcement learning algorithms. Our paper introduces the LMRL-Gym benchmark
         for evaluating multi-turn RL for LLMs, together with an open-source research
         framework containing a basic toolkit for getting started on multi-turn RL with
         offline value-based and policy-based RL methods. Our benchmark consists of 8
         different language tasks, which require multiple rounds of language interaction
         and cover a range of tasks in open-ended dialogue and text games.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have demon-
strated remarkable abilities when naturally con-
versing with humans (OpenAI, 2023; 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023; Google, 2023), answering
questions and responding to requests (Shuster
et al., 2022b;a; Qin et al., 2023), and even per-
forming coding tasks (Chen et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2023). Much of these capabilities are en-
abled by learning to emulate humans from large
datasets of text from the web (Völske et al.,
2017; Shuster et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2023),
learning from examples “in context” (Brown
et al., 2020), as well as other sources of supervi-
sion such as instruction datasets (Mishra et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b)
and preference fine-tuning with RLHF (Ziegler
et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). However, Figure 1: Overview of LMRL-Gym: We show
directly applying LLMs in settings that require sample trajectories from two tasks in our bench-
planning or multi-turn interactions reveals cer- mark. In Guess My City task, the agent learns to
tain difficulties. LLMs are not explicitly goal- ask questions to guess the city the oracle is from
directed, as they are not optimized to directly while in the Maze task, the agent learns to make
solve particular tasks, but rather to produce the correct moves based on cues from the oracle.
text that resembles the distribution of human-
provided examples or accords with human preferences (Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a). This can become particularly apparent in temporally extended
tasks, such as multi-turn dialogue (Irvine et al., 2023; , FAIR), complex tool use (Wang et al., 2022a),
multi-step games (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), as well as other interactive applications. In principle,
LLMs should contain the knowledge necessary to succeed in such settings: if the multi-turn interac-
tions center around problem domains that are well represented in the model’s training data (such as
dialogue), well-trained LLMs should already serve as powerful predictive models in such settings.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, leveraging this predictive knowledge to derive effective actions and strategies requires not
just emulating humans, but also planning and optimization.
   Multi-turn reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) in principle offers a path to enable
LLMs to overcome challenges in goal-directed reasoning and planning in interactive, multi-turn set-
tings, including complex dialogue, games, and tool use. We might hypothesize that RL could serve
as a powerful tool for LLM training, not just for training models to accord with human preferences,
but more generally to accomplish tasks in an intentional and goal-directed manner. Text generation
can be viewed as a sequential decision-making process, treating a sequence of tokens as a trajectory.
Many tasks, such as successfully answering questions or eliciting a desired reaction from a user,
can then be framed as optimizing some reward function over these trajectories. However, despite
extensive interest in RL for LLMs in recent years, much (though not all) of the recent research in
this area has focused on “single-step” RL problems, where a single response is optimized for some
quality metric, typically derived from human preference signals (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ziegler et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Anthropic, 2023; Ramamurthy et al., 2023; Christiano
et al., 2023; Casper et al., 2023).
   While some works have sought to apply RL for multi-turn tasks (Singh et al., 1999; Li et al., 2016;
Shah et al., 2016; Kwan et al., 2022), particularly in the domain of goal-directed dialogue (Lewis
et al., 2017; Verma et al., 2022), there has been comparatively little research on actually improving
the underlying RL algorithms and very little head-to-head comparison on the same set of tasks.
This is perhaps unsurprising: it is likely much easier to evaluate improvements to algorithms for
single-turn text generation as compared to multi-turn generation since multi-turn dialogue requires
an interactive evaluation procedure, where there is no established protocol and the “gold standard”
constitutes costly and time-consuming studies with human participants.
   In this work, we aim to address this challenge and make it possible for RL algorithms researchers
to iterate on developing better RL methods for multi-turn language-based interaction tasks, such as
dialogue and games. We posit that benchmarking RL algorithms for LLMs presents a very different
set of challenges and merits a different set of solutions compared to other benchmarks in NLP. While
most NLP benchmarks are based on standard supervised machine learning paradigms, with a train-
ing set and a test set (Marcus et al., 1993; Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003; Socher et al., 2013;
Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019; Williams et al., 2018), RL benchmarks require simulators
that the trained agents can interact with to measure their performance. Until recently, constructing
high-fidelity simulators for dialogue with humans has been exceptionally difficult. However, the
very same LLMs that we advocate to train with RL can offer a solution here, as they can be trained
to emulate human-like dialogue and produce both synthetic datasets and synthetic simulated eval-
uation protocols, where an RL-trained LLM agent “talks” to another LLM provided as part of the
benchmark as a “simulator.” While this approach to benchmarking interactive dialogue has signif-
icant downsides (e.g., the responses of the benchmark LLM might often deviate drastically from
human behavior), we believe that the corresponding upside of enabling accessible benchmarking of
multi-turn RL algorithms provides a compelling solution. We emphasize however that our goal is
not to utilize this approach to benchmark whether LLMs are good at talking to humans, but rather
as a way to test RL algorithms with datasets that are sufficiently difficult and complex so as to gauge
how effective they might be if they were then trained on data from real humans.
   Our proposed benchmark, LMRL-Gym, consists of 8 tasks that each come with an offline dataset
that can be used for offline RL training, and a “simulator” that can be used to evaluate the resulting
agents in terms of their performance on multi-turn interactive tasks. This simulator supports both
evaluation of agents trained with offline RL, and online training. Three of these tasks are Interac-
tive Dialogue tasks designed to simulate real-world interactions with humans requiring information
gathering from humans (20 Questions, Guess My City) and negotiation (Car Dealer). Five of these
tasks are RL Capability Tests designed to isolate specific desirable properties of training RL with
language. In addition to presenting the benchmark tasks and the synthetic data generation system,
we also provide a research framework that provides a toolkit for researchers and practitioners to get
started with multi-turn RL for LLMs. This framework includes implementations of PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017), ILQL (Snell et al., 2022a), and several baseline methods, implemented in an extensible
way designed for future development of tasks, experimentation, and algorithm design.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Datasets, benchmarks, and libraries. Benchmarks and datasets have been an important factor for
driving progress in NLP in domains that include machine translation (Tiedemann, 2012; Bojar et al.,
2016), natural language understanding (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al.,
2020; 2021a; Ramamurthy et al., 2023), and solving math problems (Cobbe et al., 2021). However,
these tasks generally do not involve multi-turn interaction and do not come with rewards, making
them hard to adapt to RL research. For example, the standard for evaluating dialogue agents has been
to run a human subjects study, but this is time-consuming and costly. Some works have proposed
text games for evaluating language-based agents (Hausknecht et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021b;


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wang et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2023). Our aim is to cover a variety of problem settings that reflect
challenges in open-vocabulary interaction in addition to text games. Motivated by successes in using
LLMs to generate synthetic data (Hausknecht et al., 2019; Park et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022b), our
proposed tasks are based on synthetic data. While such data may differ from natural text, the scope
of our benchmark is specific to evaluating RL algorithms, not the ability to interact with humans.
RL for language models. RL for language models has seen success in aligning LLMs with human
preferences (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a;b; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Christiano et al., 2023), optimizing non-differentiable objectives for machine translation (Wu
et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017; Kiegeland & Kreutzer, 2021), generation (Tambwekar et al., 2019;
Pang & He, 2021; Pyatkin et al., 2022), dialogue (Cuayáhuitl et al., 2015; Georgila & Traum, 2011;
Li et al., 2016), question answering (Pyatkin et al., 2022), and summarization (Paulus et al., 2017;
Böhm et al., 2019; Wu & Hu, 2018). These include RL methods that learn by directly interacting
with the environment (online RL) (Carta et al., 2023) and RL methods that only use a static dataset
(offline RL) (Jaques et al., 2020; Snell et al., 2022a; Jang et al., 2022; Verma et al., 2022; , FAIR).
However, many of these works operate in the singe-step bandit setting, and do not consider multi-
turn goal-directed tasks. Our benchmark, on the other hand, focuses on tasks involving multiple
turns of interaction with clearly defined goal-based reward functions.
Capabilities of LLMs. There has been a surge in the capabilities of LLMs for genera-
tion (Ghazvininejad et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019), dialogue (Lewis et al., 2017; Jaques et al.,
2017; Shuster et al., 2022b; Snell et al., 2022b), question answering (Pyatkin et al., 2022), summa-
rization (Paulus et al., 2017; Böhm et al., 2019; Wu & Hu, 2018), text-based games (Narasimhan
et al., 2015; Hausknecht et al., 2019), translation (Gu et al., 2017), and more. However, these are
often supervised learning tasks that do not test the LLMs’ abilities to achieve a specific long-term
objective. Research on dialogue generation (Jaques et al., 2017; He et al., 2018; Shuster et al.,
2022b;a) has often focused on generating feasible-looking agent dialogue without explicit consider-
ation for some multi-turn objective. Our benchmarks allow for the development of algorithms that
enable LLMs to interact with an environment to achieve long-term objectives, by providing tasks
with online simulators and offline datasets.

3    M ULTI -T URN G ENERATION WITH RL AND L ANGUAGE M ODELS
This section introduces the conceptual foundations of using reinforcement learning for multi-turn
generation with language models. We introduce a definition of the Markov Decision Process for
language and a framework for the methods we focus on in this paper.
3.1 D EFINITIONS
We formalize language generation tasks as a partially observable Markov decision process. We can
think of the state as the history of tokens and action as the next token generated by the model. An
observation is a single token si in the history. The probability of generating the next token given
the previous observation token P (si+1 |si ) is non-Markovian. However, a Markovian state can be
formed by concatenating all of the previous tokens.
   A policy π defines the agent’s behavior by taking in the current state s given by [s0 , . . . , si ], and
outputting a new action token a given by si+1 . The environment assigns a reward r(s, a) based on
the entire sequence of tokens so far. The tokens in the state are either generated by the policy π or
the environment. For example, in the Car Dealer task, the policy generates the tokens for the Seller
and the environment generates the tokens for the Buyer and the history of their conversation would
form the state.
   A complete sequence of tokens will also be referred to as a trajectory. The goal of RL is to
produce a policy π ∗ that maximizes the  hPexpected discountedi sum of rewards over trajectories (τ )
                                             T −1 t
under the policy π ∗ = arg maxπ Eτ ∼π        t=0 γ  rt t t , where τ represents a trajectory.
                                                      (s , a )

3.2 RL A LGORITHMS
Several possible RL algorithms could be used (Jaques et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2022; Snell et al.,
2022a; Schulman et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Casper et al., 2023). Policy
gradient methods, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), directly compute the gradient of the lan-
guage model concerning the expected reward objective. Value-based methods estimate a state-action
(Q) or state-value (V ) function, from which they then derive a policy by either acting greedily with
respect to the Q-function or by combining the learned Q-function with the base LM by perturbing
the base model’s logits with the learned action-value functions (Snell et al., 2022a).
   RL methods for training LLMs can be online or offline. Online methods repeatedly interact with
the environment, collecting additional data during training. Offline RL instead learns to extract
the best behaviors from an existing, potentially suboptimal dataset. Due to the large amount of
existing text interactions on the internet, offline RL is an ideal setting for training language models.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, our work primary focuses on benchmarking offline RL algorithms. However our tasks
also fully support online RL and we include an online PPO baseline in our evaluation.

4   T HE LMRL-G YM : S YNTHETIC B ENCHMARKS FOR RL WITH L ANGUAGE
                                      Our benchmark consists of 8 tasks, split into two categories;
                                      RL Capability Tests and Interactive Dialogue tasks. The RL
                                      Capability tests focus on specific desirable capabilities for RL
                                      algorithms to have such as strategic decision-making, credit
                                      assignment, or trajectory stitching. For the interactive dialogue
                                      tasks, we model them after real-world interactions with hu-
                                      mans, such as persuading someone to buy a car or playing a
                                      guessing game like 20 questions. In such multi-turn interac-
                                      tions, there is a need for the agent to make inferences about
                                      persuasive strategies and social interaction, actively gather in-
                                      formation efficiently through asking questions, and strategi-
                                      cally reason in partially observable settings. Below, we dis-
                                      cuss the specific capabilities of RL algorithms for LLMs that
                                      our benchmark aims to evaluate, we summarize the data gener-
                                      ation and simulation process, and we describe the tasks them-
                                      selves. We provide a concise summary of the dataset and task
                                      statistics in Section 4.3.
                                      4.1 E VALUATING C APABILITIES E NABLED BY RL
Figure 2: To generate data for con-   A central objective of our benchmark is to evaluate the core ca-
versational tasks, we use LLMs as     pabilities that RL can enable in large language models. Some
“simulators” for the task. Our sim-   of these capabilities are computational, and relate to core
ulators can be used to generate of-   decision-making irrespective of the considerations of natural
fline data, to provide a “simula-     language, such as playing chess, while others are semantic.
tion environment” for evaluation,     We discuss the particular capabilities of algorithms we aim to
to perform online training, and to    evaluate in this section, followed by a discussion of the criteria
compute rewards.                      that such tasks must meet to do so.
Strategic decision making. RL shines in goal-directed tasks that require multi-step planning and
strategic decision-making. Strategic decision-making can range from simple choices like asking
follow-up questions to gather information (e.g., in the 20 Questions task), to complex strategy in
chess.
Complex language. Our benchmark includes realistic language and interaction scenarios, requir-
ing LLMs to combine their knowledge from pretraining to help solve tasks during RL finetuning.
Rather than focusing entirely on simple causal logic and strategy of the sort found in text games,
several of our tasks specifically emphasize the use of realistic language.
Credit assignment. In RL, rewards are often delayed relative to the action that was pivotal to the
outcome. For example, a seller agent might state a particularly compelling feature of the product
and then, several turns later, complete a successful sale. RL must determine the statements that led
to the good outcome, and reinforce them.
Partial observability. In language tasks, the state consists of the entire history of tokens, and an
agent may need to examine this entire context to infer the correct state. For example, the mental
states of a speaker in a dialogue (e.g., whether the buyer is impatient in a selling task), previously
observed facts in a guessing game, and other hidden variables might induce partial observability.
Trajectory stitching. In a dataset with many suboptimal trajectories, it is necessary to join op-
timal actions from different suboptimal trajectories together to form the most optimal trajectory.
An algorithm capable of trajectory stitching should be able to learn from optimal actions taken in
unsuccessful trajectories and avoid suboptimal actions that occurred in successful trajectories.
4.2 LMRL-G YM TASKS
We split our tasks into 5 ”RL Capability Tests” and 3 ”Interactive Dialogue” tasks. The RL Capa-
bility tests are designed to create comparisons between tasks based on specific RL capabilities. In
addition, they are chosen to be text-based versions of tasks where RL without language is known to
excel. The interactive dialogue tasks are chosen to be illustrations of real-world interactions where
we expect multi-turn RL to shine. Example trials for each task are shown in Figure 4.
4.2.1   T HE RL C APABILITY T ESTS


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The RL Capability Tests are text-based games
designed such that they 1) isolate specific RL
capabilities and 2) are language analogs of
tasks where RL is known to succeed. To em-
phasize the comparison to a non-text-based ver-
sion, we evaluate the Maze task in a symbolic
or grid-based environment seen in Appendix G.
Below we highlight how each of the tasks iso-
lates the RL Properties. Further details on task
design for each of the RL Property test tasks
can be found in Appendix A.
Partial Observability. We focus on the effect
that partial observability has on performance       Figure 3: Each task in the text-based games and
by including both fully observed (FO) and par-      RL Capabilities test suite is chosen to test some
tially observed (PO) versions of the Maze and       subset of the RL Capabilities outlined in Sec-
Text-Nav tasks. We create a partially observed      tion 4. We use the number of checkmarks to high-
Maze or Text-Nav by removing information            light which tasks emphasize a property more than
about the location from the state.                  others. As can be seen in the figure, the RL Prop-
                                                    erty Test tasks Chess, Endgames, Wordle, Maze,
Trajectory Stitching. All of the RL Capabil-        and Text-Nav all test some proper subset of all
ity Tests test trajectory stitching, because they   the properties. The Interactive Dialogue tasks test
include suboptimal data. The inclusion of sub-      many of the properties, but since they were de-
optimal requires an offline algorithm to utilize    signed to be realistic rather than an RL Property
information from suboptimal data to generate        Test, we are unsure of the extent to which they
optimal trajectories. Further details about our     test some properties.
dataset generation strategies can be found in
Appendix C.
Credit Assignment. Chess, Endgames, Maze and Text-Nav test credit assignment, because suc-
cess in the task is dependent on things outside the control of the agent. In Chess and Endgames,
victory is highly dependent on the actions of the opponent. If the opponent makes bad moves, vic-
tory is far more likely than if the opponent makes excellent moves. Similarly, in the Maze and
Text-Nav tasks, the dataset is generated such that trajectories that start close to the goal are far
more likely to succeed. Therefore the agent must learn to distinguish between lucky wins and those
resulting from complex strategic decisions.
Complex Language We include both Maze and Text-Nav tasks to highlight the differences be-
tween a maze task with and without complex or stochastic text. However, the RL Capability tests
are not designed primarily with complex language in mind and we leave that problem to the Inter-
active Dialogue tasks.
Strategic Decision Making Wordle, Chess, and Chess Endgames test strategic decision-making
to varying degrees. Wordle tests information gathering and strategy in a partially observed environ-
ment, because the full information about the state is not provided to the agent. We find that Chess
requires the most strategic decision-making because it requires the agent to plan over a game more
than 40 moves in length.
Why include Endgames (Theoretical Chess Endgames)? Chess endgames provide a simpler
and more goal-directed variation of the chess task. By focusing on the endgame, we encourage
algorithms to learn strategy rather than memorizing the opening moves of a chess game. A classic
theoretical endgame position consists of a position where the only pieces on the board are the two
kings and the queen. Although the board position appears simple, a sequence of carefully calculated
moves is required to win. A simpler board state allows language models to make progress without
fewer computational resources.
4.2.2 I NTERACTIVE D IALOGUE TASKS
For the interactive dialogue tasks, we chose two tasks that involve rational decision-making (20Qs,
Guess) and information gathering and one that involves negotiation (Car Dealer). These tasks aim
to simulate real world interactions between humans.
20Qs (Twenty Questions). This task tests information gathering to see if a policy can successfully
reason about an unknown subject based on context to determine what it is. Additionally, it also
evaluates the ability of the model to understand semantics, as it also needs knowledge about the
objects in question. In twenty questions, one player (the oracle) thinks of an object, and the agent
(the guesser) tries to guess what it is by asking a series of yes-or-no questions. In this interaction,
the oracle serves as the environment, and the agent learning a policy to solve the game is the guesser.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Guess (Guess My City). This task simulates a more complicated guessing game, where one player
(the oracle) is from a specific city, and the other player (the guesser) tries to guess what city the
oracle is from. Here, the guesser can ask not only yes and no questions, but can also ask open-ended
questions. This task tests strategic decision-making and the ability of algorithms to handle complex
language, as it allows the agent to go beyond learning to ask yes/no questions and learning to ask
questions open-ended questions that provide the agent with more information.
Car Dealer. This task simulates a conversation between a car buyer and a car dealer, each with
different strategies for getting the best deal. The buyer wants to buy a certain type of car within a
certain budget, and the car dealer wants to complete the sale ideally with a high sale price. We have
designed the task such that there exist three different kinds of sellers and three different buyers, each
primed with a different strategy. Hence, agents should learn to make agreements with buyers who
are most compatible with their strategy. This allows us to test the ability of RL algorithms to learn
strategic decision-making and credit assignment, by learning which strategies led to a successful
sale of the car.


Figure 4: Example trials for tasks in LMRL-Gym. Each task requires the agent to perform a multi-
turn interaction with an environment – either a text game or another LLM simulating a human
speaker. Full details of tasks are provided in Appendix C.


4.3 A N OVERVIEW OF DATA C OLLECTION FOR LMRL-G YM TASKS
In order to make the tasks in LMRL-Gym practical for benchmarking RL methods, we must balance
accessibility and realism. Real-world datasets would be the most realistic, but since RL algorithms
need to be evaluated by actually running the learned policy, real-world tasks are comparatively inac-
cessible for rapid iteration (e.g., if they require talking to real humans). We therefore use simulators


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all of our tasks, which are derived either from text-based games, or conversational agents pow-
ered by language models. Although this fully synthetic setup sacrifices some realism, we believe the
significant gain in accessibility is worthwhile and will enable more rapid RL algorithm progress.
Text-based games. For each of these tasks, we use a simulator such as a chess engine or maze
solver to generate near-optimal data and then we dilute the policy with suboptimal data by taking
suboptimal actions or using inferior policies. We also convert our task from a symbolic version to a
text-based version in a programmatic way as discussed in ??.
Conversational tasks. For conversational tasks, we leverage existing LLMs to generate our data,
either with two instances of LLMs “talking” to one another or all at once through few-shot prompt-
ing. In order to train these LLMs, we use OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 to generate an initial dataset by asking
reasonable questions and answers out-of-the-box, collecting a dataset of differing sizes depending
on the task. In the case of 20Qs and Guess My City, we collected 1K conversations by querying
GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) to generate both sides of the conversation. To generate the dataset for
training our algorithms, we fine-tuned a GPT2-medium guesser model and a GPT2-medium oracle
model on their respective sides of the conversation. Using these models, we generated the final 100K
conversations dataset by having the two models talk to each other. We conducted a similar process
for the Car Dealer task.
   In Table 4.3 we present the dataset statistics on these tasks. The number of trajectories and the
average length of the trajectories varies based on the complexity of the tasks.

             Task    Maze    Text-Nav       Wordle     Chess     Endgames      20Qs     Guess     Car
         Size        1.24k       2.5k         1m        625k       97.756k      100k     100k      19k
   avg length         19.7      12.2          4.82       46.7        11.9       -14.9    -18.8     16.5
   std length         24.5      8.77          1.27      18.16        12.0        4.38     4.57     3.61
 success rate         0.11      0.26          0.70       0.60        0.59        0.31     0.53     0.53
   avg return        -19.7      0.258        -4.12      0.210       0.586       -17.3    -18.8    0.562
   std return         24.5      0.424         1.59      0.970       0.492        2.56     4.12    0.422

Table 1: Statistics for all tasks in LMRL-Gym. Size represents the number of trajectories, the
average length is the average length of trajectories in the dataset where the unit is a response from
the agent. The success rate is the proportion of trajectories that reach the objective. Finally, the
reward functions for each task are defined in Appendix C.

5   LMRL R ESEARCH F RAMEWORK FOR A LGORITHM D EVELOPMENT
To validate the efficacy of LMRL-Gym for benchmarking RL algorithms that meet the expected
capabilities defined in Section 4.1, we evaluate our tasks on a set of both online and offline RL
algorithms. With these experiments, we expect to 1) observe a significant spread in performance be-
tween the different algorithms, validating the utility of our tasks for measuring differences between
RL algorithms; and 2) we should ideally observe room to improve beyond what our current algo-
rithms achieve on these tasks, such that our benchmark can enable future algorithmic development.
Our project page (REDACTED) contains links to our open-sourced datasets and research framework
(REDACTED).
   We evaluate two standard language model finetuning baselines (BC & filtered BC), two baseline
value-based offline RL methods (MC & ILQL (Snell et al., 2022a)), standard online RL methods
(PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), Online Filtered BC), as well as evaluation done by human evaluators
and GPT4. For all of our experiments, we use the decoder-only transformer model GPT2 (Radford
et al., 2019) (and its variant sizes) as the policy and value network.
BC, Filtered BC, Online Filtered BC In line with standard RL nomenclature, we denote su-
pervised fine-tuning as behavioral cloning (BC). This baseline tests whether LMs can effectively
represent the behaviors in the datasets. We also evaluate filtered BC, which is identical, except we
use only the most successful examples in the dataset for fine-tuning. Online filtered BC collects data
using the current policy and selects the most successful trajectories for finetuning. See Appendix D
for our data filtering criteria for each task.
Offline Value-based RL: MC Returns and ILQL Monte-Carlo returns (Nakamoto et al., 2023)
and Implicit Language Q-Learning (Snell et al., 2022a) train a value V and Q function. In MC
Returns, we fine-tune an LM to predict the reward-to-go of the trajectory at each token. In ILQL we
train the 2 action-value (Q) functions using the Bellman backup operator introduced in Kostrikov
et al. (2021). The Q and V functions are then used to perturb the logits of the original BC model
(see Equation 5).


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Online RL: PPO PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) is an online RL algorithm that has become widely
adopted for training language models with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (Chris-
tiano et al., 2023; Stiennon et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Casper et al., 2023). Unlike the previous
two value-function RL methods, PPO directly learns a policy, meaning that at inference time we can
directly sample from our learned policy.
GPT4 To compare few-shot prompting to RL fine-tuning, we few-shot prompt GPT4 to complete
each of these tasks. We do this by providing several examples from the dataset in the prompt as well
as any extra information that would be necessary to complete the game. The prompts can be found
in our code repository.
Human Eval To verify that the tasks are achievable by humans, we include human evaluations.
The human evaluations are performed by 6 people. Each evaluator is allowed 1 trial run and then n
number of trial runs where n is chosen such that the amount of time spent by each person on each
task is less than 10 minutes. As the representation of the board is difficult for ordinary humans to
parse for the Chess and Endgames task, we gather human evaluations through Stockfish (Sto).
5.1 T RAINING AND E VALUATION P ROTOCOL
For the BC and filtered BC methods, we initialize our models with the pre-trained GPT2
weights (Radford et al., 2019) and perform standard finetuning. For each of the RL methods, we
initialize the weights of the base model with the weights from the BC checkpoint and then continue
finetuning with the RL objective. When fine-tuning PPO, we limit the number of samples to less
than 100k. We report the hyperparameters that we used for each task in Appendix D. We evaluate
each policy by measuring the average reward in the simulated environment for each task.

6   B ENCHMARKING BASELINE RL M ETHODS
In Table 9 we present the results for each method on our benchmark tasks. Across all of the tasks,
we see that the RL algorithms outperform the BC methods. However, among the RL algorithms,
there is no clear winner. We discuss this in detail below.

             alg.   BC     % BC     MC Return    ILQL     Online PPO    Online % BC     GPT-4    Human
     FO Maze        58.2    68.9       75.0       99.9       79.7           57.4         78.2
     PO Maze        53.1    50.1       52.4       76.3       42.4           53.1         60.4
 FO Text-Nav        53.7    65.1       71.9       91.8       87.1           74.5         67.5
 PO Text-Nav        49.7    60.5       71.6       83.7       85.5           68.4         40.2
      Wordle        79.9    79.1       94.9       97.7       84.2           95.2         15.4       -
       Chess        47.2    42.9       46.5       47.3       48.0           47.2          0        50.0
    Endgames        35.1    17.7       50.2       45.8       77.5           36.2          0       33.72
       20Qs         57.1    77.1       87.1       82.9       72.9           55.2         95.7
       Guess        30.0    48.0       88.0       75.0       49.9           31.6         92.3
         Car        44.5    54.8       57.2       46.3       50.5           40.4         53.5

Table 2: Normalized reward for all tasks. Value-based methods (MC and ILQL) generally outper-
form filtered BC, as we might expect in stochastic settings, though the relative performance of ILQL
and the simpler MC method is, perhaps surprisingly, reversed on the tasks with more complex lan-
guage, suggesting that there is significant room for improvement with such methods. Online RL with
PPO often, but not always, improves over offline methods that are not permitted to collect additional
online interaction. To make the results more comparable across tasks, we normalize the average
return for each policy such that 0 is the minimum possible return, 50 is the dataset average return,
and 100 is the maximum return for each task. We also report the raw score results and evaluation
details in Appendix E.


Online PPO vs. Offline Value-based RL. Online RL was able to do better than our offline meth-
ods on the PO Text-Nav, Chess, and Endgames tasks by leveraging additional online interaction data
and the ability to explore the environment simulator. However, on the Maze and Wordle tasks, ILQL
outperformed PPO, which we believe to be due to either (1) observed instabilities in PPO training
(see Appendix F.2 for details); or (2) a lack of sample efficiency in PPO. To address instabilities in
PPO, we tuned the KL coefficient and included BC loss in the training objective. In contrast, on FO
Text-Nav PPO performed comparably to ILQL and outperformed MC. For the Endgames task, PPO
outperformed the other methods by a large margin as shown in Figure 5. These results demonstrate
that current RL algorithms such as PPO are unable to completely solve tasks that test the capabilities
of trajectory stitching and credit assignment, showing room for improvement in the development of
such algorithms.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Online PPO vs. Online Filtered BC We found that Online PPO outperformed Online Filtered
BC in all tasks except for Wordle. This is most likely caused by 1) a lack of exploration by Online
Filtered BC 2) PPO exhibiting greater ability to perform credit assignment. This highlights the
strengths of the online PPO algorithm.
ILQL vs. MC Returns. Among the offline methods, ILQL has the potential to be a much more
capable algorithm than MC Returns in principle, because of the use of Bellman backups to estimate
the Q-function instead, enabling multiple steps of policy improvement, rather than the single-step of
improvement performed by MC. Empirically, we see these advantages of ILQL realized on the Maze,
Text-Nav, and Wordle tasks, where it outperforms MC. However, on the Endgames, 20Qs, Guess My
City and Car Dealer tasks, ILQL falls short of MC. In summary, the simpler MC Returns method
performs better on tasks with more complex text, perhaps because it is harder to scale full TD-
learning in these settings. Overall, this demonstrates that there is still much room for improvement
in terms of developing better TD-based RL methods for LLMs.
Partial Observability. Partial observability posed a challenge for all of the algorithms. We ob-
served a drop in normalized performance for every algorithm between partially observed and fully
observed versions of Maze and Text-Nav tasks. In partially observed settings, the model needs to
infer the state and take information-seeking actions to help deduce it. The difference in performance
between fully and partially observed tasks illustrates this additional challenge and highlights the
necessity for developing LM RL algorithms that can effectively handle partial observability.
Prompting GPT-4 vs. RL Finetuning. We found that GPT-4 with prompting was not able to
outperform RL Finetuning baselines on most of the tasks. This could be because 1) task data and
training data for GPT4 are significantly different distributions 2) GPT4’s training objective does not
satisfy the RL Capabilities such as trajectory stitching or credit assignment. Two notable exceptions
to this rule are the 20Qs and Guess My City tasks. This is most likely because the dataset used to
train the simulator for these tasks was originally generated by GPT3.5.
   In summary, we can see that RL algorithms consistently outperformed filtered BC and prompting
on many of the tasks. However, these results highlight significant areas for growth. For example, the
instabilities observed in training PPO require further investigation beyond hyperparameter tuning.
Moreover, the performance discrepancy between ILQL and the simpler MC Returns highlights that
scaling full TD-learning to Interactive Dialogue settings is another area for improvement.

7   D ISCUSSION
In this work, we have proposed LMRL-Gym, consisting of 8 tasks ranging from simple navigation
(Maze) to strategy games (Chess) to negotiation (Car Dealer). Additionally, we provide a research
toolkit for practitioners to get started with multi-turn RL for LLMs. By providing online simulators
and offline datasets for training and evaluation, our objective is to make it possible for RL algorithm
researchers to iterate and advance the development of more effective methods for language-based,
multi-turn interaction tasks. This includes enabling core capabilities in LLMs through RL to perform
complex decision making, complex conversational interactions, credit assignment, and trajectory
stitching. Our evaluation shows the promise of RL in several tasks, with further room for improve-
ment with a push for better methods. We acknowledge several limitations when designing tasks in
our benchmark, including primarily leveraging smaller GPT-based LLMs to generate datasets and
finetune our LLM-based simulators. While we have primarily trained and evaluated models with
a maximum 1.5B parameters, we have maintained a lower parameter count to ensure accessibility
for researchers with limited computational resources. We have released all of our code and datasets
at: REDACTED. In addition, we share all of the hyperparameters we used to train our models in
Appendix D and provide more in-depth insight into our results, training procedure, and evaluation
in Appendix E.

8   E THICS S TATEMENT
This work aims to develop a benchmark for the advancement of research in reinforcement learning
and LLMs. We generate datasets for tasks in our benchmark with existing LLMs for dialog tasks
and online engines for text games, adhering to best practices in data handling and ensuring there is
no personally identifiable or sensitive information present in the generated datasets. We recognize
that there may be biases present in the datasets we collect, and have taken steps to ensure a diverse
and varied collection of responses from LLMs for our conversational task as detailed in our data
generation process in Appendix C. Finally, we open-source our datasets, simulators, and code for
our research framework in order for our research to be verifiable and reproducible.
   In considering the social and ethical implications of interactive RL, we acknowledge and recog-
nize the dual use implication of this research, particularly centered around developing LLM sim-
ulators that could perform persuasion, manipulation, and addictive engagement of users at a large


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


scale. The optimization processes employed by such algorithms, which aim to maximize certain ob-
jectives, raise ethical considerations when the optimized outcomes may prioritize system goals over
user safety and alignment to human values. We have designed our datasets and reward functions
such that prioritize fairness and human-aligned outcomes. By incorporating these considerations
when designing our framework, we aim to encourage the development of reinforcement learning
models and LLMs that not only excel in performance but also adhere to ethical standards, mitigating
the potential for undue persuasion or manipulation.

R EFERENCES
Stockfish. https://stockfishchess.org/. Accessed: 2023-04-27.
Anthropic. Introducing claude, 2023.        URL https://www.anthropic.com/index/
  introducing-claude.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,
  2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai:
  Harmlessness from ai feedback, 2022b.
Florian Böhm, Yang Gao, Christian M. Meyer, Ori Shapira, Ido Dagan, and Iryna Gurevych. Better
  rewards yield better summaries: Learning to summarise without references. In Proceedings of
  the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th In-
  ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3110–
  3120, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D19-1307. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1307.
Ond rej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias
  Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Ne-
  gri, Aurelie Neveol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina Scarton,
  Lucia Specia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos Zampieri. Findings of the 2016 con-
  ference on machine translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation,
  pp. 131–198, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W16/W16-2301.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning, 2023.
Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier
  Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, Tony Wang, Samuel
  Marks, Charbel-Raphaël Segerie, Micah Carroll, Andi Peng, Phillip Christoffersen, Mehul
  Damani, Stewart Slocum, Usman Anwar, Anand Siththaranjan, Max Nadeau, Eric J. Michaud,
  Jacob Pfau, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Xin Chen, Lauro Langosco, Peter Hase, Erdem Bıyık, Anca
  Dragan, David Krueger, Dorsa Sadigh, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Open problems and funda-
  mental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Louis Castricato, Alex Havrilla, Shahbuland Matiana, Duy V. Phung, Aman Tiwari, Jonathan Tow,
  and Maksym Zhuravinsky. trlX: A scalable framework for RLHF, June 2023. URL https:
  //github.com/CarperAI/trlx.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code, 2021.
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences, 2023.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine,
 James Moore, Matthew J. Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy Tay, and Adam
 Trischler. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games. CoRR, abs/1806.11532,
 2018.
Heriberto Cuayáhuitl, Simon Keizer, and Oliver Lemon. Strategic dialogue management via deep
  reinforcement learning, 2015.
Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR)†, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily
 Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan
 Hu, Athul Paul Jacob, Mojtaba Komeili, Karthik Konath, Minae Kwon, Adam Lerer, Mike Lewis,
 Alexander H. Miller, Sasha Mitts, Adithya Renduchintala, Stephen Roller, Dirk Rowe, Weiyan
 Shi, Joe Spisak, Alexander Wei, David Wu, Hugh Zhang, and Markus Zijlstra. Human-level play
 in the game of ¡i¿diplomacy¡/i¿ by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science,
 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.ade9097. URL https://www.science.
 org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade9097.
Kallirroi Georgila and David Traum. Reinforcement learning of argumentation dialogue policies in
  negotiation. pp. 2073–2076, 08 2011. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2011-544.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Jay Priyadarshi, and Kevin Knight. Hafez: an interactive po-
 etry generation system. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, pp. 43–48,
 Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/P17-4008.
Google. Bard, 2023. URL https://bard.google.com/.
Jiatao Gu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor O.K. Li. Trainable greedy decoding for neural machine
   translation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
   Processing, pp. 1968–1978, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Compu-
   tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1210. URL https://aclanthology.org/
   D17-1210.
Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Côté Marc-Alexandre, and Yuan Xingdi. Interactive
 fiction games: A colossal adventure. CoRR, abs/1909.05398, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
 org/abs/1909.05398.
He He, Derek Chen, Anusha Balakrishnan, and Percy Liang. Decoupling strategy and generation in
  negotiation dialogues, 2018.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021a.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, Andy Zou, Sahil Patel, Christine Zhu, Jesus Navarro, Dawn Song,
  Bo Li, and Jacob Steinhardt. What would jiminy cricket do? towards agents that behave morally.
  NeurIPS, 2021b.
Robert Irvine, Douglas Boubert, Vyas Raina, Adian Liusie, Vineet Mudupalli, Aliaksei Korshuk,
  Zongyi Liu, Fritz Cremer, Valentin Assassi, Christie-Carol Beauchamp, et al. Rewarding chatbots
  for real-world engagement with millions of users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06135, 2023.
Youngsoo Jang, Jongmin Lee, and Kee-Eung Kim. GPT-critic: Offline reinforcement learning for
  end-to-end task-oriented dialogue systems. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qaxhBG1UUaS.
N. Jaques, J. H. Shen, A. Ghandeharioun, C. Ferguson, A. Lapedriza, N. Jones, S. Gu, and R. Picard.
  Human-centric dialog training via offline reinforcement learning. Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
Natasha Jaques, Shixiang Gu, Dzmitry Bahdanau, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Richard E.
  Turner, and Douglas Eck. Sequence tutor: Conservative fine-tuning of sequence generation
  models with KL-control. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1645–1654. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v70/jaques17a.html.
Samuel Kiegeland and Julia Kreutzer. Revisiting the weaknesses of reinforcement learning for
  neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1673–
  1681, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  naacl-main.133. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.133.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
   learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169, 2021.
Wai-Chung Kwan, Hongru Wang, Huimin Wang, and Kam-Fai Wong. A survey on recent ad-
 vances and challenges in reinforcement learning methods for task-oriented dialogue policy learn-
 ing, 2022.
Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N. Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal?
 end-to-end learning for negotiation dialogues, 2017.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Dan Jurafsky. Deep reinforce-
  ment learning for dialogue generation, 2016.
Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice Santorini. Building a large annotated
 corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330, 1993.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In ACL, 2022.
Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yuexiang Zhai, Anikait Singh, Max Sobol Mark, Yi Ma, Chelsea Finn, Aviral
 Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cal-ql: Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-
 tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05479, 2023.
Karthik Narasimhan, Tejas Kulkarni, and Regina Barzilay. Language understanding for text-
  based games using deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1–11, Lisbon, Portugal, September
  2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1001. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D15-1001.
Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural
  machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1464–1474, Copenhagen, Denmark,
  September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1153. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D17-1153.
OpenAI. Chatgpt, 2022. URL https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. Gpt-4, 2023. URL https://openai.com/research/gpt-4.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang and He He. Text generation by learning from demonstrations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=RovX-uQ1Hua.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior, 2023.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
  summarization, 2017.
Valentina Pyatkin, Jena D. Hwang, Vivek Srikumar, Ximing Lu, Liwei Jiang, Yejin Choi, and Chan-
  dra Bhagavatula. Reinforced clarification question generation with defeasibility rewards for dis-
  ambiguating social and moral situations, 2022.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08354, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Chris-
  tian Bauckhage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural
  language processing: Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy op-
  timization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=8aHzds2uUyB.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel.             High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation, 2018.
Pararth Shah, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, and Larry Heck. Interactive reinforcement learning for task-
  oriented dialogue management. 2016.
Kurt Shuster, Mojtaba Komeili, Leonard Adolphs, Stephen Roller, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston.
  Language models that seek for knowledge: Modular search & generation for dialogue and prompt
  completion, 2022a.
Kurt Shuster, Jing Xu, Mojtaba Komeili, Da Ju, Eric Michael Smith, Stephen Roller, Megan Ung,
  Moya Chen, Kushal Arora, Joshua Lane, Morteza Behrooz, William Ngan, Spencer Poff, Na-
  man Goyal, Arthur Szlam, Y-Lan Boureau, Melanie Kambadur, and Browser assisted question-
  answering with human feedbackJason Weston. Blenderbot 3: a deployed conversational agent
  that continually learns to responsibly engage, 2022b.
Satinder Singh, Michael Kearns, Diane Litman, and Marilyn Walker. Reinforcement learning for
  spoken dialogue systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 12, 1999.
Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11871, 2022a.
Charlie Snell, Sherry Yang, Justin Fu, Yi Su, and Sergey Levine. Context-aware language modeling
  for goal-oriented dialogue systems. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  NAACL 2022, pp. 2351–2366, Seattle, United States, July 2022b. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.181. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.findings-naacl.181.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Pradyumna Tambwekar, Murtaza Dhuliawala, Lara J. Martin, Animesh Mehta, Brent Harrison, and
  Mark O. Riedl. Controllable neural story plot generation via reward shaping. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. International Joint
  Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, aug 2019. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/829.
  URL https://doi.org/10.24963%2Fijcai.2019%2F829.
Jörg Tiedemann. Parallel data, tools and interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
   ternational Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pp. 2214–2218, Is-
   tanbul, Turkey, May 2012. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL http:
   //www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/463_Paper.pdf.
Erik F Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. Introduction to the conll-2003 shared task: Language-
  independent named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the seventh conference on Natural lan-
  guage learning at HLT-NAACL 2003, volume 4, pp. 142–147, 2003.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Siddharth Verma, Justin Fu, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Chai: A chatbot ai for task-oriented
  dialogue with offline reinforcement learning, 2022.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. Tl; dr: Mining reddit to learn
 automatic summarization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization,
 pp. 59–63, 2017.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rJ4km2R5t7.
Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is
  your agent smarter than a 5th grader? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07540, 2022a.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, et al.
  Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ nlp tasks. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  5085–5109, 2022b.
Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven C. H. Hoi.
  Codet5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners, 2022.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
  tence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08198, 2018.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
   tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
   2021.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin John-
  son, Xiaobing Liu, Łukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa,
  Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa,
  Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural
  machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation, 2016.
Yuxiang Wu and Baotian Hu. Learning to extract coherent summary via deep reinforcement learn-
  ing, 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents, 2023.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    F URTHER D ETAILS ON TASK D ESIGN
In this appendix, we lay out in more formalism why certain tasks test certain properties and go into
more detail underlying the interactions involved in each task. We discuss both the RL Capability
Tests and the Interactive Dialogue Tasks.
A.1 RL C APABILITY T ESTS
The 5 RL Capability tasks are chosen such that they highlight specific properties. For example, for
each of the Maze and Text-Nav tasks we include a partially observed and fully observed version to
highlight this contrast. We include both the Maze and Text-Nav because they are very similar tasks
but are different in that Text-Nav includes more complicated textual descriptions and Maze has a
more complicated layout. Similarly, we chose to include Wordle to test strategic decision-making in
a partially observed environment. Chess and Endgames test strategic decision-making, but in a fully
observed environment and with a more difficult strategy. The Maze, Text-Nav, Chess, and Chess
Endgames are all text-based representations of symbolic tasks where RL has shown success.
Maze. We design a maze task and maze-solving dataset to test the credit assignment and trajec-
tory stitching capabilities discussed in Section 4.1. We test trajectory stitching by including highly
suboptimal data. We test credit assignment by restricting the generation of the data such that the
only dataset trajectories that reaches the goal start near the goal. We accomplish this by splitting
the maze up into symmetrical submazes and restricting all traversed states in a dataset trajectory to
a given submaze. The fully observed version of the maze (FO) includes the coordinates in the maze
in each state, whereas the partially observed version only includes the history of actions. We design
the reward function such that the agent receives a reward of −1 for non-goal states and 0 for goal
states.
Text-based Navigation (Text-Nav). We design a text-based game based on navigation in a house
environment using a modified version of the TextWorld engine (Côté et al., 2018). This task tests
credit assignment and trajectory stitching like the maze task as well as testing the ability of the agent
to parse more complex language, and learn which text is relevant and not relevant to solving the task
at hand.
Wordle. We use the game of Wordle as a flexible unit-test task for assessing the ability of our
language models to execute complex information-seeking behavior in a partially observed setting.
In the game Wordle the agent is given at most 6 attempts to guess a hidden 5-letter word. After each
guess, the agent is told whether each letter in the guessed word is: 1) in the hidden word and in
the right position, 2) in the hidden word but not in the right position, or 3) not in the hidden word.
Through this process, each step provides the agent with more information on what the correct word
would be and narrows the possible choices for the final word. Since Wordle involves reasoning
about words at the level of individual letters, this can induce issues for standard language model
tokenizers. Therefore, we represent words as a sequence of space-separated letters, which will
cause most standard LM tokenizers to automatically represent each letter as a separate token.
Chess. We create a text-based chess task to test the strategic decision-making, credit assignment,
and trajectory stitching abilities of an RL algorithm. To generate the data, we have Stockfish 15.1
simulating the agent of various strengths play against another environment Stockfish engine with
elo 1200 simulating the environment. This test trajectory stitching, because the agent needs to make
good and legal moves in losing positions as well as winning positions. We use FEN (Forsyth-
Edwards Notation) notation to represent the board state at each turn and we utilize the SAN (Short
Algebraic Notation) to represent each action, both of which are standard notations used by the chess
community.
Endgames (Theoretical Chess Endgames). Chess endgames provide a simpler and more goal-
directed variation of the chess task. By focusing on the endgame, we encourage algorithms to learn
strategy rather than memorizing the opening moves of a chess game. A classic theoretical endgame
position consists of a position where the only pieces on the board are the two kings and the queen.
Although the board position appears simple, a sequence of carefully calculated moves is required to
win. A simpler board state allows language models to make progress without fewer computational
resources. We use an ϵ-greedy dataset generation process, meaning we generate an optimal move
with probability ϵ and a random move with probability 1 − ϵ. This forces the model to trajectory
stitch and learn from optimal moves in failed trajectories and not suboptimal moves in successful
trajectories.
A.1.1 I NTERACTIVE D IALOGUE TASKS
For the interactive dialogue tasks, we chose two tasks that involve rational decision-making (20Qs,
Guess) and information gathering and one that involves negotiation (Car Dealer). These tasks aim
to simulate real world interactions between humans.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Unlike in supervised learning, where training and validation losses serve as reliable indicators
of performance, in RL, these metrics do not provide a meaningful measure of policy effectiveness
(Sutton & Barto, 2018). Instead, the policy must interact with the environment for evaluation. How-
ever, in the case of language-based RL tasks, relying on human evaluators to conduct thousands of
assessment rollouts throughout and after training becomes infeasible. To address this challenge, we
have built simulators with another LLM for tasks involving dialog and carefully scripted environ-
ments for text-game tasks. While simulation may not perfectly replicate human natural language in
social situations, it provides a strong indicator to assess the efficacy of an RL method (Park et al.,
2023).
20Qs (Twenty Questions). This task tests information gathering to see if a policy can successfully
reason about an unknown subject based on context to determine what it is. Additionally, it also
evaluates the ability of the model to understand semantics, as it also needs knowledge about the
objects in question. In twenty questions, one player (the oracle) thinks of an object, and the agent
(the guesser) tries to guess what it is by asking a series of yes-or-no questions. In this interaction,
the oracle serves as the environment, and the agent learning a policy to solve the game is the guesser.
Guess (Guess My City). This task simulates a more complicated guessing game, where one player
(the oracle) is from a specific city, and the other player (the guesser) tries to guess what city the
oracle is from. Here, the guesser can ask not only yes and no questions, but can also ask open-ended
questions. This task tests strategic decision-making and the ability of algorithms to handle complex
language, as it allows the agent to go beyond learning to ask yes/no questions and learning to ask
questions open-ended questions that provide the agent with more information.
Car Dealer. This task simulates a conversation between a car buyer and a car dealer, each with
different strategies for getting the best deal. The buyer wants to buy a certain type of car within a
certain budget, and the car dealer wants to complete the sale ideally with a high sale price. We have
designed the task such that there exist three different kinds of sellers and three different buyers, each
primed with a different strategy. Hence, agents should learn to make agreements with buyers who
are most compatible with their strategy. This allows us to test the ability of RL algorithms to learn
strategic decision-making and credit assignment, by learning which strategies led to a successful
sale of the car.

B    F URTHER DETAILS ON DESIDERATA FOR EFFECTIVE MULTI - TURN RL
A crucial aspect of training RL models involves assessing, both during and after the training process,
the extent to which the trained policy has successfully accomplished its objectives. Although LLMs
are able to perform well on tasks, do not have any way of knowing how to solve a specific task like
a text game or selling a car, because they need to train on the particular game/customers/etc.
   Unlike in supervised learning, where training and validation losses serve as reliable indicators
of performance, in RL, these metrics do not provide a meaningful measure of policy effectiveness
(Sutton & Barto, 2018). Instead, the policy must interact with the environment for evaluation. How-
ever, in the case of language-based RL tasks, relying on human evaluators to conduct thousands of
assessment rollouts throughout and after training becomes infeasible. To address this challenge, we
have built simulators with another LLM for tasks involving dialog and carefully scripted environ-
ments for text-game tasks. While simulation may not perfectly replicate human natural language in
social situations, it provides a strong indicator to assess the efficacy of an RL method (Park et al.,
2023).
Measure of Success. Similar to the point on being easy to evaluate, our tasks must have a clear
measure of success. For example, if a deal is made, or if a word is correctly guessed, or the game is
won these are clearly distinct from a deal not being made or losing the game. This provides a clear
goal for the agent to achieve and also make it easy for researchers to compare methods. In addition
this allows for a intuitive reward design where we reward the agent for success and penalize for
failure.
Unit Test Functionality. We aim to design a benchmark such that some of the tasks can be used to
test and isolate RL capabilities as described in Section 4.1. This means that we create benchmarks
that emphasize some capabilities over others. For example, we design a maze task such that it
evaluates the credit assignment and trajectory stitching capabilities, but uses more simple language.
Other tasks such as twenty questions test the complex language and partial observability capabilities
with less emphasis on credit assignment.
Task-Specific Reasoning. In our tasks we utilize information and reasoning problems that a large
language model is unlikely to have seen in the pre-training data. This means that the algorithm
must adapt to a specific task environment through fine-tuning. For example, it is unlikely that the
algorithm will have experienced a specific maze layout or the preferences of a specific customer in
the pre-training data.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Suboptimal Data. RL has the advantage of being able to use suboptimal data in order to learn
more optimal behaviors and therefore learn a policy better than the policy represented in the dataset.
As discussed in the previous section on capabilities enabled by RL, the way that RL can do this is by
stitching together optimal parts of suboptimal trajectories or learning to assign credit to the optimal
actions within suboptimal trajectories. In addition, suboptimal data can be utilized by RL to learn
the dynamics of the MDP outside of the space traversed by optimal trajectories.

C    DATASET G ENERATION , S TATISTICS , & R EWARDS
We provide further details pertaining to how each dataset was generated as well as relevant statistics.
C.1 M AZE
We aim to collect our 1.2k trajectories in such a way that it will challenge the algorithm to perform
trajectory stitching and credit assignment. We do this by splitting up the maze into three ”sub-
mazes” and then controlling generation such that the dataset trajectories are restricted to one of the
submazes. The trajectories themselves are generated using a policy such that 15% of the actions are
taken by a suboptimal maze solver and the remaining 85% of the actions are random.
   This tests trajectory stitching, because there are no optimal paths from the start to the goal thereby
forcing the algorithm to trajectory stitch. Furthermore, this also tests credit assignment, because the
only paths which successfully reach the goal are the ones that start in the same submaze as the goal.
Therefore the algorithm must learn to realize that successful trajectories occur because of taking the
correct actions, not because of random chance.
   The reward function is 0 for every action that takes the agent to the goal, -1 for every move that is
not the goal. Each episode has a maximum of 100 moves.
C.2 T EXT-BASED NAVIGATION
We design a text-based game based on navigation in a house environment using a modified version
of the TextWorld engine (Côté et al., 2018). The house environment consists of 10 uniquely named
rooms with various interactable objects that can be opened, closed, picked up, or placed. The agent
is tasked to pick up stale food from the living room and place it into the fridge in the kitchen. At
the beginning of each episode, the agent spawns at a random room in the house. The state of the
environment consists of the following components: (1) the room that the agent is currently in, (2)
the objects that the agent currently holds, (3) the objects in the room that the agent can interact with,
and (4) the exits the agent can take (as a cardinal direction).
   Like in the maze task, we collect data so that algorithms must perform both trajectory stitching
and credit assignment to successfully solve the task. We do this by partitioning the rooms in the
house into two halves based on proximity to the kitchen. We consider two behavior policies that
collect the dataset, each of which behaves greedily-optimal in one half of the rooms, and uniformly
at random otherwise. Therefore, if the agent spawns in rooms farther from the kitchen, trajectory
stitching is required to learn a successful trajectory. Moreover, successful trajectories in the dataset
will only be due to the agent spawning in a room close to the kitchen, which can only be recognized
with proper credit assignment.
   The reward is 1 for reaching the goal state and 0 for every state that is not the goal state.
C.3 W ORDLE
For wordle we define the environment to use a subset of 400 words from the official wordle vo-
cabulary list. We then generate the dataset using a policy that samples a word uniform at random
from this vocabulary with 66% probability and otherwise samples a word from the vocabulary that
meets all known letter constraints. This policy achieves a reward of -4.12, which is far worse than
the -1.94 reward achieved by a high performing scripted policy, which we use to represent a loose
upper bound for this task. We generate 1 million trajectories for training and 100k trajectories for
evaluation, using our suboptimal policy.
   The reward is -1 for every word that is not a final guess and 0 for every word that is not.
C.4 C HESS
We collect our data for the chess task using Stockfish 15.1 to generate both sides of the board. The
Stockfish opponent in the dataset is Stockfish with an elo of 1200 which matches the environment,
and the Stockfish engine with the white pieces has levels ranging from an elo of 800 to 1600. We
choose to keep the level of the Stockfish opponent fixed so that there are no inconsistencies between
the dataset and the evaluation of the chess agent in the environment. When generating the dataset,
we first uniformly randomly select a Stockfish elo y between 800 and 1600 and then generate 100
games of chess play between the Stockfish agent of elo y and the opponent of elo 1200. In addition
to storing the state and action, we also store the opponent’s move and the elo of the Stockfish agent
used to generate the agent policy in that game so that the dataset can be filtered by elo used.
   The reward is 1 for a move that results in victory, 0 for a legal move and -1 for an illegal move.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5 C HESS E NDGAMES
We generate the dataset by first selecting a random legal theoretical endgame position and a probabil-
ity ϵ. Then we generate a game from the random position, making a random move with probability
ϵ and an optimal computer move with probability 1 − ϵ. The opponent in the dataset and the evalu-
ation environment is Stockfish elo 1200. We only include positions with a Queen, Queen and Rook,
Rook, and two Rooks and select 30,000 random starting positions for each variation. (i.e. 30,000
positions with only a Queen in addition to the two Kings, another 30,000 with only Queen and Rook
etc) for a total of 120,000 theoretical endgame positions.
   Because there are more restrictions on this version of the task with fewer pieces on the board, we
check how many states in the dataset are unique and we find that there are 1,086,314 unique states
in the dataset which accounts for 93% of the states being unique. In addition, 38.28% of the moves
in the dataset are generated by the stockfish engine. In the dataset of won games, 94.8% of the states
are unique and 41.78% of the games are made by the engine with 58.623% of the total states in the
dataset of victorious games.
   The reward is the same as for chess.
C.6 T WENTY Q UESTIONS
The dataset we collect consists of 100K full conversations between the guesser and the oracle.
The oracle can choose from a set of 158 unique objects taken from 17 different categories of ob-
jects/animals. Each object has a roughly equal amount of conversations in the dataset but varies in
terms of how many conversations are successful in guessing the object. However, every object has
at least one conversation where it is guessed correctly to facilitate learning.
   For the reward function, since we want the guesser to guess the correct word in as few guesses as
possible, the reward function reflects this by penalizing the guesser for each question that does not
guess the correct word.

                                      0    if question correctly guessed the word
                r(question) =                                                                     (1)
                                      −1 otherwise
    If the guesser model correctly guessed the word, then the trajectory ends. Over twenty questions,
the maximum total sum of rewards is 0 if the guesser guessed the word on the first question, whereas
the minimum is −20 if the guesser did not guess the word in twenty questions.
    The method for collecting the dataset is as follows. For each conversation, we select uniformly at
random from the above list the word that the oracle is answering question about. The oracle is an
LLM (OpenAI’s GPT3.5) given the following prompt. In our prompts, we denote variables that we
fill in with variable data with {{variable}}.
         You are a question answering oracle. You will answer each
         question about an object with Yes or No. If the answer
         could be both, answer with the most typical scenario. Here
         are a few examples:

         example 1:
         object: Computer
         question: Does the object use electricity?
         answer: Yes.
         explanation of answer: Computers need electricity to
         function.

         example 2:
         object: Cup
         question: Is the object a piece of furniture?
         answer: No.
         explanation of answer: A cup is a utensil, not a furniture.

         example 3:
         object: Pen
         question: Is the object alive?
         answer: No.
         explanation of answer: A pen is not a living organism.

         example 4:
         object: Apple
         question: Is it edible?
         answer: Yes.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         explanation of answer:           An apple is an edible fruit.

         Answer the question about the object truthfully.
         object: {{word}}
         question: {{question}}
         answer (yes or no):
   By using the OpenAI TextCompletion API, we can extract from the generated text either ”yes” or
”no”.
   We also prompt another LLM (the same model as the oracle) to generate questions for the guesser.
The prompt for the guesser changes depending on the input to the model and how far along it is in
its guessing process. The following prompt is used for the first guess:
         You are playing a game of twenty questions. You can ask
         20 yes-no questions to determine the identity of an object
         chosen by an oracle. Each turn, you can ask a question and
         receives a "Yes" or "No" as the answer. You are smart, so
         you will ask the question that will narrow down the possible
         objects as much as possible. Don’t get stuck on one idea
         and try to branch out if you get stuck.

         Generate the first yes-no question you will ask to determine
         the object.
  The following prompt is used for the subsequent guesses:
         You are playing a game of twenty questions. You can ask
         20 yes-no questions to determine the identity of an object
         chosen by an oracle. Each turn, you can ask a question and
         receives a "Yes" or "No" as the answer. You have already
         asked {{conversation length}} questions. You are smart, so
         you will ask the question that will narrow down the possible
         objects as much as possible. Don’t get stuck on one idea
         and try to branch out if you get stuck.

         Here are the questions you’ve asked and their corresponding
         answers:
         {{list of questions and answers, e.g. Is the object alive?
         No.}}

         Based on what you know about the object so far, generate the
         next yes-no question you will ask to determine the object.
  The following prompt is used for the final guess after the guesser has guessed 19 times:
         You are playing a game of twenty questions. You can ask
         20 yes-no questions to determine the identity of an object
         chosen by an oracle. Each turn, you can ask a question and
         receives a "Yes" or "No" as the answer. You have already
         asked 19 questions, so this is your final guess.

         Here are the questions you’ve asked and their corresponding
         answers:
         {{list of questions and answers, e.g. Is the object alive?
         No.}}

         Based on what you know about the object so far, generate
         your final guess of what the object is. Only guess one
         object.

         Is the object
   We determine whether the guesser has correctly guessed the word, and thus ending the conversa-
tion, by using the NLTK POS tagger to check that the only nouns that the question contains are the
correct words, and that they appear at the end of the sentence.
   We used these prompts to generate 1000 conversations by prompting the GPT3 back and forth
using the response of one to add to the response of the other as described. Afterwards, we fine-tuned
two FLAN-T5-XL models with our collected conversations to generate 100K more conversations.
The FLAN-T5-XL oracle also serves as the environment for the RL environment when we evaluate
the trained policy.



                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.7    G UESS M Y C ITY
This dataset also consists of 100K full conversations between the guesser and the oracle. The oracle
can choose from a set of 100 unique cities, which we selected by looking at the most populated
cities in the world. Each city has a roughly equal amount of conversations in the dataset but varies
in terms of how many conversations are successful in guessing the object. However, every object
has at least one conversation where it is guessed correctly to facilitate learning. The reward function
is the same as that for 20 Questions, with a similar data generation and prompt structure. However,
we do include constraints in the prompt to make sure that the name of the city or country it is in is
not revealed in the answer from the oracle.

C.8    C AR D EALER
This dataset consists of 19k conversations between a car dealer and a buyer. The car dealer and the
buyer have three distinct strategies each that they employ. We design the car dealer and buyer pairs
such that the car dealer is best at selling to a particular buyer personality, but often fails to sell to the
other buyer personalities. This ensures that the seller can learn information about the buyer and i.e.
their persona to figure out if they can form an agreement. The buyer personalities are 1) a buyer that
loves discounts 2) a buyer that wants a lot of cool features on their car and 3) an impatient buyer.
The car dealer personalities are 1) a car dealer that loves to give discounts 2) a car dealer that talks
a lot about the features of the car and 3) a very concise car dealer.
   We created this protocol of creating car dealer and buyer strategies in order to encourage the car
dealer to employ diverse negotiation tactics. The ideal car dealer would be able to be concise, pro-
vide the right amount of discounts, and talk enough about the car to get the buyer interested without
overwhelming them. By employing such a strategy of buyer and car dealer personas, we ensure that
algorithms that do well in this task will learn effective strategies, understanding of language, and
interpretation of the other speaker, amongst many other persuasive techniques. We seek to show that
our baseline algorithms do learn to improve their strategy over the dataset.
   In the conversation below, the buyer and car dealer are unable to form an agreement as their
strategies do not align.

         Background buyer: The buyer will never buy from the seller
         unless given a discount.
         Background seller: The agent never gives discounts, never
         talks about the features of the car, and is very concise.
         Preferred brands: Tesla
         Preferred features: ["Apple CarPlay/Android Auto",
         "Bluetooth", "Blind spot monitoring", "Navigation system",
         "Leather seats", "Sunroof/moonroof", "Remote start", "Heated
         seats", "Third-row seating", "Backup camera"], "budget":
         "90k"
         Agent: Good morning, how can I assist you today?
         Buyer: Hi, I’m interested in purchasing a Tesla Minivan.
         Agent: Great choice. Our dealership has a variety of Tesla
         models available.
         Buyer: Do you have any discounts available?
         Agent: I’m sorry, but we don’t offer discounts.
         Buyer: Without a discount, I’m not sure if I can afford it.
         Agent: I understand. The Tesla Minivan is a premium
         vehicle with advanced features.
         Buyer: Is there any flexibility with the price?
         Agent: Our prices are fixed, and we don’t negotiate.
         Buyer: I really want the Tesla Minivan, but I can’t go over
         my budget of $90k.
         Agent: I appreciate your budget constraint. Let me check
         the available options for you.
         Agent checks inventory.
         Agent: We do have a Tesla Minivan with all the features you
         mentioned, priced at $95k.
         Buyer: That’s above my budget. Is there anything you can
         do to bring the price down?
         Agent: I’m sorry, but as I mentioned earlier, our prices
         are fixed.
         Buyer: Is there any possibility of getting the same
         features in a different model within my budget?
         Agent: Unfortunately, the Tesla Minivan is the only model


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        that offers all the features you mentioned.
        Buyer: In that case, I’m afraid I won’t be able to purchase
        the car.
        Agent: I understand. Thank you for considering our
        dealership. If you change your mind, feel free to reach
        out.
        Buyer: (probability of buying: 0%, purchase price: $0)
        [End of conversation]
        Probability of buying: 0
        Purchase price: $0
  In the conversation below, the buyer and car dealer have similar personas of wanting to hear and
speak about the features of the car respectively.
        Background buyer: The buyer will only buy the car if it
        meets all of their specifications.
        Background seller: The agent never gives discounts and
        loves to talk a lot about features of the car.
        Preferred brands: "Lexus", "preferred features":
        [Navigation system"], "budget": "70k"
        Agent: Good afternoon! Welcome to our car dealership. How
        can I assist you today?
        Buyer: Hi there! I’m looking for a Lexus Minivan with a
        Navigation system.
        Agent: Excellent choice! The Lexus Minivan is a top-notch
        vehicle with plenty of impressive features. The Navigation
        system is definitely a must-have. Let me show you some
        options we have available. Buyer: That sounds great. I’m
        quite particular about my budget, though. I have a maximum
        of $70,000 to spend.
        Agent: Noted. We have a few Lexus Minivans in stock that
        fall within your budget. Let me tell you about their
        features and options. This way, you can make an informed
        decision.
        Buyer: I appreciate that, but I really want to stick to my
        budget. I won’t be able to go over $70,000.
        Agent: I understand your concern, but unfortunately, we do
        not offer any discounts or negotiate on prices. However,
        let me assure you that the Lexus Minivan is worth every
        penny. Its advanced safety features, luxurious interior,
        and reliable performance make it a great investment.
        Buyer: I understand your point, but I’m afraid I won’t be
        able to stretch my budget beyond $70,000.
        Agent: I completely respect your budget and decision. Let
        me show you a Lexus Minivan that fits your requirements
        perfectly. It has all the features you desire, including
        the Navigation system. The price of this model is $72,000.
        Buyer: I really like the sound of that car, but I can’t go
        over my budget. Is there anything else available within my
        price range?
        Agent: I apologize for any inconvenience caused. Let me
        check our inventory to see if there are any other options
        that meet your requirements and budget.
        Agent checks inventory
        Agent: Good news! I found another Lexus Minivan that meets
        all your specifications and falls within your budget. This
        model is priced at $69,500.
        Buyer: That sounds much better! I’m interested in that
        car.
        Agent: I’m glad to hear that! This particular Lexus
        Minivan is a great choice. It has the Navigation system,
        as well as additional features such as leather seats, a
        sunroof, and advanced safety technology. The total price is
        $69,500.
        Buyer: That sounds perfect! I’ll take it!
        Agent: Fantastic! I’m thrilled that we could find the
        perfect car for you. Your total purchase price will be


                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         $69,500.
         Buyer: Probability of buying a car: 100%
         Purchase price: $69,500.
         Agent: Congratulations! You’ve made an excellent choice.
         I’ll start the paperwork and get everything ready for you.
   We provide another conversation with different value preferences for the buyer, where the buyer
forms an agreement with the seller that is higher than their budget:
         ===========
         Preferred Features: Honda, Remote start, Third-row
         seating, Bluetooth, Navigation system, Backup camera, Apple
         CarPlay/Android Auto, Heated seats.Budget: $10000
         ===========
         Seller: Welcome to our car dealership. How can I assist
         you today?
         Buyer: I’m looking for a Honda Sedan with remote start,
         third-row seating, Bluetooth, navigation system, backup
         camera, Apple CarPlay/Android Auto, and heated seats.
         Seller: I have a Honda Sedan available. No discounts or
         features to discuss. The price is $15,000.
         Buyer: That’s too expensive. My budget is $10,000.
         Seller: I understand your budget is 10, 000.T hepriceis15,000.
         Buyer: I can’t go over $10,000. That’s my limit.
         Seller: I understand your limit is $10,000. The price is
         $15,000.
         Buyer: I really want a Honda Sedan, but $15,000 is too much
         for me.
         Seller: I understand, but the price is $15,000.
         Buyer: Okay, I’ll take it for $10,000. Seller: I
         appreciate your interest. The price is $15,000. Buyer:
         Fine, I’ll pay $15,000. Let’s get this done. Seller:
         Thank you for your decision. The price is $15,000.
We provide a sample example of a conversation in the training and evaluation set respectively.
         Evaluation Example:
         Background buyer: The buyer will only buy the car if it
         meets all of their specifications.
         Background seller: The agent never gives discounts and
         loves to talk a lot about features of the car.
         Preferred brands: "Tesla", "preferred features": [Backup
         camera, Leather seats"], "budget": "30k"
         Seller: Good afternoon! Welcome to our car dealership.
         How can I assist you today?
         Buyer: Hi there! I’m looking to buy a Tesla Sedan with a
         backup camera and leather seats. Do you have any available?
         Seller: Absolutely! We have a few Tesla Sedans in stock
         that meet your specifications. They are packed with
         features and I’m sure you’ll be impressed. Let me show
         you what we have.
         Buyer: Great! I’m excited to see them.
         Seller: This first Tesla Sedan we have is a 2020 model. It
         has a beautiful backup camera that provides a clear view
         of your surroundings. The leather seats are incredibly
         comfortable and add a touch of luxury to the interior. The
         price for this model is $35,000. Buyer: $35,000 is a bit
         higher than my budget of $30,000. Is there any flexibility
         in the price?
         Seller: I apologize, but we do not offer discounts on our
         cars. However, let me assure you that this Tesla Sedan
         is worth every penny. It is an excellent investment for
         the long term and offers unmatched performance and safety
         features.
         Buyer: I understand, but it’s important for me to stick to
         my budget. Is there any other Tesla Sedan that comes closer
         to my budget?
         Seller: I completely understand your concern. Let me check
         our inventory for other options.[Agent takes a few moments


                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          to check inventory]
          Agent: I have good news! We have another Tesla Sedan that
          is a 2019 model. It also has a backup camera and leather
          seats. The price for this model is $28,000.
          Buyer: That sounds much better. Can you tell me more about
          this specific model?
          Agent: Of course! This 2019 Tesla Sedan is in excellent
          condition. It has the same backup camera and leather
          seats as the previous model I showed you. It also comes
          with advanced safety features and impressive performance
          capabilities. The previous owner took great care of it,
          and it has low mileage. I truly believe this is an amazing
          deal.
          Buyer: The price is within my budget, and the features
          sound appealing. I’m leaning towards this one. Can you
          provide any additional incentives or options?
          Agent: I’m sorry, but as I mentioned earlier, we do not
          offer discounts or incentives. However, I can assure you
          that this Tesla Sedan is a fantastic choice. It meets all
          your specifications and offers exceptional value for the
          price.
          Buyer: I understand. Given that it meets all my
          requirements and is within my budget, I think I’m ready
          to make the purchase.
          Agent: That’s great to hear! I believe you’ve made an
          excellent choice. The predicted probability of you buying
          this car is 100%, and the purchase price is $28,000."

D     H YPERPARAMETERS FOR A LL TASKS
E     E VALUATION D ETAILS
We normalize Table 9 such that 50 is the dataset average return, 0 is the minimum, and 100 is the
maximum. The normalization process works as follows: if the reward is greater than the average
return we calculate:

                                        raw return − dataset average
                        score = 50 +                                    × 50
                                       max raw return − dataset average
    Otherwise if the reward is less than the average return we calculate
                                        raw return − min raw return
                           score =                                     × 50
                                     dataset average − min raw return
    In the following sections, we discuss more in-depth the evaluation protocol for the various tasks.
E.1 M AZE
For evaluating the maze task, we take 32 rollouts from each of the 25 possible positions and then
average the result. In the environment, the agent has 100 moves to successfully make it to the goal
otherwise the episode will terminate. Since the agent receives -1 reward for every move that does
not reach the goal state the minimum possible goal state, the minimum reward is -101. We compute
the dataset average reward, by sampling actions according to how likely they are in the dataset. We
compute the maximum possible reward by evaluating the optimal policy from each of the possible
start positions and averaging the results.
E.2 C HESS
To evaluate the chess agent, we have it play 1000 games against Stockfish elo 1200 from the begin-
ning of the game. As the game progresses, the board positions get increasing OOD for the chess
agent so the chess agent often makes illegal moves. To measure this, we track the percent of illegal
moves as well as the average episode length for the full game chess agent.
   For filtered BC, we simply trained the agent only on games in the dataset which resulted in a
victory for the agent, thus denoted BC-Won. Note that BC-Won achieves the worst performance of
all algorithms listed. This is because there is a distribution shift between the state visited by a BC-
Won agent and the rollouts of the policy. In other words, the ”winning positions” and the ”rollout
positions” are two overlapping but distinct distributions especially since the full-game chess agent
did not succeed in winning any games.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        20Qs,        Maze FO,     Text-Nav     Chess         Endgames     Wordle
                        Guess, Car   PO
         model          gpt2-        gpt2-small   gpt2-small   gpt2-small    gpt2-small   gpt2-small
  BC                    medium,
                        gpt2-
                        medium,
                        gpt2-xl
         lr             1e-4         1e-4         1e-4         1e-4, 1e-5,   1e-4         1e-4
         batch size     128          128          128          128, 256,     128          128
                                                               32
         model          gpt2-        gpt2-small   gpt2-small   gpt2-small    gpt2-small   gpt2-small
 %BC                    medium,
                        gpt2-
                        medium,
                        gpt2-xl
         lr             1e-4         1e-4         1e-4         1e-4          1e-4         1e-4
         batch size     128          128          128          128           128          128
         filter         top 10%      success      success      success       success      top 30%
         method
         model          gpt2-        gpt2-small   gpt2-small   gpt2-small    gpt2-small   gpt2-small
                        medium,
                        gpt2-
  MC                    medium,
                        gpt2-xl
         lr             1e-4         1e-4         1e-4         1e-4          1e-4         3e-5
         batch size     128          128          128          64            64           32
         β              16           16           4            8             8            64
         discount γ     0.99         0.99         0.99         0.99          0.99         1.0
         cql weight     0.001        0.5          0.001        1e-4          1, 1e-4      0.01
         model          gpt2-        gpt2-small   gpt2-small   gpt2-small    gpt2-small   gpt2-small
                        medium,
                        gpt2-
 ILQL                   medium,
                        gpt2-xl
         lr             1e-4         1e-4         1e-4         1e-4          1e-4         3e-5
         batch size     128          128          128          128           128          32
         β              4            16           1            8             8            32
         cql weight     0.001        0.5          0.001        1e-4          1            0.01
         expectile τ    0.7          0.99         0.7          0.7           0.7          0.7
         discount γ     0.99         0.99         0.99         0.99          0.99         0.99
         model          gpt2-        gpt2-small   gpt2-small   gpt2-small    gpt2-small   gpt2-small
                        medium,
                        gpt2-
 PPO                    medium,
                        gpt2-xl
         lr             1e-6         1e-6         5e-6         1e-5          1e-5         3e-5
         rollouts       2048         512          4000         1024          512          512
         batch size     128          128          128          128           128          32
         GAE λ          0.95         0.95         0.95         0.95          0.95         0.95
         discount γ     0.99         0.99         0.99         0.99          0.99         0.99
         KL coef.       0.01         0.1          0.01         0.01          0.01         0.001
         clip range     0.2          0.2          0.2          0.2           0.2          0.2
         BC      loss   0            0            0            0             0            10
         weight

                         Table 3: Hyperparameters for baseline experiments.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             alg.    BC      % BC      MC Return           ILQL       Online PPO    Online % BC    GPT4     Human
     FO Maze        -72.1     -56.4       -48.1            -6.97         -37.7            -71.7     -39.7
     PO Maze        -79.5     -82.9       -80.3            -52.9         -91.7            -79.5     -88.0
 FO Text-Nav         0.39      0.54        0.63             0.88          0.81             0.62      0.52
 PO Text-Nav         0.25      0.49        0.58             0.76          0.80             0.53      0.21
      Wordle        -2.81     -2.85       -2.16            -2.04         -2.63            -2.15     -5.42     -
       Chess        -22.3     -56.5       -28.2            -21.4         -16.0            -22.3     -81.3
    Endgames        0.112    -0.439       0.588            0.452         0.814            0.112    -22.87
       20Qs         -16.0     -14.6       -13.9            -14.2         -14.9            -16.8     -13.0
       Guess        -17.0     -15.2       -11.2            -12.5         -15.1            -19.2    -10.13
         Car         44.5      54.8        57.2             46.3          50.5

Table 4: Raw statistics for all tasks. In the main paper, the statistics are normalized. Refer to Table 9

                          Reward Min Score     Dataset Average Score       Reward Max Score
          FO Maze              -101                         -83                   -6.84
          PO Maze              -101                         -83                  -25.75
      F0 Text-Nav                 0                         0.26                    1
      PO Text-Nav                 0                         0.26                    1
           Wordle                -6                        -4.12                  -1.94
            Chess              -401                         0.21                    1
         Endgames                -1                        0.586                    1
            20Qs               -20.0                       -17.3                  -12.6
            Guess              -20.0                       -18.8                  -8.56
              Car                 0

Table 5: In this table we report the minimum, dataset average, and maximum reward used to nor-
malize the results in Table 4 tp get Table 9.

E.3 C HESS E NDGAMES
To evaluate the chess agent in endgame positions, we select 645 positions not contained in the
training dataset and which are not trivially solvable. By trivially solvable, we mean a position
which could be solved by stockfish in one to four moves. In order to check this, we use Stockfish’s
evaluation tools to select positions which are a mate in 15 or greater. We then have the chess agent
play one game from each position of these positions and keep these positions fixed for evaluation
purposes. In this case we consider filtered BC to be training BC on all of the trajectories which
ended in a victory.
   As we can see in the table above, PPO Online significantly outperforms all of the other methods.
To investigate whether PPO Online’s performance is simply due to dataset collected, we fine-tune
our BC agent on the PPO Online dataset. We do ablations where the data used for training is from
the last 50, 25 and 10 rounds of data collection for the PPO policy. We choose to do this ablation
because we expect the quality of the PPO policy performance increases in the later rounds of data
collection.
E.4 W ORDLE
To evaluate Wordle, we rollout 4096 trajectories against the environment and report the average
reward across all the rollouts.

F    BASELINE D ETAILS
F.1 MC D ETAILS
The target for these heads is the discounted return-to-go:
                                                    T
                                                    X −1
                                             Rt =          γ i−t rt                                  (2)
                                                    i=t
and we use MSE loss for the Q head:
                            J(Q) = E(st ,at ,rt:T −1 )∼D (Q(st , at ) − Rt )2

                                                                                                     (3)
                                                                                                     (4)
where D represents the dataset. In MC, Q(st , at ) represents how much more rewards the policy will
get if it takes action at at the state st under some policy (in this case the policy that collected the
dataset).


                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            BC     BC-Won         ILQL      MC Returns       PPO Offline     PPO Online
              reward     -23.189   -56.522       -20.46        -25.47          -20.90          -15.95
       percent illegal   24.929%   34.91%        24.76 %       25.64%          23.05%          21.96%
       episode length     51.01       92.02       47.96         53.44          48.69           44.19

        Table 6: Results of chess agent in the full game positions against Stockfish Elo 1200.

                               BC       % BC        MC       ILQL       PPO Offline        PPO Online
                  reward      0.112     -0.439     0.588     0.452        -0.019             0.814
        percent victories    26.233     26.419     69.3       56.7        28.37               88.4
          percent illegal     0.967      2.717     0.692      0.66        0.925              0.722
          episode length     12.923     23.477     11.92      14.6        25.24               8.38

Table 7: Comparison between the different baseline methods. The best performance is achieved
by PPO Online with a 0.13 gap in performance between PPO Online and the next best-performing
method of MC Returns. PPO Online attains overall the highest reward, but BC-Engine wins more
frequently and MC Returns and ILQL make fewer illegal moves.


  During rollout, when sampling, we perturb the base BC policy with the learned value-
functions (Snell et al., 2022a). Let πβ represent the policy trained with BC, and α represent a
scalar multiplier, then:
                                   πMC (at |st ) ∝ πβ (at |st )αQ(st ,at )                                (5)
F.2 PPO D ETAILS
PPO Implementation Details Our PPO implementation uses a learned value function to estimate
an advantage baseline. Our value function is fit using GAE (Schulman et al., 2018) value estimates
and is implemented as a linear head on top of the same transformer as the policy. We apply clipping
to both the importance weights and the value function, as is done in (Castricato et al., 2023). We
also apply a KL penality to the reward, as is standard for RLHF (Stiennon et al., 2022). On some of
our tasks, we add a supervised learning, BC, loss term to the standard PPO loss to prevent the model
in distribution; this is similar to the approach taken in Ouyang et al. (2022), which adds a pretraining
loss term to the PPO loss to mitigate performance regressions on some benchmarks during RLHF.
PPO Instabilities In some cases we observed training instabilities with PPO in which the policy’s
performance would increase for a little bit and then collapse (see Figure 5). We primarily observed
this on our maze environment. We are uncertain what the cause of this dramatic instability is, and
leave further investigation of this phenomenon to future work.

G     S YMBOLIC M AZE E NVIRONMENT
Code to run experiments for the symbolic maze task can be found here: REDACTED. We ran online
and offline Q-learning on this environment. The online Q-learning method is DQN and the offline


    Figure 5: An example of an observed PPO training instability on the fully observed maze task.


                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            BC      Complete     Last 50      Last 25   Last 10   PPO Online
                reward     0.112     0.201         0.17        0.189     0.235      0.814
      percent victories   26.233     38.636      37.023       40.558    41.271       88.4
        percent illegal    0.967     1.165        1.159        1.213     1.175      0.722
        episode length    12.923     13.21        14.22       14.647    13.338       8.38

Table 8: Comparison between PPO Online and BC agents fine-tuned on the dataset collected by PPO
during training. We chose to train on the complete PPO dataset, the last 50 rounds, last 25 rounds,
and last 10 rounds of data collected. PPO Online performance still far surpassed performance of
the BC agents trained on the PPO policy dataset. Furthermore, there is no substantive difference
between training on the complete PPO dataset and the PPO dataset collected in the last 10 rounds.


Q-learning method is CQL. We found that Q-learning was able to perform optimally on the Maze
task in both the online and offline setting. The results are as follows:

                                               alg.   DQN       CQL

                                Symbolic Maze         100.0    100.0

Table 9: Results for CQL and DQN on the symbolic maze environment. These are normalized in
the same way as results on LM RL tasks.


H    G ENERATED E XAMPLES FROM T RAINED M ODELS
We show an example of a conversation between BC model (seller) and the oracle model (buyer):
        ===========
        Preferred brands: Lexus, 46 features, backup camera, blind
        spot monitoring, sunroof. Budget: $90000.
        ===========
        Seller: Good afternoon! How may I assist you today?
        Buyer: Hi there! I’m looking for a Lexus SUV with a backup
        camera, blind spot monitoring, and a sunroof. Do you have
        anything like that?
        Seller: Absolutely! We have a few models that fit that
        description. Do you have a budget in mind?
        Buyer: Well, I’d like to stay around $90,000, but I’m
        willing to go over that if I find the perfect car.
        Seller: Great! Let me show you our selection. This Lexus
        SUV here has all the features you’re looking for. Have a
        seat inside and take a look. Buyer: Wow, this is really
        nice! How much does it cost? Seller: The MSRP for this
        model is $87,000, but we can work with you on the price.
        Buyer: Hmm, that’s a bit high for me. Do you have any
        other options?
        Seller: Of course! We have this similar model here for
        $80,000. It’s a great car and has all the features you’re
        looking for.
        Buyer: That’s more in my budget. Let me take a look
        inside.
        Seller: Absolutely! And if you’re interested, we could
        also discuss financing options.
        Buyer: I’m definitely interested in financing. How does
        that work here?
        Seller: Well, we have a few options available. We can work
        with your bank or credit union, or we can discuss financing
        through our dealership. We also have some special offers
        and promotions available that may be of interest to you.
        Buyer: That sounds good. I definitely want to make sure
        I’m getting the best deal possible.
        Seller: Of course! We want to make sure you’re completely


                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          satisfied with your purchase. And this car here is a great
          value for the features you’re getting. Buyer: You know
          what, I think I’m sold! Let’s do this.
          Seller: Wonderful! I just need to get some paperwork
          started and we can get the financing process going.
          Congratulations on your new car!

    We show a conversation between the MC model (seller) and the oracle (buyer):
          ===========
          Preferred brands: Audi, Sunroof/moonroof, Leather seats,
          Heated seats. Budget: $70000
          ===========
          Seller: Good morning, how can I assist you today?
          Buyer: I’m looking to buy an Audi Sedan.
          Seller: Certainly, we have a range of Audi Sedans
          available. What features are you interested in?
          Buyer: I want a car with a sunroof/moonroof, leather seats,
          and heated seats.
          Seller: I understand. Let me check our inventory for Audi
          Sedans with those features. (Pause)
          Seller: We have a few options that meet your requirements.
          The prices range from $75,000 to $85,000.
          Buyer: My budget is $70,000. Can you offer a lower price?
          Seller: I’m sorry, but we don’t offer any discounts. The
          prices are as listed.
          Buyer: I really can’t go over my budget. Is there anything
          you can do? Seller: I apologize for the inconvenience,
          but the prices are fixed. We have quality Audi Sedans that
          meet your preferences. Buyer: (Sighs) Okay, let’s say I
          consider going slightly over my budget. How much would it
          be? Seller: The closest option to your budget is priced
          at $75,000. Buyer: Hmm, that’s not bad. Can you go any
          lower?
          Seller: I’m sorry, but I can’t lower the price.
          Buyer: Alright, I’ll take it. What’s the final price?
          Seller: The final price is $75,000.
          Buyer: Okay, let’s proceed with the purchase then.



I    H UMAN E VALUATION E XAMPLES

          You are playing a game of twenty questions. You can ask
          20 yes-no questions to determine the identity of an object
          chosen by an oracle. Each turn, you can ask a question and
          receives a "Yes" or "No" as the answer. You are smart, so
          you will ask the question that will narrow down the possible
          objects as much as possible. Don’t get stuck on one idea
          and try to branch out if you get stuck.

          Human: Does the item belong indoors?
          Oracle: No.
          Is the item used for playing sports?
          Oracle: Yes.
          Human: Is the item a ball?
          Oracle: Yes.
          Human: Do you throw the item?
          Oracle: Yes.
          Human: Do you bounce the item?
          Oracle: No.
          Human: Is it a baseball?
          Oracle: No.
          Human: Is it a football?
          Oracle: Yes.


                                                29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     R ATING E XAMPLES FOR NATURALNESS
We conducted a user study where we provided participants with 18 examples to annotate on a scale
from 1 to 5, where 1 represents the least natural and 5 represents the most natural conversation.
There were 9 examples that were from GPT, and 9 examples that were generated from one of our
models (MC Returns). We showed them examples from 20 Questions, Guess My City, and Car
Dealer tasks. We found the following ratings below. Note that each element shows the percentage
for the particular label. We found that participants felt conversations from GPT and the MC model
where equally natural of 55.56% and 58.53% respectively.

            Label                         Percentages for GPT                     Percentages for MC Model
                             Car Dealer      Guess City     20 Questions   Car Dealer   Guess City    20 Questions
    1 - Not Natural           4.44%            13.33%         24.44%        8.89%         11.11%        22.22%
    2 - Slightly Unnatural    24.44%           35.56%         31.11%        17.78%        40.00%        24.44%
    3 - Neutral/Natural       20.00%           24.44%         15.56%        17.78%        20.00%         8.89%
    4 - Quite Natural         24.44%           22.22%         13.33%        31.11%        20.00%        35.56%
    5 - Very Natural          26.67%            4.44%         15.56%        24.44%         8.89%         8.89%

Table 10: User study of humans rating conversations from GPT and from our MC model for three
tasks: Car Dealer, Guess City, and 20 Questions.


                                     Label          GPT        MC Model
                                       1           14.07%       14.07%
                                       2           30.37%       27.41%
                                       3           20.00%       15.56%
                                       4           20.00%       28.89%
                                       5           15.56%       14.07%
                                   Sum (≥ 3)       55.56%       58.52%

        Table 11: Average of percentage ratings for three tasks for GPT and for our MC Model


                                                      30
