Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S ELF D REAMER : D UAL -P ROTOTYPICAL R EGULAR -
IZATION FOR F RAME -M ASKED M ODEL -BASED R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         In the realm of reinforcement learning (RL), the conventional approach involves
         training agents in unknown environments using extensive experiences comprising
         high-dimensional state representations (typically images), actions, and rewards.
         However, this standard setup imposes substantial data transmission overhead in
         scenarios where edge devices are employed for data collection, and cloud servers
         are utilized for model training. This paper introduces a novel paradigm termed
         ”frame-masked RL,” which is devised to enhance data efficiency while examin-
         ing the impact on existing methods. Concurrently, we introduce a model-based
         algorithm, ”SelfDreamer,” tailored to mitigate the information loss incurred due
         to frame masking. SelfDreamer leverages action-transition dual prototypes to em-
         bed action information within the world model and align the hidden states in the
         representation space. Empirical evaluations reveal that SelfDreamer consistently
         outperforms state-of-the-art methods across six continuous control tasks sourced
         from the DeepMind Control Suite, demonstrating superior or comparable perfor-
         mance while utilizing only half of the observations from the environment.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a foundational paradigm within machine learning, primarily ded-
icated to the training of autonomous agents for effective decision-making and continuous control
tasks. In this context, RL agents typically operate in environments characterized by a degree of
uncertainty, wherein they receive information regarding the current states and associated rewards
iteratively. Recent advancements in RL have witnessed a predilection for representing state signals
in the form of images. However, this prevalent approach may raise concerns, especially in cloud
computing scenarios where training data collection and model learning occur at disparate endpoints.
Notably, when gathering trajectories from resource-constrained edge devices, such as drones or
robotic arms, and training a consolidated policy through a central server, the storage and transmis-
sion overhead incurred by image-based state representations become substantial. Consequently, the
exigency to address the challenges posed by image-based reinforcement learning under conditions
of sparse state signals, wherein the performance must be preserved despite concealing a portion of
the training data, becomes evident (Fig. 1a).
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), as originally conceived by Sutton (1991), emerges as
a promising candidate to address the aforementioned challenge. MBRL agents, although devoid of
direct interaction with the physical environment, acquire knowledge from a latent world model that
simulates real-world dynamics, thereby enhancing data efficiency. In the aforementioned context,
the viability of the world model hinges on its capacity to glean meaningful insights from limited
state images, while simultaneously having unrestricted access to lightweight scalar representations
of actions and rewards. If such a world model can be successfully acquired and accurately emulates
the true environment, it offers an enticing solution to the edge-cloud co-design predicament.
Within the domain of image-based MBRL, the Dreamer framework, as introduced by Hafner et al.
(2020), stands out for its commendable performance. Dreamer represents a significant milestone
as the first MBRL agent to outperform established model-free RL agents, as delineated by Barth-
Maron et al. (2018); Hessel et al. (2018), demonstrating superior sample efficiency in both discrete


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Frame Masked


   Edge Device                     Cloud Server

    (a) Frame masking for edge-cloud co-design.       (b) Model-based RL under sparse state signals.

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the system configuration featuring a central server and multiple edge
devices, where the RL model is trained using data collected from resource-constrained edge devices
by a resource-abundant server. To mitigate power and storage overhead on small-scale devices, the
concept of frame masking is considered, wherein only observations at select timesteps are stored
and transmitted, while lower-dimensional action and reward vectors or scalars are retained. (b) De-
piction of the training process within Dreamer , a state-of-the-art MBRL framework , incorporating
frame masking. The world model is trained through three objectives: reward prediction, transition
prediction, and observation-related tasks (represented by blue, orange, and green arrows). In this
study, we pad the masked frames with the previous valid frames, e.g., o2 and o3 are padded by o1, to
investigate the potential degradation of existing methods and strategies to restore their performance.



and continuous control domains. Dreamer’s world model operates by encoding high-dimensional
visual data into a compact latent space, thereby enhancing computational efficiency. This low-
dimensional state space, furnished by the world model, facilitates policy training through gradient-
based algorithms integrated into a differentiable architecture.
The role of image state signals in the context of MBRL is pivotal, as direct reward maximization
often falters due to the inherent sparsity and noise of rewards. Dreamer addresses this challenge
by employing a reconstruction loss on sequences of visual observations, effectively framing it as an
auxiliary task that bridges the gap between the model and the real-world environment. Concurrently,
other studies, such as those by Nguyen et al. (2021); Deng et al. (2022), have proposed alternative
strategies to bolster the robustness of the latent space, eschewing the reliance on reconstruction and
achieving enhanced performance in regular continuous control tasks.
Despite the commendable achievements of contemporary MBRL, a notable challenge persists con-
cerning the acquisition of a reliable world model from partial training data, which stems from the
reliance on visual observations. Notably, the simulated world model may exhibit distributional
disparities compared to the actual environment, leading to unforeseen performance deviations in
downstream policies. Even attempts to mitigate this issue, such as padding missing frames with the
latest valid frames (Fig. 1b), often result in a flattened latent space, undermining subsequent reward
prediction and policy learning.
This paper delves into the intricacies of MBRL when confronted with incomplete state signals,
specifically in the form of visual observations. Additionally, it explores potential solutions to ame-
liorate the performance degradation attributed to information sparsity. Drawing inspiration from
prototypical learning in computer vision (Snell et al., 2017) and prior work in MBRL (Deng et al.,
2022), we propose an innovative algorithm named ”SelfDreamer.” This algorithm capitalizes on the
concept of action-transition dual-prototypical learning, introducing a self-supervised regularization
mechanism that enforces consistent transitions for similar actions. This regularization aids in con-
ferring consistency and alignment to the latent space, particularly in the context of image-missing
states. Subsequently, we evaluate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm using the standard Deep-
Mind Control Suite, applying frame masking to a subset of images from the environments. The em-
pirical results demonstrate that SelfDreamer consistently outperforms three state-of-the-art MBRL


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods across six continuous control tasks, achieving higher final returns and, notably, superior or
equivalent performances while utilizing only half of the state images.
The contributions of this work can be succinctly summarized as follows:

       • This study represents a pioneering exploration of sparse state signals in reinforcement
         learning, frame-masked RL, showcasing a significant enhancement in data efficiency. The
         results shed light on a new line of research.
       • In addition to outlining this novel research direction, we introduce SelfDreamer, which in-
         corporates a dual-prototypical mechanism featuring action-consistent transitions to embed
         action information into the MBRL world model and reform the representation space.
       • Extensive experimental evaluations affirm the empirical effectiveness of SelfDreamer, as it
         consistently outperforms state-of-the-art RL methods under standard settings and delivers
         superior or comparable policies while achieving double data efficiency in frame-masked
         RL scenarios.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   F RAME - MASKED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Algorithm 1: Edge-cloud co-design with frame-masking
Initialize an empty cloud dataset D = {}.                  Notations
Initialize policy parameters ϕ.                            ot           observation at time step t
while not converged do                                     at           action at time step t
     /* Experience Collecting by                           rt           reward at time step t
          the Edge Devices                    */           πϕ (at |ot ) policy with parameters ϕ
     Receive ϕ from the server.
     o1 = env.reset()                                      Hyperparameters
     for timestep t = 1..T do                              T        length of interaction
         // Mask frames                                    P        frame-masking period
                periodically.                              C        collect interval
         if t mod P ̸= 1 then                              B        batch size
               ot ← ot−1                                   L        sequence length
         at ∼ πϕ (at |ot )
                                                           Frame-masking
         rt , ot+1 ← env.step(at )
     Transmit experiences to the global                     For data compression, masked frames are
      dataset D ← D ∪ {(ot , at , rt )}Tt=1 .               dismissed during experience transmission
     /* Model Training by the                               and are recovered by repeating the
          Cloud Server                                      previous unmasked frames at the server
                                              */            end.
     for update step c = 1..C do
         Sample B training sequences
         {(ot , at , rt )}k+L
                          t=k ∼ D.
         Update ϕ by arbitrary RL algorithm.


Reinforcement learning is conventionally formulated within the framework of Markov Decision Pro-
cesses (MDP; Sutton (1991)), characterized by a state space S, an action space A, a reward function
R, and a transition function T , sometimes accompanied by a discount factor γ. The fundamental
objective of an MDP agent is to maximize the cumulative reward by engaging with an unknown en-
vironment, where each interaction at time step t is typically represented as tuples (st , at , rt , st+1 ).
These tuples signify that (1) the agent receives the current state from the environment and responds
with a valid action, and (2) the environment executes the specified action, returns the associated
reward, and provides the subsequent state.
However, in the realm of most RL research, direct access to the internal states of the environment is
typically unavailable, with only observations being accessible, often manifesting as visual percep-
tions (hence, we denote ot instead of st as the input to the policy in this paper). The extensive trial-
and-error nature of RL training processes can render high-dimensional state signals impractical for


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cloud computing frameworks reliant on data collected from resource-constrained edge devices (Dai
et al., 2022). For instance, in standard benchmarks like the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al.,
2018) and the Atari Benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013), agents are required to process large num-
bers of 64x64 and 210x160 color images, amounting to 500K and 50M observations, respectively.
In response to these challenges, we introduce a novel paradigm termed ”frame-masked RL,” de-
signed to reduce the demand for environment frames during both training and testing, compared to
the conventional RL setting. As outlined in Algorithm 1, edge devices are deployed to interact with
the environment and collect experiences {(ot , at , rt )}Tt=1 . However, observations are sampled only
at intervals of P time steps (referred to as the ”frame-masking period”), with the masked frames
padded using the most recent valid observations. This approach maintains the integrity of the entire
trajectory by interspersing genuine frames as anchors. Consequently, the agent operates under con-
ditions of sparse state signals, leading to a reduction in data storage and transmission overhead by
a factor of P (with the size of action and reward signals being relatively negligible). Importantly,
rewards are still computed within the original state space, i.e., the true observation is discarded after
the reward function calculation, preserving valuable information. Simultaneously, a cloud server is
employed to receive trajectories from the edge device, and these can be efficiently compressed and
reconstructed due to the periodic repetition of observations. Subsequently, the desired model can
be trained within the server using any RL algorithm of choice and then returned to the edge device
for further iterations. It is worth noting that frame skipping (Mnih et al., 2013) also involves dis-
regarding responses from the environment, but it accomplishes this by repeating actions to capture
sufficient dynamics, especially in high-frequency games.

2.2     M ODEL - BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

In the context of this paper, our primary focus lies in model-based reinforcement learning with frame
masking. As such, we first introduce the state-of-the-art framework, Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020).
While we will briefly touch on the training of the policy, it is essential to note that this aspect is not
the central emphasis of our work.

World-model learning. The central objective of Dreamer is to create a compact world model that
encapsulates the transition and reward structures. This world model takes the form of a recurrent
state-space model (RSSM; Hafner et al. (2019)).

                          Recurrent model:              ht = fθ (ht−1 , zt−1 , at−1 )
                          Representation model:         zt ∼ pθ (zt | ht , ot )
                          Transition predictor:         zˆt ∼ qθ (zˆt | ht )                              (1)
                          Reward predictor:             rˆt ∼ qθ (rˆt | ht , zt )
                          Observation predictor:        oˆt ∼ qθ (oˆt | ht , zt )
For a comprehensive illustration, refer to Fig. 1b, which depicts the following key components: (1)
The recurrent model (red arrows), which comprises a GRU (Cho et al., 2014) responsible for encod-
ing previous actions and observations into the deterministic latent variable ht . (2) The representation
model and the transition predictor (yellow arrows), which introduce the stochastic stream zt through
variational encoding. (3) The reward predictor (blue arrows), which facilitates downstream policy
learning by emulating the reward function. (4) The observation predictor (green arrows), which
contributes to model coherence by reconstructing observations from the model states. These com-
ponents are jointly trained by maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO; Jordan et al. (1999)).

                                                                                                    
      T
      X
          Eq  − DKL (p(zt | ht , ot ) || q(zˆt | ht )) + log q(rt | ht , zt ) + log q(ot | ht , zt )    (2)
                                                                                                     
      t=1
                 |              {z                    }   |      {z         }    |      {z         }
                                   t
                                  JKL                              t
                                                                  JR                      t
                                                                                         JO

A descendant of Dreamer, known as DreamerPro (Deng et al., 2022), serves as the basis for our
method. DreamerPro augments Dreamer by replacing the reconstruction loss JOt with two cluster
assignment tasks. This modification enhances the robustness of the RSSM by aligning the model’s
capacity with the underlying nature of states, rather than attempting to fit noisy observations.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Policy learning by world simulation. Dreamer operates by alternating between the training of the
world model and policy. Both an actor and a critic, consisting of MLPs with ELU activations, are
employed to learn from the latent trajectories generated by the world model. The simulation process
commences at each non-terminal state st = [ht , zt ] encountered during world model learning. At
each step of imagination, an action aτ is sampled from the actor’s stochastic policy. Predicted re-
wards rˆτ and subsequent states sτˆ+1 are generated based on the learned world model. Utilizing these
simulated trajectories, the actor refines its policy using biased but low-variance straight-through gra-
dients (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and explores by regularizing the output entropy. Simultaneously,
the critic is trained to approximate the λ-return (Schulman et al., 2016) using a squared loss.

3     S ELF D REAMER


           (a)                                (b)                                     (c)

Figure 2: Illustration of SelfDreamer. (a) SelfDreamer leverages action and transition coupling
to learn pairs of prototypes, comprising an action prototype cA and a transition prototype cT . (b)
The action prototypes are learned by assigning data pairs to the nearest prototype pairs based on
action similarity, followed by minimizing within-cluster distance and maximizing between-cluster
distance. (c) The transition prototypes are learned from data points, capturing common ground
transitions, and are further propagated to refine the dynamics.


3.1   M OTIVATION

The quality of the policy in MBRL significantly hinges on the accuracy of simulations generated
by the world model. This model constructs a compact latent representation primarily through
observation-related tasks. In the context of frame-masked reinforcement learning, which offers cer-
tain benefits, there arises a potential drawback - the risk of flattening the latent space due to padded
observations. Specifically, frame masking may lead to the abandonment of some state signals from
the environment, disrupting the coherence of state sequences. Additionally, frame padding could
further compound this issue by mapping consecutive states to a single one. This phenomenon bears
resemblance to mode collapse in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs; Srivastava et al. (2017))
and over-smoothing in Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs; Chen et al. (2020)).
To rejuvenate and rectify the compromised latent representation space, we propose the incorporation
of the causal relationship between actions and transitions, which we refer to as ”action-consistent
transitions” (ACT). ACT aims to preserve the consistency of state transitions induced by similar
actions. Unlike isolating the action space from the state space (Chandak et al., 2019), our central
idea is to implicitly embed action information into the state representation. We hypothesize that this
strategy benefits the frame-masked world model for two primary reasons: (1) From a local perspec-
tive, action sequences serve as a means to distinguish frame-padded states from their counterparts,
acting as a regularization that discourages the model from overfitting to the padded observations.
(2) From a global standpoint, state representation might experience occasional mismatches in the
absence of full access to observations. However, with the aid of action-transition correlation, state
consistency and robustness are maintained even in the absence of direct supervision.
One potential concern with this proposal is its applicability, particularly when enforcing a single
transition for various states after taking identical actions. For instance, in a continuous control task,


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the transition of a humanoid character may differ when it is on the ground compared to when it is in
the air, despite employing the same action vector. To address this concern and ensure the generaliz-
ability of our method, we introduce a novel algorithm named SelfDreamer. SelfDreamer leverages
prototypical learning and simultaneously learns two types of prototypes for actions and transitions.
These prototypes are coupled into pairs, as depicted in Fig. 2a, to enforce action-transition relation-
ships and to identify common-ground transitions for similar actions. While these dual prototypes
are intertwined, we introduce two novel objective functions into Eqn. 2, JA and JT , which will be
elaborated upon in the subsequent sections.

3.2   ACTION - PROTOTYPE LEARNING

For prototypical learning, during each model learning iteration, we randomly sample an experience
sequence of length L from the replay buffer: {(ot , at , ot+1 )}L
                                                                t=1 ∼ D (where reward signals are
disregarded as this method is self-supervised). This process can be scaled up to form batches of
sequences, contributing to a more robust distribution estimation.
To extend the application of the previously outlined mechanism from discrete action spaces to con-
tinuous ones, we initiate the procedure by randomly initializing k action prototypes. Each action
prototype, denoted as cA  i , is an n-dimensional continuous vector, contingent on the action space:
cA        n
  i ∈ R , 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Drawing inspiration from the k-means clustering algorithm (MacQueen,
1967), the initial step in action-prototype learning involves clustering action data points into distinct
sets, SiA , by assigning them to the nearest action prototypes (as defined in Eqn. 3). We employ the
cosine distance metric (denoted as DC ) for measuring the distance between actions, which consid-
ers only the orientation of actions. For a more comprehensive discussion on this clustering method,
please refer to Section A.2.


             SiA = { ap : DC (ap , cA               A
                                    i ) ≤ DC (ap , cj ) ∀j, 1 ≤ j ≤ k } ∀i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k                (3)

Following the assignment step mentioned above, the objective function JA for action-prototype
learning is formulated as described in Eqn. 4. The first term in this equation aggregates the distri-
bution of actions assigned to a specific action prototype. As depicted in the left portion of Fig. 2b,
action prototypes are generated by minimizing the within-cluster cosine distances. However, to
construct meaningful action prototypes, it is essential for each cluster of actions to maintain clear
boundaries between one another. Consequently, the second term in the equation aims to maximize
the between-cluster distance, ensuring that each cluster represents a unique domain of actions, as il-
lustrated on the right side of Fig. 2b. Given that determining the appropriate number of action groups
k can be challenging even with domain knowledge, this min-max game design proves valuable. It
allows for the use of a larger number of prototypes initially, and redundant ones can be subsequently
dismissed in an autoregressive manner by moving them further away from those on active duty.

                              k X
                              X                            k
                                                           X k
                                                             X
                      JA =                −DC (cA
                                                i , a) +               DC (cA    A
                                                                            i , cj )                 (4)
                              i=1 a∈SiA                    i=1 j=i+1



3.3   T RANSITION - PROTOTYPE LEARNING

Before initiating the learning process for transition prototypes, we first input the sampled ex-
perience sequence into the current world model for RSSM state inference, as denoted by
{st , at , st+1 }L
                 t=1 ∀st = [ht , zt ]. Subsequently, we define transitions tt as the residuals between
adjacent deterministic states, specifically ht+1 − ht , excluding the stochastic states to ensure a
variance-free representation. Lastly, since we couple actions and transitions for both the prototypes
and the data points, we can then partition transitions into k transition sets SiT corresponding to
the transition prototypes initialized from Gaussian distribution: cTi ∈ Rm , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ k, where m
represents the dimension of the deterministic states.


                                SiT = { tp : ap ∈ SiA } ∀i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k                                (5)


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As visualized in Fig. 2c, a mutual information exchange occurs between the prototypes and the
transition data points, where a transition prototype learns from the transitions and subsequently
propagates the integrated transition information back into the system. This interaction is formal-
ized through the objective function JT (Eqn. 6), which employs gradient stopping (sg) to prevent
backpropagation and fix certain models or prototypes. The first term of this objective function trains
each transition prototype to fit all transition data points, weighted by the cosine similarity of their
associated actions. This results in the learning of a shared latent encoding for similar actions, even
when these actions are applied within different states. Furthermore, the weightings range from −1
to 1, so negative cosine similarity encourages contrastive learning among transition prototypes, pre-
venting the representation from collapsing. The latter term of the objective function is the key to
this algorithm, guiding the world model by minimizing the cosine distance between each transition
and its corresponding transition prototype. Since transitions are derived from the feedforward pro-
cess of the world model, gradients can flow through the sequence of inferred model states, thereby
enforcing the action-transition regularization discussed in Section 3.1.

                 k X
                 X                                                k X
                                                                  X
          JT =             −sg(SC (cA              T
                                    i , a)) ∗ DC (ci , sg(t)) +               −DC (sg(cTi ), t)    (6)
                 i=1 a,t                                          i=1 t∈SiT


4     E XPERIMENTS
Environment Setup. In our evaluation, we concentrate primarily on image-based RL, and as a
result, we assess the performance of our method and the baseline algorithms within the context of
the DeepMind Control Suite (DMC; Tassa et al. (2018)). This suite encompasses a diverse array
of continuous control tasks, and we have selected six of these tasks for our evaluation, consistent
with the settings employed in prior works (Deng et al., 2022). The selected tasks include Cartpole
Swingup Sparse, Cheetah Run, Cup Catch, Finger Spin, Reacher Easy, and Walker Run. To ensure
a comprehensive assessment, we consider three distinct environment setups: (1) Standard DMC: In
this setup, we adhere to the default configuration of the DMC, which serves as our baseline envi-
ronment. (2) Frame-masked DMC: This setup aligns with the frame-masking paradigm described in
Algorithm 1 of our paper. Within this configuration, observations in the replay buffer are subjected
to frame masking, where observations are masked and padded at a frame-masking period denoted as
P . In our experiments, we employ frame-masking periods of 2 and 3 to simulate the data-efficient
framework proposed in our paper. (3) Natural background DMC: In line with the approach intro-
duced by Nguyen et al. (2021), we introduce a setup where the background in the DMC environment
is replaced with random natural videos. In this configuration, the task Cartpole Swingup Sparse is
substituted with Cartpole Swingup. Further details on this setup can be found in the original paper.

Baselines. In this study, we focus on MBRL, and our method is compared with several state-
of-the-art MBRL frameworks. Specifically, we include Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2021), a founda-
tional algorithm that has paved the way for subsequent research (Chen et al., 2022; Seo et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2023). Additionally, we evaluate our method against two reconstruction-free variations:
TPC (Nguyen et al., 2021), which leverages contrastive predictive coding (Oord et al., 2018), and
DreamerPro (Deng et al., 2022), a strong baseline that has demonstrated superior or comparable
performance to Dreamer, TPC, and Dreaming (Okada & Taniguchi, 2021), another MBRL baseline.

Evaluation Protocol. In accordance with the evaluation protocol established by Deng et al.
(2022), our evaluation procedure adheres to the following guidelines: For each of the selected tasks,
every model undergoes training for a duration equivalent to 1M environment steps. This corre-
sponds to 500K actor steps, as the action repeat is configured to two. To assess the performance, the
evaluation return is computed at intervals of 10K training steps, and the results are averaged over
ten episodes for each evaluation point.

4.1   P ERFORMANCE IN STANDARD DMC

In our initial set of experiments, we sought to assess the generality and performance of SelfDreamer
by comparing it to the baseline methods within the standard DMC. The results of this comparison are


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 1: Final performance in standard DMC.

        Task                         Dreamer       TPC           DreamerPro      SelfDreamer
        Cartpole Swingup Sparse      810 ± 39      811 ± 20      792 ± 29        837 ± 5
        Cheetah Run                  755 ± 208     713 ± 37      892 ± 11        901 ± 11
        Cup Catch                    679 ± 410     926 ± 26      957 ± 7         958 ± 3
        Finger Spin                  553 ± 305     663 ± 218     527 ± 78        744 ± 138
        Reacher Easy                 849 ± 75      487 ± 112     930 ± 30        962 ± 12
        Walker Run                   649 ± 162     175 ± 16      620 ± 76        778 ± 18


presented in Table 1. The results reveal that SelfDreamer consistently outperforms all three baseline
methods across the evaluated tasks. Specifically, when compared to Dreamer, TPC, and DreamerPro,
SelfDreamer exhibits performance improvements of 22%, 75%, and 12%, respectively, on average
across the tasks. Additionally, it is noteworthy that SelfDreamer demonstrates relatively minor stan-
dard deviations in performance, except for Finger Spin, which exhibits relatively higher instability
across all methods. A particular highlight is the performance on Walker Run, where SelfDreamer
achieves a remarkable 25% improvement compared to DreamerPro. These findings underscore the
effectiveness of the proposed heuristic employed by SelfDreamer, namely, action-consistent transi-
tions, in enhancing the performance of model-based reinforcement learning for continuous control
tasks. The results indicate that SelfDreamer holds promise as a robust and competitive approach
within the standard DMC setting.

4.2   P ERFORMANCE IN FRAME - MASKED DMC

               Table 2: Final performance in frame-masked DMC (2x less state signals).

        Task                          Dreamer         TPC        DreamerPro     SelfDreamer
        Cartpole Swingup Sparse       831 ± 14        831 ± 7    788 ± 30       837 ± 2
        Cheetah Run                   875 ± 18        787 ± 66   795 ± 111      881 ± 16
        Cup Catch                     724 ± 322       950 ± 10   959 ± 12       960 ± 4
        Finger Spin                   646 ± 199       939 ± 21   973 ± 7        977 ± 2
        Reacher Easy                  845 ± 78        331 ± 65   969 ± 7        969 ± 2
        Walker Run                    264 ± 94        132 ± 49   616 ± 73       698 ± 17


               Table 3: Final performance in frame-masked DMC (3x less state signals).

        Task                          Dreamer         TPC        DreamerPro     SelfDreamer
        Cartpole Swingup Sparse       818 ± 29        742 ± 74   767 ± 24       822 ± 19
        Cheetah Run                   806 ± 103       717 ± 94   803 ± 54       858 ± 4
        Cup Catch                     946 ± 11        939 ± 5    954 ± 6        954 ± 4
        Finger Spin                   771 ± 189       584 ± 39   683 ± 190      813 ± 110
        Reacher Easy                  815 ± 49        380 ± 24   942 ± 39       956 ± 13
        Walker Run                    100 ± 54        87 ± 27    406 ± 9        471 ± 24

In our second set of experiments, we delve into the realm of frame-masked reinforcement learning,
as introduced in Section 2.1. We present the results obtained when employing a frame-masking
period set to 2 (Table 2) and another set to 3 (Table 3) to investigate the impact on model performance
when reducing visual information.
Table 2 presents the results when the frame-masking period is set to 2. Notably, we observe that for
Dreamer and TPC, there is a drop in performance by 3% and 7%, respectively, while DreamerPro
demonstrates an improvement of 15%. This improvement extends to certain tasks, with Cartpole
Swingup Sparse, Cheetah Run, Cup Catch, and Finger Spin experiencing performance gains of 2%,
4%, 3%, and 25%, respectively. These results underscore the potential of frame-masked reinforce-
ment learning to achieve higher data efficiency while maintaining or even enhancing performance.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, when SelfDreamer is applied, the final return is further improved by 18% compared to
DreamerPro ”without” frame masking, achieving double data efficiency and highlighting the bene-
fits of the action-transition dual prototypes introduced in Section 3.
Table 3 explores the impact of setting the frame-masking period to 3. In this scenario, Dreamer,
TPC, and DreamerPro all experience diminished final returns due to the loss of visual information,
with reductions of 4%, 13%, and 11%, respectively. This impact is particularly pronounced in the
challenging Walker Run task, where the performance degradation is notable, especially when com-
pared to the results from Table 2. Despite these challenges, SelfDreamer continues to outperform
the best baseline, DreamerPro, by 8% on average across all tasks. This suggests that SelfDreamer
effectively assigns a robust latent state in the world model, aiding downstream behavior learning,
even in scenarios with reduced visual information.

4.3   P ERFORMANCE IN NATURAL BACKGROUND DMC

                      Table 4: Final performance in natural background DMC.

            Task                  Dreamer      TPC           DreamerPro     SelfDreamer
            Cartpole Swingup      123 ± 26     567 ± 60      636 ± 95       731 ± 51
            Cheetah Run           26 ± 8       349 ± 53      356 ± 15       404 ± 21
            Cup Catch             57 ± 51      536 ± 93      555 ± 91       661 ± 29
            Finger Spin           2±2          309 ± 24      801 ± 233      916 ± 38
            Reacher Easy          101 ± 47     705 ± 97      672 ± 168      701 ± 23
            Walker Run            39 ± 1       149 ± 11      383 ± 41       409 ± 11

In our final set of experiments, we explore the performance of SelfDreamer in the context of natu-
ral background DMC, where nuisance and task-irrelevant information are introduced to distract the
learning process. Table 4 presents the results of these experiments, with a focus on the compari-
son between SelfDreamer and DreamerPro, which serves as the foundation for our method. The
results indicate that SelfDreamer exhibits a 12% performance improvement on average across all
tasks when compared to DreamerPro. Additionally, SelfDreamer demonstrates more stable final
performance across the tasks. These findings suggest that SelfDreamer is capable of generalizing to
model-based reinforcement learning scenarios with noisy observations and distractions introduced
by task-irrelevant information. Furthermore, the results imply that SelfDreamer effectively prior-
itizes the world model’s learning of task-relevant information even in challenging and distracting
environments, showcasing its robustness and adaptability.


5     C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION

In this paper, we introduce a novel reinforcement learning framework called ”frame-masked RL,”
which effectively learns from sparse state signals, thereby achieving higher data efficiency. Fur-
thermore, we have presented ”SelfDreamer,” a model-based algorithm that leverages prototypical
learning and action-transition dual prototypes to mitigate representation flattening issues in the
frame-masked world model. Our empirical results, based on continuous control tasks within the
DeepMind Control Suite, demonstrate that SelfDreamer consistently outperforms three state-of-the-
art methods across frame-masked DMC and other experimental settings, highlighting its versatility
and effectiveness in model-based reinforcement learning.
As our current focus primarily centers on continuous control tasks and model-based RL methods,
future research avenues include extending the application of frame masking and investigating the
heuristic of action-consistent transitions for (1) tasks involving discrete actions and a diverse array
of states, such as those found in the Atari benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013), and (2) model-free
RL methods (Yarats et al., 2022). Additionally, addressing distribution mismatch concerns is an
important consideration. In this work, the testing policy is constrained to utilize frame-masked
sequences of states. Future research could explore methods to enable the evaluation process to
leverage full observations, thereby paving the way for further advancements in this direction. Our
work serves as a foundational stepping stone for these prospective research endeavors.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matthew W Hoffman, David Budden, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Dhruva Tb,
  Alistair Muldal, Nicolas Heess, and Timothy Lillicrap. Distributed distributional deterministic
  policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08617, 2018.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Yash Chandak, Georgios Theocharous, James Kostas, Scott Jordan, and Philip Thomas. Learning
  action representations for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 941–950. PMLR, 2019.
Chang Chen, Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning
  with transformer world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481, 2022.
Deli Chen, Yankai Lin, Wei Li, Peng Li, Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. Measuring and relieving the over-
  smoothing problem for graph neural networks from the topological view. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 3438–3445, 2020.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
  for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
Hao Dai, Jiashu Wu, Yang Wang, and Chengzhong Xu. Towards scalable and efficient deep-rl in
  edge computing: A game-based partition approach. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Comput-
  ing, 168:108–119, 2022.
Daniel Defays. An efficient algorithm for a complete link method. The Computer Journal, 20(4):
  364–366, 1977.
Fei Deng, Ingook Jang, and Sungjin Ahn. Dreamerpro: Reconstruction-free model-based rein-
  forcement learning with prototypical representations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4956–4975. PMLR, 2022.
Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for
 discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, volume 96, pp. 226–231, 1996.
Justin Fu, John Co-Reyes, and Sergey Levine. Ex2: Exploration with exemplar models for deep
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Dibya Ghosh, Jad Rahme, Aviral Kumar, Amy Zhang, Ryan P Adams, and Sergey Levine. Why
  generalization in rl is difficult: Epistemic pomdps and implicit partial observability. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25502–25515, 2021.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
  crete world models. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction
 to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37:183–233, 1999.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Lei Le, Raksha Kumaraswamy, and Martha White. Learning sparse representations in reinforcement
  learning with sparse coding. Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI’17, 2017.
Vincent Liu, Raksha Kumaraswamy, Lei Le, and Martha White. The utility of sparse representa-
  tions for control in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4384–4391, 2019.
J MacQueen. Classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In 5th Berkeley Symp. Math.
  Statist. Probability, pp. 281–297. University of California Los Angeles LA USA, 1967.
Geoffrey J McLachlan and Kaye E Basford. Mixture models: Inference and applications to cluster-
  ing, volume 38. M. Dekker New York, 1988.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
George E Monahan. State of the art—a survey of partially observable markov decision processes:
  theory, models, and algorithms. Management science, 28(1):1–16, 1982.
Tung D Nguyen, Rui Shu, Tuan Pham, Hung Bui, and Stefano Ermon. Temporal predictive coding
  for model-based planning in latent space. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8130–8139. PMLR, 2021.
Masashi Okada and Tadahiro Taniguchi. Dreaming: Model-based reinforcement learning by latent
 imagination without reconstruction. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
 Automation (ICRA), pp. 4209–4215. IEEE, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Martin Riedmiller, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, Michael Neunert, Jonas Degrave, Tom Wiele,
 Vlad Mnih, Nicolas Heess, and Jost Tobias Springenberg. Learning by playing solving sparse
 reward tasks from scratch. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4344–4353.
 PMLR, 2018.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representation, 2016.
Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu, Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Masked world models for visual control. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1332–
  1344. PMLR, 2023.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Akash Srivastava, Lazar Valkov, Chris Russell, Michael U Gutmann, and Charles Sutton. Veegan:
  Reducing mode collapse in gans using implicit variational learning. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM Sigart
  Bulletin, 2(4):160–163, 1991.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Daydreamer:
  World models for physical robot learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 2226–2240.
  PMLR, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous con-
  trol: Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.


                                              12
