Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R&B: R EGION AND B OUNDARY AWARE Z ERO - SHOT
G ROUNDED T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION
 Jiayu Xiao1,2∗ Henglei Lv1,2∗ Liang Li1 † Shuhui Wang1,3 Qingming Huang1,2,3
 1
   Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
 2
   University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
 3
   Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
 jiayu.xiao@vipl.ict.ac.cn liang.li@ict.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn



                                             A BSTRACT

            Recent text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress
            in generating high-quality images given text-prompts as input. However, these
            models fail to convey appropriate spatial composition specified by a layout in-
            struction. In this work, we probe into zero-shot grounded T2I generation with
            diffusion models, that is, generating images corresponding to the input layout
            information without training auxiliary modules or finetuning diffusion models. We
            propose a Region and Boundary (R&B) aware cross-attention guidance approach
            that gradually modulates the attention maps of diffusion model during genera-
            tive process, and assists the model to synthesize images (1) with high fidelity,
            (2) highly compatible with textual input, and (3) interpreting layout instructions
            accurately. Specifically, we leverage the discrete sampling to bridge the gap be-
            tween consecutive attention maps and discrete layout constraints, and design a
            region-aware loss to refine the generative layout during diffusion process. We
            further propose a boundary-aware loss to strengthen object discriminability within
            the corresponding regions. Experimental results show that our method outperforms
            existing state-of-the-art zero-shot grounded T2I generation methods by a large
            margin both qualitatively and quantitatively on several benchmarks. Project page:
            https://sagileo.github.io/Region-and-Boundary.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recently, text-to-image (T2I) models such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) have shown remarkable capacity of synthesizing
high-quality images conditioned on textual input. Trained on large-scale datasets (Schuhmann et al.,
2022; Ramesh et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2014) composed of image-text pairs collected from the Internet,
these models learn a coherent generative space where vision and language modalities are highly
unified. Many works (Ruiz et al., 2023; Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Hertz et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022)
leverage strong generative prior and zero-shot capacity of these T2I models and extend them to various
downstream tasks, presenting diverse personalized generative results based on user instructions.
Nevertheless, there remains challenges for grounded T2I generation. As shown in Figure 1, in some
situations, users may expect outcome that the generated images are not only highly relevant to the
given prompt but also adhere to a specified layout. Existing T2I models struggle (Gokhale et al.,
2022) to correctly interpret spatial layout instructions specified by textual input, and lack the ability
to localize concepts according to other spatial conditional inputs (e.g., bounding boxes). To address
this, some works (Zheng et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Avrahami et al., 2023) propose to train plug-in
modules to incorporate layout conditions into the generative process. Yet this requires auxiliary
training process on labelled data, and does not guarantee generalization on new model architectures.
Most recent works (Chen et al., 2023; Phung et al., 2023; Epstein et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2023;
Mou et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023) show that self-attention and cross-attention maps of diffusion
    †
        Corresponding Author.
    * Equal contribution.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               “A rabbit wearing a
                  “A sketch of a       “a close up of     “A chicken is stand-
                                                                               red magician hat,
   Text Prompt     sandwich on a       a banana and a      ing on a huge egg, sunglasses, and a tie,
                      plate”             doughnut”        floating on a river” a bundle of balloon”


      Layout
    Instruction


      Stable
     Diffusion


       Ours


Figure 1: Illustration of zero-shot grounded text-to-image generation with Stable Diffusion. Given
text input and bounding box information corresponding to the specific concepts, our method can
generate images that conform to the spatial instructions.

models encode rich structural information (Hertz et al., 2022), and manipulation on the attention maps
leads to edited results on the corresponding images. Inspired by the classifier guidance (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021), they design energy functions on the attention maps for zero-shot layout control by
transforming spatial guidance signals into gradients. While showing competitive results that interpret
the layout instructions, they still suffer from two critical issues. First, these methods fail to provide
accurate spatial guidance, reflected by the misalignment between the synthetic images and the layout
information. Second, they inherit the semantic inconsistency issues (e.g., missing objects, conceptual
binding errors) from the original T2I model.
To mitigate the above issues, we propose Region and Boundary (R&B) aware cross-attention guidance
for grounded T2I generation. As for region-aware guidance, we find that the inaccurate outputs
of previous methods owes to the neglect of the gap between cross-attention maps and ground-
truth bounding boxes. The former depicts shape and localization of objects at a fine-grained level,
while the latter only provides coarse-grained spatial clues. To address this, we first leverage a
dynamic threshold to highlight object-related regions of cross-attention maps, and extend them to
their minimum bounding rectangles (MBR). Then, inspired by theories on discrete sampling (Jang
et al., 2016; Sohn et al., 2015) for deep networks, we construct a differentiable path from the binary
MBRs to consecutive attention maps through a Straight-Through Estimator. Further, we design a
region-aware loss that directly measures divergence between MBRs and ground-truth boxes, enforcing
alignment between the distribution of attention maps and layout conditions. As for boundary-aware
guidance, we discover that refining boundaries of attention maps in object regions enhances the
semantic consistency to the textual prompts, and further ensures adherence to layout constraints. We
then propose a boundary-aware loss to sharpen boundaries of attention maps to encourage expression
of different concepts in correct regions and enhance faithfulness of the synthetic images.
Our contribution can be concluded as below:

      1. To achieve zero-shot grounded T2I generation for diffusion models, we introduce R&B,
         a novel attention guidance approach for layout generation, which requires no auxiliary
         modules or extra training.

      2. We perform attention control of different objects from the perspectives of region and
         boundary respectively. Accordingly, we design a region-aware loss and a boundary-aware
         loss. The former encourages accurate alignment between activation regions of cross-attention
         maps and layout instructions, while the latter enhances expressiveness of different concepts
         in the refined localization, and better cooperates with text semantics.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. We conduct experiments and ablation study for better comprehension of the proposed
         method. Experimental results show that our proposed R&B performs well on zero-shot
         grounded T2I generation with high spatial accuracy and generative fidelity, and surpasses
         the existing state-of-the-art methods by a large margin both qualitatively and quantitatively.

2    BACKGROUND
Diffusion models. A diffusion model is trained to approximate a data distribution via gradually
denoising a random variable drawn from a unit Gaussian prior. Essentially, it learns to reverse a time-
dependent data perturbation process that diffuses the data distribution into a fixed prior distribution,
e.g., Gaussian distribution. Basically, a denoiser ϵθ is trained to estimate the noise ϵt from the
corrupted image zt = αt x + σt ϵt with the diffusion loss:

                              L(θ) = Ex0 ,t,ϵt ∼N (0,1) [||ϵt − ϵθ (zt , t)||2 ],                      (1)

Recently, a powerful Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) is widely used for synthesizing
images with high resolution and quality. It transforms real images into latents and performs denoising
process in the latent space. It further introduces a fixed text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) for
text-image interactions with cross-attention modules to achieve text conditional image generation.
Controllable diffusion. Previous work (Song et al., 2020b) describes diffusion models as score-based
models from the perspective of stochastic differential equation (SDE), and transforms the derivation
of the reversed diffusion process into estimation of the score function: ∇zt log pt (zt ). Further, the
controllable diffusion process can be viewed as a composed score function to sample from a richer
distribution, i.e., ∇zt log pt (zt , y), where y is an external condition. This joint score function can be
decomposed as below:

                         ∇zt log pt (zt , y) = ∇zt log pt (zt ) + ∇zt log pt (y|zt ),                  (2)

where the first term is the original unconditional model, and the second term corresponds to the
classifier guidance that steers the sampling process towards the generation target (e.g., categories).
Dozens of methods (Voynov et al., 2023; Bansal et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Lv
et al., 2024) design different energy functions to estimate ∇zt log pt (y|zt ) for controllable generation.
Inspired by these works, we incorporate layout conditions into the denoising process through an
energy function g(zt ; t, y), where lower value of g indicates better alignment with spatial constraints.
In this way, the guidance ∇zt log pt (y|zt ) can be computed as ηg ∇zt g(zt ; t, y), where ηg is a scaling
factor to control the guidance strength.
Text-to-image generation with layout guidance. Many recent works inject layout guidance into
the powerful SD models and achieve interactive generation that satisfies users’ preference. Some
of them (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Li et al., 2023a) train auxiliary modules to embed the layout
information into intermediate features of the SD UNet to bias model output. Other works provide
a solution of cross-attention (Tu et al., 2023b;a; 2024) modulation to inject the layout guidance in
either forward or backward manner. The forward methods (Liu et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2023; Balaji
et al., 2022) directly manipulate the value of the SD cross-attention maps during the forward process,
requiring more refined layout information (e.g., segmentation maps) or additional training. The
backward methods (Chen et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Phung et al., 2023) utilize an energy function
to transform layout constraints into gradients and update the noisy latents during the sampling process.
Our proposed R&B can be viewed as a backward method.

3    M ETHOD
In this section, we first provide a detailed description of the problem definition of zero-shot grounded
text-to-image generation. We then discuss the methodology of our R&B for diffusion-based zero-shot
grounded T2I generation. Figure 2 illustrates an overview of our training-free generation framework.
Zero-shot grounded T2I generation. In contrast to visual grounding (Liu et al., 2022), zero-shot
grounded text-to-image generation (Chen et al., 2023; Phung et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Lian et al.,


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Layout            “handbag”                               Region-aware   “bench”                        Boundary-aware
     instruction                Differential path                  guidance                  Edge                 guidance
                                                                                           extraction

                                       Box
                                     selection


                                        Aggregation

                                                     Cross-
                                  Q                 attention         Q
                                  KV                                  KV                                …
                                             Q             Q
                                             KV            KV


                              A handbag placed on the wooden bench                                          Generated image
         Update latent                                                             Update latent


Figure 2: Overall framework of our region-aware cross-attention guidance for diffusion-based zero-
shot grounded T2I generation. At each time step, we update the noisy latent via optimizing the energy
function g(zt ; t, B), which is a summation of region-aware loss Lr and boundary-aware loss Lb .

2023) aims at generating images conditioned on a text prompt and grounding information, without
additional training procedure. Considering a text prompt T = {T1 , ..., TN }, and a set of bounding
boxes B = {B1 , ..., BK }. Each bounding box Bi corresponds to a subset Ti ⊂ T. The generated
images are supposed to be highly consistent with the text prompt and satisfy the layout constraint
imposed by bounding boxes. An intuitive visual example is shown in Figure 2, given the textual input
“A handbag placed on the wooden bench” and layout instruction with two bounding boxes associated
with “handbag” and “bench” respectively, our approach synthesizes an image in which a handbag is
positioned in the middle of a wooden bench, and the object sizes of the handbag and bench match the
two corresponding bounding boxes.
Attention map extraction and aggregation. As shown in Figure 2, at each denoising step t, the
noisy latent zt is fed to the diffusion U-Net. At each cross-attention layer l, the image and text features
are fused for cross-modal interaction, where deep image features ϕl (zt ) and textual embeddings are
projected to query matrix Ql and key matrix Kl respectively (here we disregard the case of multi-head
attention for simplicity). The cross-attention Al ∈ RHl ×Wl ×N with respect to N textual tokens at
layer l is computed as below:
                                                                   Ql K ⊤
                                                      Al = Softmax( √ l ),                                                      (3)
                                                                      d
where the dimension d is utilized to normalize the softmax values. Hl and Wl represent the resolution
of the cross-attention maps. Denoting {Ajl ∈ RHl ×Wl |Tj ∈ Ti } as the cross-attention maps with
respect to the ith concept Ti , we compute an aggregated attention map (Couairon et al., 2023) Mi by
averaging the cross-attention maps across different layers:
                                                                L     N
                                                           1 XX
                                                 Mi =             1Ti (Tj ) · Ajl ,                                             (4)
                                                           L  j=1
                                                                l=1

where 1Ti (·) is an indicator function. Since the cross-attention maps Al at each layers have different
resolutions, we first upsample them to an unified resolution 64 × 64, then average them to get Mi .
Previous works (Hertz et al., 2022; Epstein et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023) indicate that cross-attention
maps of the diffusion U-Net contain rich semantic and geometric information for generated images.
Based on the above properties, we perform cross-attention guidance for grounded generation.
Dynamic thresholding. After adopting the aggregated cross-attention maps, our goal is to accurately
describe the shape and localization of a specific concept in a zero-shot manner. Previous work (Epstein
et al., 2023) applies a fixed threshold to the normalized attention map to highlight the foreground
objects, and performs self-guided image editing. However, this approach is ineffective in the case
of grounded generation, because the distribution of the attention map changes during the layout


                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generation process. To address this, we propose a dynamic thresholding approach to highlight the
foreground region M̂i of the ith object:


                                           Mi − minh,w (Mi )
                              Mnorm
                               i    =                               ,                                 (5)
                                      maxh,w (Mi ) − minh,w (Mi )
                                 norm                        norm
                          P                          P
                           h,w Mi     ⊙ Bi            h,w Mi       ⊙ (1 − Bi )
                   τi = λ    P             + (1 − λ)      P                    ,                      (6)
                               h,w Bi                       h,w 1 − Bi

                                           1 if (Mnorm

                                                   i   )h,w ≥ τi
                             (M̂i )h,w =                          ,                                   (7)
                                           0 if (Mnorm
                                                   i   )h,w < τi

where τi is calculated by weighted averaging the activation values inside and outside the corresponding
bounding box Bi in Eq. (6). Tuple (h, w) represents a spatial entry of the attention map.
Box selection. The binary mask M̂i in Eq. (7) highlights the foreground region associated with the
ith concept. Nonetheless, there remains a domain gap (Cai et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023a) between M̂i and the ground-truth bounding box Bi , since the latter only describes the shape,
size, and position of the object through a rectangular binary mask. To bridge the gap, we perform box
selection by extending M̂i to its minimum bounding rectangle (MBR) B̂i to match Bi , as illustrated
in Figure 2. Even though, directly optimizing B̂i towards its ground-truth Bi is not feasible because
the MBRs are hard and non-differentiable masks. Towards practical implementation, we first adopt
two variants of Mi : a shape-aware attention map Msi (Epstein et al., 2023) and an appearance-aware
attention map Mai (see Appendix C for details). Then we construct a differentiable path from the
hard mask B̂i to the two consecutive attention maps via a Straight-Through Estimator (STE) for the
region-aware cross-attention guidance:


                                 Bˆis = stopgrad(B̂i − Msi ) + Msi ,                                  (8)
                                 Bˆa = stopgrad(B̂i − Mai ) + Mai .
                                   i                                                                  (9)

Numerically, the two binary masks Bˆis and Bˆia in Eqs. (8) and (9) equal to B̂i . However, since Bˆis
and Bˆia are differentiable, we can directly design loss functions on the above two binary masks
to transform the layout condition into gradients, and optimize the input noisy latent through error
backpropagation for layout control.
Region-aware loss for attention guidance. After obtaining the aforementioned differentiable boxes,
we align them with the ground-truth bounding box Bi through a region-aware loss:
                                                  P
                                                      h,w B̂i ⊙ Bi
                                  IoUi = P                                 ,                         (10)
                                              h,w B̂i + (1 − B̂i ) ⊙ Bi

                                                                   P        ˆs
                                                                       h,w Bi ⊙ Bi
                         Lir (zt ; Bi ) = (1 − IoUi ) · (λs (1 −                   )
                                                                       P       ˆs
                                                                          h,w Bi
                                                                                                     (11)
                                                  P        ˆa
                                                      h,w Bi ⊙ Bi
                                       +λa (1 −                   )).
                                                      P       ˆa
                                                         h,w Bi

The fraction in Lir encourages the attention map to transport its top values from current high-activation
regions into the target regions. IoUi in Eq. (10) measures the spatial accuracy of generative layout,
and controls the scale of Lir . When B̂i completely agrees with Bi , Lir falls to 0. Different from energy
functions proposed in previous methods (Phung et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023), Lir
in Eq. (11) directly measures the divergence between the predicted MBR and ground-truth Bi , which
provides a more accurate guidance path for the diffusion model, leading to better generation accuracy
in accordance with layout constraints.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Boundary-aware loss for attention guidance. Recent work (Li et al., 2023b) proposes to enhance
the faithfulness of synthetic images by incentivizing the presence of objects via maximizing the total
variation of cross-attention maps, which promotes local changes in attention maps and facilitates the
appearance of discriminative object-relative regions within the image. Inspired by this, we propose a
boundary-aware loss to enlarge the variation of cross-attention maps within the regions corresponded
to different objects:


                                            Ei = Sobel(Mi ),                                          (12)

                                                                    P
                                                                        h,w Ei ⊙ Bi
                           Lib (zt ; Bi ) = (1 − IoUi ) · (1 −          P              ),             (13)
                                                                           h,w Ei


where Sobel(·) represents the Sobel Operator and Ei is the extracted edge map from the aggregated
attention map. Intuitively, Lib enlarges the sum of changes in Bi and suppresses the outer activation,
thus constrains the objects to express within bounding boxes and better adheres to the semantics. To
this way, the overall energy function for classifier guidance in Section 2 can be written as:

                                                       X
                       g(zt ; t, y) = g(zt ; t, B) =           Lir (zt ; Bi ) + Lib (zt ; Bi ).       (14)
                                                       Bi ∈B


At each denoising step, we calculate the gradient of g(zt ; t, B) and update the latent zt :


                                      zt ← zt − ηg ∇zt g(zt ; t, B).                                  (15)

A visual example for the controlling process of cross-attention maps is shown in Appendix D
(Figure 7). The proposed R&B iteratively refines the cross-attention maps during the sampling
process, and effectively enforces the high responses to concentrate within the corresponding boxes.


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Dataset. We utilize different datasets to validate the effectiveness of our approach quantitatively. First,
we compare our model performance against different state-of-the-art methods from the perspective
of generation accuracy. We use two benchmarks: HRS (Bakr et al., 2023) and Drawbench (Saharia
et al., 2022). The HRS dataset is composed of various prompts tagged with name of objects and
corresponding labels. We select three tracks to validate the effectiveness of our proposed method:
spatial/size/color, the number of prompts for each category are 1002/501/501 respectively. The
Drawbench dataset comprises 39 prompts, with manually annotated labels assigned to each prompt.
To evaluate the spatial accuracy, we select a subset of 20 samples from this benchmark. The bounding
box annotations for the above two benchmarks is generated according to the textual prompts with
the aid of GPT-4 (Phung et al., 2023). Second, we assess all the methods in terms of their fidelity to
the textual input. We select 100 samples from the MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) dataset and create
triplets consisting of image caption, object phrases and bounding boxes. Five images are randomly
generated for each samples to measure the consistency with image caption.
Metrics. In order to evaluate the generative accuracy, we adopt the method used in HRS (Bakr et al.,
2023). This method leverages an object-detection model to detect objects within the synthetic images.
Accordingly, one image is considered as a correct prediction when all detected objects are correct and
their spatial relationships, sizes or color align with the corresponding phrases in the prompt. For the
alignment with layout conditions, we report mean IoU score between the bounding boxes predicted
by detection model and the ground-truth. For the fidelity to the textual input, we utilize CLIP-Score
to measure the distance between input textual features and generated image features.

                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   “A birthday cake with fruit toppings”


   “A birthday cake with fruit toppings”


   “A birthday cake with fruit toppings”                       candles                            rose toppings


Figure 3: Illustration of visual variations. We vary the textual prompt and layout constraints to
generate different images. The size and localization of the bounding boxes are changed for spatial
control. The instances of the text prompt are alternated for semantic editing. More visual variations
for different text prompts can be found in Appendix F (Figure 14).

4.2    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Visual variations. To validate the robustness of the proposed method, we generate different images
by varying the textual input and bounding box constraints. Visual results are shown in Figure 3, we
choose “A birthday cake with fruit toppings” as the basic text prompt. In the top row, the localization
of the birthday cake changes from the bottom to the top of the image according to the box instructions.
In the middle row, the cake grows taller from left to right, and the localization of the fruit toppings
changes accordingly. These show that our synthetic images highly align with the box information
across a range of size and localization variations. In the bottom row, we adopt multiple changes
with prompt alternation and box adjustment, while R&B presents delicate results respectively. This
demonstrates that our method simulates the layout control from different aspects robustly, maintaining
high generation fidelity and accuracy.
Quantitative comparison. We validate the generative accuracy of our method and existing state-of-
the-art zero-shot grounded T2I approaches (details can be found in Appendix B). Comparison results
are shown in Table 1. For the spatial category, our method surpasses the best methods by 5.69%
on HRS and 11.50% on DrawBench. For the size and color categories, our proposed method also
beats the baselines by a large margin of 9.77% and 8.5%. The proposed region-aware loss guides the
generative process to follow the layout more faithfully, which is the key to improve performance on
spatial and size category. Our proposed boundary-aware loss enables the generation of more objects
according to layouts, which boosts performance on hard cases with 3 or 4 objects. Quantitative
comparisons of the alignment with layout constraints and textual input are in the Appendix F (Table 5).

          Methods           Stable Diffusion   BoxDiff   Layout-guidance   Attention-refocusing   R&B (Ours)

                  Spatial        8.48           16.31         16.47               24.45              30.14

        HRS         Size         9.18           11.02         12.38               16.97              26.74

                    Color        12.61          13.23         14.39               23.54              32.04

      DrawBench   Spatial        12.50          30.00         36.50               43.50              55.00

Table 1: Quantitative comparisons with competing methods. The evaluation accuracy (%) is
reported. Best results are bold.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                       “A pit bull dog
                                                                                        on a messy bed
                                                                                      beside a handbag”


                                                                                       “A living room
                                                                                        with a couch
                                                                                         and chair”


                                                                                      “a white cup and
                                                                                      a large knife on
                                                                                       a counter top”


                                                                                        “a woman with
                                                                                       a rope leading
                                                                                           a horse”


                                                                                        “Three horses
                                                                                       on the runway”



                    Stable                     Attention-     Layout-
      Layout                      BoxDiff                                    R&B        Text prompt
                   Diffusion                   refocusing     guidance

Figure 4: Visual comparisons with different baselines. We compare our R&B with Stable Diffusion
and several zero-shot grounded T2I baselines. Bounding boxes related to different objects are
annotated on the images with dashed boxes. Zoom in for better visualization.
Visual comparisons. In Figure 4 we illustrate a visual comparison between our method and several
competing baselines. We observe that without additional layout constraints, the vanilla Stable
Diffusion suffers from missing objects and object counting error, therefore the generated images fail
to convey the given layout information. Existing methods achieve zero-shot grounded T2I generation
via diffusion guidance, and present competitive results that better reflects the object layouts. Yet
the critical problems of T2I methods mentioned above still exist. For example, BoxDiff fails to
generate the cup (3rd row), Attention-refocusing fails to generate the handbag (1st row) and chair (2nd
row), Layout-guidance fails to generate the chair (2nd row), and both BoxDiff and Layout-guidance
generate horses with incorrect number, see the last row. Furthermore, many synthetic images do not
comply well with the layout constraints. In comparison, our proposed R&B (1) handles the semantic


                                                                                    “Three cars on
                                                                                      the street”


                                                                                    “A dog running
                                                                                     with a man on
                                                                                       a horse”



         Layout                                                                       Text prompt
Figure 5: Ablation study for the effect of different losses. We illustrate the visual impact of Lr and
Lb respectively, and also show the combined results.

                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


deficiency problems well, (2) produces images that better align with the bounding boxes, (3) better
reflects the semantics of the given text prompts (e.g., rope in the woman’s hands for leading a horse).
The effectiveness of our R&B method can be attributed to the reliable guidance provided by the region-
aware loss and the boundary-aware loss. The region-aware loss accurately captures the discrepancy
between the generated layout and the ground-truth boxes, while the boundary-aware loss calibrates
the generative process by encouraging the expression of different objects in their corresponding
regions. We notice that although Attention-refocusing yields high quantitative performance on HRS
and Drawbench benchmarks, the generated images do not align well with the box constraints. The
reason is that the above two benchmarks only evaluate the model’s generation accuracy in terms of
coarse-grained aspects. Images that do not align with the bounding box can still be considered as
correct in the evaluation. Additional generative results under different random seeds for competing
methods can be found in Appendix F (Figure 9).

4.3     A BLATION STUDY

Impact of different loss components. In Figure 5, we present visual results for comprehension of
our proposed region-aware loss Lr and boundary-aware loss Lb . We observe that Lr (the second
column) contributes to good spatial accuracy, yet does not handle some difficult semantics well. For
example, the wrong number of cars, and the missing man on the horse. On the other hand, with Lb
alone, the generated images (the third column) better adhere to the text semantics, but do not align
well with the ground-truth bounding boxes. The fourth column shows visual result of the combination
of the two losses. We witness that they complement each other well, and present boosted generative
results with higher spatial and semantic accuracy. As for the quantitative analysis of the two losses,
please refer to Table 4 in Appendix E.
Impact of the guidance ratio. We analyze the impact of the guidance ratio ηg in Eq. (15) for
the energy function g from the quantitative aspect. Numerical results on MS-COCO are shown in
Table 2. We scale ηg from 20 to 300, and report the mean IoU and T2I similarity to measure the
alignment with layout and textual input respectively. We utilize UniDet (Zhou et al., 2022) to detect
objects in the synthesized images, and calculate the mean IoU score between the predicted object
bounding boxes and their corresponding ground-truth boxes. The upper bound of the mean IoU is
0.875, for some phrases in the textual prompts do not belong to the test classes of UniDet. As for the
text-to-image similarity, we calculate the CLIP-Score of the image features and corresponding text
prompt features. We observe the fact that as ηg grows, the two scores are improved at the beginning,
and then experience a rapid decline. The reason is that excessively strong constraints greatly impair
the generative fidelity, leading to a deterioration in the evaluation results. Practically, we choose ηg
as 70 for all the experiments, in order to balance the generative accuracy and fidelity. Due to space
constraints, we discuss the additional ablation results detailly in Appendix E.

                      20        50        60           70      80        100       150        300
       mIoU (↑)     0.5075    0.5303    0.5239    0.5533     0.5460    0.5658     0.5626    0.4818
      T2I-Sim (↑)   0.3146    0.3141    0.3186    0.3218     0.3138    0.3158     0.3136    0.3007

Table 2: Quantitative analysis of the guidance ratio. We utilize mIoU to measure the alignment
with box instructions, and CLIP-Score to measure the correspondence between images and texts.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose R&B, a novel attention guidance approach for diffusion based zero-shot
text-to-image generation. We point out two prevalent issues associated with the current approaches:
(1) the misalignment between generated images and layout information, and (2) the semantic issues
inherited from the base T2I models. Accordingly, we propose a region and boundary aware guidance
approach to mitigate the above problems. Experimental results show that our proposed method
outperforms the existing baselines by a large margin both quantitatively and qualitatively, and verify
its robustness to various layout and textual conditions. Future work will focus on extensions of
zero-shot grounded generation in different scenarios (e.g., 3D, video).


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China: 62322211,
61931008, 62236008, 62336008, U21B2038, the Key R&D Plan Project of Zhejiang Province (No.
2024C01023), and Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences under
Grant 2020108.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Thomas Hayes, Oran Gafni, Sonal Gupta, Yaniv Taigman, Devi Parikh, Dani
 Lischinski, Ohad Fried, and Xi Yin. Spatext: Spatio-textual representation for controllable
 image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18370–18380, 2023.
Eslam Mohamed Bakr, Pengzhan Sun, Xiaoqian Shen, Faizan Farooq Khan, Li Erran Li, and
  Mohamed Elhoseiny. Hrs-bench: Holistic, reliable and scalable benchmark for text-to-image
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05390, 2023.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika Aittala,
  Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models with an
  ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 843–852, 2023.
Shaofei Cai, Liang Li, Xinzhe Han, Shan Huang, Qi Tian, and Qingming Huang. Semantic and
  correlation disentangled graph convolutions for multilabel image recognition. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023.
Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Training-free layout control with cross-attention
 guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03373, 2023.
Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
  Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11472–11481, 2022.
Guillaume Couairon, Marlène Careil, Matthieu Cord, Stéphane Lathuilière, and Jakob Verbeek.
  Zero-shot spatial layout conditioning for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.13754, 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00986, 2023.
Tejas Gokhale, Hamid Palangi, Besmira Nushi, Vibhav Vineet, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Chitta Baral,
  and Yezhou Yang. Benchmarking spatial relationships in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10015, 2022.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In The Eleventh International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2022.
Zilong Huang, Xinggang Wang, Jiasi Wang, Wenyu Liu, and Jingdong Wang. Weakly-supervised
  semantic segmentation network with deep seeded region growing. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7014–7023, 2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Yunji Kim, Jiyoung Lee, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dense text-to-image
  generation with attention modulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12964, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023a.
Yumeng Li, Margret Keuper, Dan Zhang, and Anna Khoreva. Divide & bind your attention for
  improved generative semantic nursing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10864, 2023b.
Long Lian, Boyi Li, Adam Yala, and Trevor Darrell. Llm-grounded diffusion: Enhancing prompt
  understanding of text-to-image diffusion models with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.13655, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
  Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Xuejing Liu, Liang Li, Shuhui Wang, Zheng-Jun Zha, Zechao Li, Qi Tian, and Qingming Huang.
  Entity-enhanced adaptive reconstruction network for weakly supervised referring expression
  grounding. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(3):3003–3018,
  2022.
Zhenhuan Liu, Liang Li, Jiayu Xiao, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Qingming Huang. Text-driven generative
  domain adaptation with spectral consistency regularization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7019–7029, 2023a.
Zhiheng Liu, Yifei Zhang, Yujun Shen, Kecheng Zheng, Kai Zhu, Ruili Feng, Yu Liu, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Yang Cao. Cones 2: Customizable image synthesis with multiple subjects.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19327, 2023b.
Henglei Lv, Jiayu Xiao, Liang Li, and Qingming Huang. Pick-and-draw: Training-free semantic
  guidance for text-to-image personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16762, 2024.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02421, 2023.
Quynh Phung, Songwei Ge, and Jia-Bin Huang. Grounded text-to-image synthesis with attention
  refocusing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05427, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–22510,
  2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emergent
  correspondence from image diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03881, 2023.
Yunbin Tu, Liang Li, Li Su, Zheng-Jun Zha, Chenggang Yan, and Qingming Huang. Self-supervised
  cross-view representation reconstruction for change captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2805–2815, 2023a.
Yunbin Tu, Chang Zhou, Junjun Guo, Huafeng Li, Shengxiang Gao, and Zhengtao Yu. Relation-aware
  attention for video captioning via graph learning. Pattern Recognition, 136:109204, 2023b.
Yunbin Tu, Liang Li, Li Su, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Qingming Huang. Smart: Syntax-calibrated
  multi-aspect relation transformer for change captioning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
Kira Vinogradova, Alexandr Dibrov, and Gene Myers. Towards interpretable semantic segmentation
  via gradient-weighted class activation mapping (student abstract). In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 13943–13944, 2020.
Andrey Voynov, Kfir Aberman, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Sketch-guided text-to-image diffusion models.
  In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–11, 2023.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for
  text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Jiayu Xiao, Liang Li, Chaofei Wang, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Qingming Huang. Few shot genera-
   tive model adaption via relaxed spatial structural alignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11204–11213, 2022.
Jinheng Xie, Yuexiang Li, Yawen Huang, Haozhe Liu, Wentian Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, and
   Mike Zheng Shou. Boxdiff: Text-to-image synthesis with training-free box-constrained diffusion.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10816, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Guangcong Zheng, Xianpan Zhou, Xuewei Li, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xi Li. Layoutdiffusion:
  Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22490–22499, 2023.
Xingyi Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Simple multi-dataset detection. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7571–7580,
  2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We utilize the Stable Diffusion V-1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) as our base generative model. We adopt
the DDIM scheduler (Song et al., 2020a) with 50 denoising steps. The ratio of classifier-free guidance
is set as 7.5. Previous works (Balaji et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2022) show that
T2I diffusion models tend to form the layout of each object in early stages and refine the generative
details (color, textures) in later stages. Thus we only perform layout guidance at the first 10 steps.
The λ for dynamic threshold in Eq. (6) is set as 0.4, the ratios λs and λa in Eq. (11) are set as 1.5 and
1.0 respectively.

B    D ETAILS OF COMPETING METHODS AND D ISCUSSIONS
Layout-guidance (Chen et al., 2023) is an attention control method for zero-shot grounded T2I
generation. It designs an energy function according to the box constraints:

                                                         P       (γ)
                                      (γ)                  u∈B Aui 2
                                E(A         , B, i) = (1 − P   (γ)
                                                                   ) ,                              (16)
                                                            u Aui

         (γ)
where Aui determines the attention value at location u corresponded to the ith token for the layer
γ. This energy function enforces high activation within the masked regions. At each time step, the
gradient of E is computed to update the noisy latent through backpropagation. Although adopting
energy function in Eq. (16) for layout guidance demonstrates effectiveness in many situations, there
still remains some critical issues. (1) Optimizing Eq. (16) aims at concentrating all attention scores
within the bounding box, which may lead to some tricky solutions (Xie et al., 2023). For example, in
Figure 4 (3rd row, 5th column), the generated cup is much smaller than the corresponding box. And
the number of generated horses is incorrect (5th row, 5th column), because most of the class-related
areas are within the boxes, the designed energy function is fooled and does not provide accurate latent
optimization directions. (2) This energy function is not sensitive to the scale of the activations and
may not effectively address some semantic deficiencies issues (missing objects, attribute binding).
Thus, even though Layout-guidance presents some delicate visual results in Figure 4, it does not
perform well on the HRS and Drawbench benchmarks.
BoxDiff (Xie et al., 2023) proposes three constraints for training-free grounded T2I image generation:
Inner-Box, Outer-Box, and Corner constraints. The Inner-Box constraint selects top-k elements of
cross-attention map within the bounding box and maximize their values. The Outer-Box constraint
selects top-k elements out of the box and minimize their values. The Corner constraint projects the
attention values alongside the x-axis and y-axis of the bounding boxes, and maximizes the projected
values in order to cope with some tricky solutions (e.g., the object becomes much more smaller than
the ground-truth box). The key insight of BoxDiff is to impose constraints on fewer elements with
higher responses of cross-attention maps, rather than all of the elements. When reproducing BoxDiff,
we find that it heavily relies on choice of initial seeds. The main reason is that the top-k selection
strategy introduces uncertainty during the denoising process. As a result, the generated outcomes
exhibit significant instability. This is shown in Figure 9 and 16, the generative layouts varies greatly
across different seeds, picking is required to adopt delicate results. We also observe that only impose
constraints on the peak values may results in outcomes that only discriminative regions of objects
locate within the box, see Figure 9 (upper half, 1st row), Figure 16 (bottom half, 1st row). Further,
visual results (Figure 4, Figure 9 and Figure 16) show that BoxDiff does not effectively cope with the
semantic issues.
Attention-refocusing (Phung et al., 2023) proposes a self-attention refocusing and cross-attention
refocusing (SAR&CAR) approach to guide the diffusion process according to the layout constraints by
manipulating both cross-attention maps and self-attention maps. As for the cross-attention guidance,
it maximizes the top values of cross-attention maps within bounding boxes in the same way as
the previous method (Chefer et al., 2023), and penalizes the top values in other object regions and
background respectively to suppress incorrect expression of different objects. As for the self-attention
guidance, it minimizes the similarity between the elements of background regions and the inner-box
regions to enforce the expression of objects in the correct places. Attention-refocusing is essentially
an enhancement of training-based methods (e.g., GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023a)), it borrows inspiration


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                      “A man in a
                                                                                    suit wearing a
                                                                                          tie”


                                                                                   “A pit bull dog
                                                                                    on a messy bed
                                                                                  beside a handbag”


                                                                                       “A cat is
                                                                                    surfing on the
                                                                                          sea”



        Layout                                                       R&B             Text Prompt

Figure 6: Visual examples for the effect of (a) Msi and (b) Mai . We illustrate the two variants of
cross-attention maps respectively, and also show the combined results.

from previous work (Chefer et al., 2023) to optimize the max attention values within and out of
the input boxes to cope with the semantic issues in grounded generation. Quantitative results in
Table 1 and 6 show that its proposed SAR&CAR boosts the performance of existing T2I methods
like Stable Diffusion and GLIGEN. However, when regarded as a training-free grounded generation
approach, the generative outcomes lack spatial accuracy. See Figure 4, 9 and 16 for visual examples.
Similar to BoxDiff, optimizing the max values of attention maps incorporates randomness into the
generative procedure and only ensures the most discriminative regions of objects are within the layout.
Meanwhile, the self-attention refocusing may not be effective during the early layout refinement
process, for it is not aware of the textual condition, when the generative layout differs significantly
from the ground truth, it does not provide accurate guidance for corresponding ojbects.

C    VARIANTS OF AGGREGATED C ROSS - ATTENTION M APS
We mentioned two variants of Mi in Section 3: Msi and Mai , respectively. Here we formulate these
two variants as below:


                          Msi = normalize(sigmoid(s · (Mnorm
                                                        i    − τi ))),                               (17)
                                            Mi − minh,w (Mi )
                          Mai = Mnorm
                                   i  =                              .                               (18)
                                        maxh,w (Mi ) − minh,w (Mi )

The formulation of Msi is inspired by previous work (Epstein et al., 2023), which adopts soft masks
from the cross-attention maps. The sigmoid(·) operation (with sharpness controlled by s) helps
to eliminate the noisy background that is thresholded by τi . In this manner, Msi represents a soft
mask that describes the shape and size of the ith object. Practically, we find that although imposing
constraints on Msi helps for fast convergence of layout control, it is somehow not sufficient for
grounded T2I generation. This is because the sigmoid(·) function introduces nonlinearity to the
guidance process. When the responses of elements deviate from the threshold, the gradients of the
elements decrease rapidly. This leads to the insensitivity to the layout guidance in some local regions
(e.g., background regions), reflected by redundant textures or catastrophic neglect in the output images.
To cope with the above issue, we further utilize Mai , which simply rescales the cross-attention maps
with linear transforms, as a complement for Msi . Mai preserves the quantitative relationships between
different activation regions of the original attention map, thereby better reflecting the appearance


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         “A black cat is chasing after a white dog”


              Stable Diffusion                                            R&B

                             “A cat looking at a laptop computer”


              Layout-guidance                                             R&B
Figure 7: Visualization of cross attention maps at earlier diffusion steps. We show visual comparison
between our R&B and (1) Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), (2) Layout-guidance (Chen et al.,
2023). Both Layout-guidance and our method perform layout guidance at the first 10 steps.

information associated with the attention map. For better comprehension, we illustrate a visual
comparison in Figure 6, (a) and (b) represent using Mai and Msi for layout guidance respectively.
We find that only optimizing Msi (2nd column) leads to weird visual effects in the synthetic images
annotated by dashed boxes, for example, the redundant tie (1st row) and sea waves (last row), and
the absence of the handbag on the bed (2nd row). By comparison, optimizing Mai (3rd column)
overcomes the above issues, yet does not guarantee alignment with the bounding box constraints (e.g.,
the wrong size of man, dog, and handbag in the first two rows). When optimizing the two variants
jointly during guidance process, R&B presents images with high (1) consistency with the layout
conditions, and (2) fidelity to the textual semantics.

D    V ISUALIZATION OF C ROSS - ATTENTION M APS

The first few denoising steps of diffusion models decide the approximate spatial layout of the
generated image, while cross attention maps are an intuitive way to describe it. To illustrate how
our method controls the generative layout through attention maps, we provide visualization of cross


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


attention maps within 10 denoising steps in Figure 7. The attention map is gradually refined from left
to right as the number of denoising steps increases. The upper half compares our method to Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and the lower half compares our method to Layout-guidance (Chen
et al., 2023). Stable diffusion lacks guidance of spatial information, therefore both objects are
possible to compete and activate on the same region, which leads to missing objects and attribute
misbinding in the generated image. Layout-guidance restricts high activation regions within the
corresponding bounding boxes, but fails to align the shape and size of objects with the box constraints.
By comparison, under the guidance of our region and boundary aware loss, the generative model
precisely localizes objects according to their layouts in the early sampling process. With the well
initialized generative layout, the T2I diffusion model produces images that align with the layout
conditions precisely, and possess high generative fidelity.


E    M ORE A BLATIONS AND ANALYSIS

Dynamic thresholding. Thresholding class-related activation maps (Vinogradova et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2018) for precise foreground region extraction is a challenging task, the reason is
that only weakly supervised information is available. Previous work (Epstein et al., 2023) adopts a
fixed threshold to obtain the size and shape of objects from the diffusion cross-attention maps for
image editing. Yet we find this not effective for layout generation, for the reason that the distribution
of cross-attention maps changes during guidance process. To address this, we utilize a dynamic
thresholding approach to highlight the foreground regions according to the mean activation values
within and outside the bounding box, formulated in Eq. (6). We show visual results in Figure 8. We
find that utilizing fixed threshold faces several issues: (1) it struggles to accurately generate objects,
which the original Stable Diffusion fails to synthesize, in the corresponding regions (e.g., the branch
in the 1st row and the hello kitty in the 2nd row). (2) it does not solve the improper attribute binding
problem, like the confusion of horse and car in the bottom row.
Discrete sampling. Inspired by previous works on deep model quantization (Jang et al., 2016; Sohn
et al., 2015), we differentiablly binarize the cross-attention maps via a Straight-Through Estimator
(STE), the formulation is shown in Eq. (8) and Eq. (9). This operation transforms the consecutive


                                                                                        "A dog is
                                                                                      standing on a
                                                                                      brown branch"


                                                                                       “A cell phone
                                                                                       placed on the
                                                                                        table with a
                                                                                     picture of hello
                                                                                           kitty”


                                                                                     “A yellow horse
                                                                                        and a car”



                            Stable            w/o Dynamic          w/ Dynamic
       Layout                                                                            Text Prompt
                           Diffusion          thresholding         thresholding

Figure 8: Visualization of the impact of dynamic thresholding. We show visual results of the
original Stable Diffusion (2nd column), binarizing the attention maps with threshold 0.5 (3rd column),
and binarizing the attention maps with a dynamic threshold (4th column), respectively.

                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  w/o Discrete sampling     w/ Discrete sampling

                    mIoU (↑)              0.5106                     0.5533

                   T2I-Sim (↑)            0.3142                     0.3218

Table 3: Quantitative ablation of discrete sampling. We conduct experiments on the subset of
MS-COCO. All the hyper-parameters are fixed for fair comparison.

attention maps into differentiable hard masks, and we design a discrete energy function in Eq. (11) to
directly measure the divergence between the predicted bounding boxes B̂i with the ground-truth Bi .
We show the impact of discrete sampling approach from the quantitative perspective, and illustrate
the results in Table 3. We alternate the discrete maps in Eq. (11) with Msi and Mai to ablate the
effect of discrete sampling. We observe that with the aid of discrete sampling, the generated images
better align with the box instructions and adhere to the textual input semantically.
Quantitative analysis of the proposed two losses. Here we analyze the impact of our proposed
two loss functions: region-aware loss Lr and boundary-aware loss Lb quantitatively. The generative
accuracy (%) on HRS and Drawbench is reported in Table 4. We observe that both Lr and Lb greatly
boost the performance of the original Stable Diffusion because they incorporate the layout information
into the generative process. Generally, using Lr for guidance yields higher accuracy than using Lb ,
especially in terms of the size metric on HRS. This is because Lr models the discrepancy between
cross-attention maps and bounding-box constraints more precisely, and the shape and localization of
generated objects better align with the layout instructions. Moreover, we find that the performance
of the diffusion model gets further improved when combining the above two losses together. This
demonstrates that these two losses cooperate with each other well during the guidance process.

                     Methods            Stable Diffusion    w/o Lr     w/o Lb    R&B
                              Spatial         8.48           20.01     25.99     30.14
                  HRS          Size           9.18           15.05     23.26     26.74
                               Color          12.61          23.22     27.32     32.04
              DrawBench       Spatial         12.50          42.50     47.50     55.00

Table 4: Quantitative results for different constraints. We evaluate two variants, where Lr and Lb
are removed from our full method. The generative accuracy (%) on HRS and DrawBench is reported.


F    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Qualitative comparisons. In Figure 9 we provide qualitative comparisons among different baselines
and our proposed R&B. Layout-guidance suffers from severe attribute misbinding problem, while
BoxDiff and Attention-Refocusing suffer from missing object. These issues are inhereted from Stable
Diffusion, which reflects that guidance from these methods is insufficient for the model to understand
the semantics of each object. Moreover, all baselines fail to generate objects that conform to the
bounding boxes accurately. Our proposed R&B mitigates the semantic issues by incentivizing object
activation in a region and boundary aware manner. It further greatly improves the alignment between
generated images and layout conditions through explicitly minimizing the difference between MBRs
and ground-truth bounding boxes. As a result, R&B generally produces images that better conform
to user input both semantically and spatially. Additionally, we find that R&B consistently produces
high-quality images regardless of seed selection, while other baselines rely on cherry picking from a
pile of generated images to satisfy user input.
Quantitative comparisons. We evaluate the adherence to the box constraints and textual input
of generated images for different diffusion-based methods. The experiments are conducted on


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             “An eagle is flying over a tree”



                                                                                         BoxDiff


                                                                                         Layout-
                                                                                         guidance


                                                                                         Attention-
                                                                                         refocusing


                                                                                           R&B


                           “A globe beside a bottle of water”



                                                                                         BoxDiff


                                                                                         Layout-
                                                                                         guidance


                                                                                         Attention-
                                                                                         refocusing


                                                                                           R&B


Figure 9: Visual comparisons among Layout-guidance (Chen et al., 2023), BoxDiff (Xie et al., 2023),
Attention-Refocusing (Phung et al., 2023) and the proposed R&B.


   Methods      Stable Diffusion   BoxDiff    Attention-refocusing   Layout-guidance   R&B (Ours)

   mIoU (↑)         0.2700          0.3753            0.3960             0.4460          0.5533

  T2I-Sim (↑)       0.2920          0.3003            0.3023             0.3108          0.3218

Table 5: Quantitative comparisons with baselines. We calculate the mean IoU and CLIP similarity
for different methods on the selected subset of MS-COCO. For each sample, we randomly generate
five images for evaluation. Best results are bold.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“A cat riding a dog”              “A person and a horse beside a    “A person, a chair and a horse
                                  car”                              beneath an airplane”


                         Figure 10: Failure cases of our proposed method.


the manually collected subset of MS-COCO with 100 samples. We observe that the SOTA zero-
shot grounded T2I methods BoxDiff (Xie et al., 2023), Layout-guidance (Chen et al., 2023), and
Attention-refocusing (Phung et al., 2023) greatly improve the mean IoU of generated images because
they effectively incorporate the layout information into the diffusion process. Meanwhile, the T2I
similarity of Stable Diffusion is also boosted due to the spatial alignment. By comparison, our
proposed R&B surpasses the existing methods by a large margin from the two aspects of fidelity to
the text prompt and alignment with the layout condition, which agrees with the visual results shown
in Figure 4. Quantitative results further validate that our method helps the model to generate images
with better spatial accuracy, and simultaneously convey the essential semantics of the text prompts.
More qualitative results. Figure 11, 12, and 13 illustrate synthetic results of the proposed R&B
under different random seeds. We observe obvious textural level variations across different random
seeds, which shows great diversity of the synthetic results. Yet the objects in the generated images
consistently align with the layout conditions. In Figure 14, given a fixed bounding box condition, we
vary the key phrases of the original prompt “A castle stands across the lake under the blue sky” to
adopt different generative results. Our proposed R&B produces images with (1) high fidelity to the
various prompts, and (2) adherence to the layout instructions.

G    L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
Figure 10 shows three possible failure cases of our proposed method. Firstly, if the prompt is too
uncommon, e.g. Out-Of-Domain, our method cannot generate accurate objects according to the given
layout. Secondly, unreasonable layouts also worsen the generation, leading to unrealistic objects.
This is because the pretrained base model (Stable Diffusion) does not cover these extreme scenes.
Thirdly, prompts with too many objects (four and more) are beyond the capacity of model and missing
objects are observed.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 “A tree stands on the grass land
                                 with mountains in the background”


     Figure 11: Synthetic trees, grasslands, and mountains with the same spatial conditions.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 “An upright bear riding a bicycle”


           Figure 12: Synthetic bears riding bicycles with the same spatial conditions.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 “A Monet painting of a woman
                                 standing on a flower field,
                                 holding an umbrella sideways”


Figure 13: Synthetic women holding umbrellas on flower fields in the style of Monet with the same
spatial conditions.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“A castle stands across the lake under the blue sky”


“A temple stands across the lake under the blue sky”


“A stadium stands across the lake under the blue sky”


“A village stands across the lake under the blue sky”


“A castle stands across the mountain under the blue sky”


“A castle stands across the grass land under the blue sky”


“A castle stands across the cemetery under the dark sky”


                    Figure 14: Synthetic different buildings on different backgrounds.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 “An orange       “An orange   “An blue car    “An blue car    “An blue car     “An blue car
                fox under a      car under a      under a       under a red    under a pink     under a pink
                black ball”      black ball”    black ball”        ball”           ball”            dog”


                                                                                                “A slice of
                 “A cute dog     “A cute dog    “A cute dog    “A fluffy dog   “A fluffy cat     watermelon
                  besides a       besides a      besides a       besides a       besides a        besides a
                blue handbag”   red handbag”   pink handbag”   pink handbag”     pink bowl”    green apple”


Figure 15: Illustration of the effect of R&B for attribute binding in T2I models. We vary the attributes
and nouns in the textual prompts to generate different images. Textual changes are emphasized.


H    VARIATION OF ATTRIBUTES AND NOUNS

In Figure 15 we illustrate how the proposed R&B copes with the attribute binding issues. Given
consistent grounding input, we vary the nouns or attributes to adopt different synthetic results. Vanilla
Stable Diffusion struggles to allocate multiple attributes with respect to different objects properly,
which results in semantic errors. Nevertheless, we witness that R&B helps to bind the nouns and
their corresponding attributes across different variations.

I   C OMPARISON WITH GLIGEN

In this section, we first compare our R&B with the training-based grounded T2I generation approach
GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023a) from the quantitative aspect. We then illustrate some visual comparisons
for better comprehension.
GLIGEN searches for embedding the spatial instructions into a pretrained T2I diffusion models (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion). It injects auxiliary gated self-attention layer at each transformer block to absorb
new grounding input. Training Stable Diffusion model on COCO detection datasets requires for 500k
iteration on 16 V100 GPUs.
Quantitative. We quantitatively compare our method with GLIGEN on HRS and Drawbench.
Numerical results are shown in Table 6. We find that although well-trained on annotated data,
GLIGEN does not perform well on the color setting, which implies that it does not effectively cope
with the attribute binding issues and some out-of-domain textual prompts (e.g., “a red dog and
an orange horse”). As for the size and spatial categories, GLIGEN yields high accuracy because
the generated images align well with the size and location of the grounding input. Notably, when


          Methods             SAR&CAR      R&B     GLIGEN      GLIGEN+SAR&CAR           GLIGEN+R&B

                  Spatial       24.45      30.14    45.71              54.19                   56.87

       HRS          Size        16.97      26.74    36.13              39.72                   42.69

                    Color       23.54      32.04    17.84              29.46                   35.72

    DrawBench     Spatial       43.50      55.00    48.00              64.00                   67.50

Table 6: Quantitative comparisons with GLIGEN. The evaluation accuracy (%) is reported. Best
results are bold. Second best results are underlined.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“As the aurora lights up the sky, a herd of reindeer leisurely wanders on the grassy meadow,
admiring the breathtaking view, a serene lake quietly reflects the magnificent display, and
in the distance, a snow-capped mountain stands majestically, fantasy, 8k, highly detailed”


                                                                                          BoxDiff


                                                                                          Layout-
                                                                                          guidance


                                                                                         Attention-
                                                                                         refocusing


                                                                                          GLIGEN


                                                                                           R&B


                 1            2            3           11           12           13
“An airplane and a tv”


                                                                                          BoxDiff


                                                                                          Layout-
                                                                                          guidance


                                                                                         Attention-
                                                                                         refocusing


                                                                                          GLIGEN


                                                                                           R&B


                 1            2            3           11           12           13


Figure 16: Visual results between training-free methods and training-based method. The example
prompts are borrowed from the paper of BoxDiff. Seeds for latent initialization are annotated at the
bottom. Zoom in for better view.

combined with R&B, the performance of GLIGEN gets consistently boosted (the rightmost column),
because the region-aware loss further enhances the alignment between generative objects and the
corresponding boxes, and the boundary-aware loss helps with the expression of different objects in
their corresponding regions to better cooperate with the textual semantics. The performance of a


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“A teddy bear and two cats sitting on the grass”


                                                                                           Layout-
                                                                                           guidance


                                                                                          Attention-
                                                                                          refocusing


                                                                                           GLIGEN


                                                                                            R&B



“Four shoes on the field with a football in the background”


                                                                                           Layout-
                                                                                           guidance


                                                                                          Attention-
                                                                                          refocusing


                                                                                           GLIGEN


                                                                                            R&B


Figure 17: Visual results between training-free methods and training-based method on object counts
setting. Zoom in for better view.

strong competing method “GLIGEN+SAR&CAR” is also reported in the second rightmost colmun
of Table 6. SAR&CAR is the loss function adopted from Attention-refocusing (Phung et al., 2023).
Qualitative. Some visual comparisons between GLIGEN and our proposed R&B are shown in
Figure 16, 17 and 18. The box information and textual prompts of Figure 16 are inherited from
the paper of BoxDiff (Xie et al., 2023). The random seeds for latent initialization are shown in the
bottom of the images. In the top half of Figure 16, all methods present relatively delicate outcomes,
because the textual input is rather concrete and constitutes an in-domain prompt. In the bottom
half of Figure 16, given an unusual prompt, we witness entanglement of semantics in the images
generated by previous methods. For example, BoxDiff, Attention-refocusing and GLIGEN generate
televisions inside the cabin of an airplane, Layout-guidance and GLIGEN generate TVs with airplane
on the screen. By comparison, with the aid of the design region and boundary aware constraints, our
approach better cope with the semantic confusion issue in grounded generation, and generate images
that align with the layout instructions.
Comparisons on the setting of object counts are presented in Figure 17. BoxDiff is not included since
it does not support the input format of multiple boxes pointing to the same object. Training-free


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Layout                                       GLIGEN+
                            GLIGEN                                            Text Prompt
    Instruction                                      R&B


                                                                       “a person under a
                                                                       airplane”


                                                                       “a person and
                                                                       banana under a
                                                                       chair and above a
                                                                       car”



                                                                       “a car and a
                                                                       airplane, the car
                                                                       is bigger than
                                                                       the airplane”



                                                                       “a person which
                                                                       is bigger than a
                                                                       car and dog and
                                                                       larger than chair”


                                                                       “a yellow
                                                                       airplane and a
                                                                       blue horse”


                                                                       “a blue airplane,
                                                                       a red horse and a
                                                                       orange dog”


Figure 18: Visual results of the boost of GLIGEN combined with R&B on HRS benchmark. The up-
permost, middle, lowermost two rows correspond to the spatial, size and color category, respectively.



                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods like Layout-guidance and Attention-refocusing suffer from attribute leakage and missing
object problems, therefore fail to consistently generate accurate object counts. Specifically, Layout-
guidance generates cats that severely inherit features from the teddy bear and Attention-refocusing
often forgets to generate small cats. The same problem also happens at the case of football and shoes.
GLIGEN, as a training-based method, generates right amount of objects, but somewhat at the cost of
decreased generative quality and diversity: (1) the lighting and texture of teddy bears and cats do not
match the background, and (2) the teddy bear always faces forward and the four shoes share the same
appearance. In comparison, our R&B generates consistently high-quality results while preserving
diversity, due to the accurate layout guidance provided by the proposed two losses. Please note that
the ambiguity of the word football causes two different appearances of the generated ball.
Figure 18 includes some visual examples on the HRS benchmark. We witness that GLIGEN provides
strong prior to grounded multi-object generation, but still fails to accurately generate images with
some unusual prompts. As an attention manipulation approach, R&B (1) boosts the generative fidelity



     Layout
                                Zest                    R&B                    Text Prompt
   Instruction


                                                                           “A brown teddy
                                                                         bear sitting in a
                                                                             red chair”


                                                                         “A horse standing
                                                                        besides a red car”


                                                                         “A girl in white
                                                                         shirt riding on a
                                                                               horse”


                                                                        “A woman holding a
                                                                        phone on her hands”



                                                                        “A giraffe wearing
                                                                        a red magician hat,
                                                                         sunglasses, and a
                                                                         tie, a bundle of
                                                                             balloon”

               Figure 19: Visual comparisons between Zest and our proposed R&B.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of GLIGEN (1st row) of images, (2) helps to cope with the entanglement of different concepts (2nd
row), (3) helps to fix poor semantics like size (4th row) and color (5th and 6th rows). This is confirmed
by the quantitative results in Table 6.

J   C OMPARISON WITH Z EST
Zest (Couairon et al., 2023) is a zero-shot segmentation guidance approach for T2I diffusion mod-
els. It adopts a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss for each cross-attention map entry, enabling the
representation of objects in their respective mask regions, formulated as below:


                                     K
                                     X                                Ŝi
                           LZest =     (LBCE (Ŝi , Si ) + LBCE (          , Si ))                  (19)
                                     i=1
                                                                    ∥Si ∥∞

In Figure 19 we compare our method with Zest from the visual aspect. We observe when conditioned
on grounded input like bounding boxes, which only coarsely describe the size and location of
corresponding objects, Zest tends to impose too strong constraints to the diffusion models. As shown
in the 2nd and 4th rows, the generated horse, car, and woman simply fill the entire boxes, presenting
poor fidelity. We also observe the presence of peculiar artifacts on some synthetic images (2nd and
3rd rows). By comparison, our proposed R&B aligns well with the grounding input, and meanwhile
presents images with better quality and semantic consistency.


                                                    29
