Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O FFLINE T RACKING WITH O BJECT P ERMANENCE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         To reduce the expensive labor cost for manual labeling autonomous driving
         datasets, an alternative is to automatically label the datasets using an offline per-
         ception system. However, objects might be temporally occluded. Such occlusion
         scenarios in the datasets are common yet underexplored in offline auto labeling.
         In this work, we propose an offline tracking model that focuses on occluded ob-
         ject tracks. It leverages the concept of object permanence which means objects
         continue to exist even if they are not observed anymore. The model contains three
         parts: a standard online tracker, a re-identification (Re-ID) module that associates
         tracklets before and after occlusion, and a track completion module that completes
         the fragmented tracks. The Re-ID module and the track completion module use
         the vectorized map as one of the inputs to refine the tracking results with oc-
         clusion. The model can effectively recover the occluded object trajectories. It
         achieves state-of-the-art performance in 3D multi-object tracking by significantly
         improving the original online tracking result, showing its potential to be applied
         in offline auto labeling as a useful plugin to improve tracking by recovering oc-
         clusions.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Supervised deep learning-based models have achieved good performance in autonomous driving.
However, it usually requires a huge amount of labeled data with high quality to train and tune
such data-hungry models. The traditional approach is manual labeling, where all the labels are
provided by human annotators. A more effective way is to auto label datasets, where labels can
be automatically provided by a trained perception system. Waymo first proposed to auto label data
offline to improve the quality of the generated labels Qi et al. (2021). In online tracking, the location
of an object is inferred only from past and present sensor data. Offline multi-object tracking (MOT)
is acausal and the position of an object can be inferred from past, present, and future sensor data.
A consistent estimate of the scene can thus be optimized globally using the data not limited to only
a short moment in the past. Based on global information, Yang et al. (2021); Qi et al. (2021); Fan
et al. (2023); Ma et al. (2023) have developed offline auto labeling pipelines that generate accurate
object trajectories in 3D space from LiDAR point cloud sequence data.
Previous offline labeling methods mainly focused on using the observation sequence to refine the
unoccluded trajectories (e.g. location, orientation, and size of the bounding boxes). However, object
trajectories and point cloud sequences are sometimes partially missing because of the temporary oc-
clusions on the objects. Severely occluded objects are likely to be missed by detectors and thus can-
not be continuously tracked. Furthermore, the trackers in Yang et al. (2021); Qi et al. (2021) adopt
the death memory strategy to terminate the unmatched tracks, which means a track not matched with
any detections for a predefined number of frames will be terminated. Therefore, the identity of the
same object may switch after reappearance from occlusion. Wang et al. (2021) proposed to capture
object permanence by not terminating any unmatched tracks. It has been applied in Fan et al. (2023);
Ma et al. (2023) for its effectiveness in reducing identity switches (IDS). However, their data associ-
ation is simply done by using the constant-velocity prediction from a Kalman filter Kalman (1960)
which cannot capture the nonlinear motion under long occlusions. Thus, tracking under occlusion
remains a challenge in point cloud-based offline auto labeling. Motion prediction models Liang et al.
(2020); Gao et al. (2020), on the other hand, can produce accurate vehicle trajectories over longer
horizons based on a semantic map. The lanes on the map serve as a strong prior knowledge to guide
the motion of target vehicles and thus can be used to estimate motion under occlusion.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this work, we propose an offline tracking model containing three modules to tackle the afore-
mentioned problems. The first module is an off-the-shelf online tracker which produces the initial
tracking result. Leveraging the idea of object permanence, the second Re-ID module tries to reasso-
ciate the terminated tracklets with the possible future candidate tracklets. Based on the association
result, the last track completion module completes the missing trajectories. Taking the insight from
the motion prediction task, we have extracted map information as a prior to enhance the association
and track completion modules. Unlike common motion prediction methods with a prediction hori-
zon predefined during training Deo et al. (2022); Gilles et al. (2021), our model can use a flexible
prediction horizon at inference time to decode the predicted poses in the track completion mod-
ule, to deal with variable occlusion durations. We train and evaluate our modules on the nuScenes
dataset Caesar et al. (2020). Previous offline auto labeling methods are mainly optimized for the
precision of the visible bounding boxes, which is a metric for the object detection task. Their perfor-
mances on MOT metrics are not fully optimized or evaluated. On the other hand, our work focuses
on the optimization and evaluation for the MOT metrics (e.g. AMOTA). We observe significant
improvements after performing Re-ID over the occlusion scenarios. We then demonstrate the ability
of the track completion module to recover the occluded tracks. To further evaluate our model on
a larger amount of occlusion cases, we also introduce artificial pseudo-occlusions by masking the
ground truth (GT) tracks. We finally evaluated the two modules separately on the pseudo-occlusions.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
       • We propose an offline tracking model for Re-ID (Sect. 3.1) and occluded track recovery
         (Sect. 3.2) to track occluded vehicles.
       • We innovatively apply prediction-based methods in offline tracking and use the lane map
         as a prior to improve the Re-ID (Sect. 3.1.2) and track completion (Sect. 3.2). To deal with
         variable occlusion duration, we decode trajectories from variable time queries (Sect. 3.2).
       • We optimize our method for the MOT task and demonstrate the improvements relative
         to the original online tracking results on the nuScenes dataset (Sect. 5.1), showing the
         potential of our model to be applied in offline auto labeling as a useful plugin to improve
         tracking and recover occlusions.

2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   T RACKING UNDER OCCLUSION
Estimating a target’s motion under occlusion is one of the main challenges in the tracking task. A
common method adopts a constant velocity Weng et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2021) or constant ac-
celeration Wang et al. (2022) transition model and uses the Kalman filter Kalman (1960) to update
the tracks when detections are missed due to occlusion. Yin et al. (2021) directly estimates displace-
ment offset (or velocity) between frames. The unmatched track is updated with a constant velocity
model. PermaTrack Tokmakov et al. (2021) supervises the occluded motion with pseudo-labels that
keep constant velocity. Those methods heavily rely on motion heuristics. Such heuristics work well
for short occlusion since objects are likely to keep moving forward with little velocity or acceler-
ation variation. However, they cannot capture the nonlinear motion under long occlusion. Due to
the large deviation error accumulated over time, the prediction of the unmatched track would not be
associated with the correct detection. Most tracking models that have finite death memory Yin et al.
(2021); Weng et al. (2020) would terminate such unmatched tracks, even if the object is detected
again later. Such premature termination would lead to IDS. Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)
effectively reduces such IDS by extending the life of unmatched tracks forever. Büchner & Valada
(2022) uses a multi-modal Graph Neural Network (GNN) to produce robust association offline. Our
model does not rely on any handcrafted motion heuristics to predict future motion or to associate.
Given any pair of future and history tracklets, the model outputs the learned affinity scores directly.
2.2   O FFLINE AUTO LABELING FROM LIDAR POINT CLOUDS
Manually annotating lidar point cloud data takes much effort due to the sparsity of the data and the
temporal correlation of the sequence. Several works have attempted to tackle this problem by auto-
matically labeling the dataset. Auto4D and 3DAL Yang et al. (2021); Qi et al. (2021) fully automate
annotation by taking initial tracklets generated from an online tracker (i.e. AB3DMOT Weng et al.
(2020)). Then, the point cloud features are extracted globally on the temporal horizon to refine the


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


initial tracks. Given full observation, such refinement utilizes future information to perform global
optimization offline. In Auto4d Yang et al. (2021), two rounds of refinement are performed to se-
quentially refine the box size and trajectory. Point cloud features and motion features are used to
jointly refine the trajectory. In 3DAL Qi et al. (2021), static objects and dynamic objects are treated
separately. Segmented foreground point cloud feature sequences and bounding box sequence fea-
tures are used together to refine the box sequences. Though these methods can produce accurate
bounding boxes, their data association is still simply done online. The global information available
in the offline setting has yet to be utilized in tracking. Such methods are likely to produce IDS and
inconsistent tracks under occlusion. CTRL Fan et al. (2023) uses the Immortal Tracker Wang et al.
(2021) to associate fragmented tracks due to long occlusion or missing detection. Then it backtraces
the tracks by extrapolation to track the missing detections. Detzero Ma et al. (2023) also uses the
Immortal Tracker to perform bidirectional tracking on the time horizon and then ensemble the re-
sults with forward and reverse order tracking fusion. As a result, CTRL and Detzero have achieved
better results which surpass the human annotation. However, their data association still relies on a
Kalman filter with the constant-velocity model.

2.3       M AP - BASED PREDICTION

Semantic maps are widely used as an input in motion prediction methods. As it contains accurate
scene context from the surrounding environment, including road lanes, crosswalks, etc. With such
information, models can predict how target vehicles navigate in the environment over a long hori-
zon. HOME Gilles et al. (2021) rasterizes the map as multiple vector layers with distinct RGB
values representing different map elements. Alternatively, VectorNet Gao et al. (2020) proposes the
vectorized approach which represents curves as vectorized polylines. It uses a subgraph network
to encode each polyline as a node in a fully connected global interaction graph. It achieves bet-
ter performance over the CNN baseline and reduces the model size. To capture higher resolution,
LaneGCN Liang et al. (2020) uses polyline segments as map nodes. It models a sparsely connected
graph following the map topology. Similarly, PGP Deo et al. (2022) constrains the connected edges
such that any traversed path through the graph corresponds to a legal route that a vehicle can take.


3      M ETHOD

Detection sequence



t=1


                     Online                                                                   Track
t=2                                                         Re-ID
                     Tracker                                                                completion


t=3


       ...
                               (a) Online Tracking Result               (b) Offline Re-ID                (c) Recovered trajectory



Figure 1: A brief overview of the offline tracking model. (a) Online tracking result: Each tracklet
is represented by a different color (the history tracklet is red). (b) Offline Re-ID : The matched pair
of tracklets are red. The unmatched ones are black. (c) Recovered trajectory .


As shown in Fig. 1, our model initially takes the detections from a detector as input. Following Wang
et al. (2021), we also perform non-maxima suppression (NMS) on the detections. We only perform
intra-class NMS with an IoU threshold of 0.1. Then it uses an off-the-shelf online tracker to asso-
ciate detections and generate initial tracklets. Next, the Re-ID module tries to associate the possible
future tracklets with the terminated history tracklet. If a pair of tracklets are matched, the track
completion module interpolates the gap between them by predicting the location and orientation of
the missing box at each timestamp. Both modules extract motion information and lane map infor-
mation to produce accurate results. The model finally outputs the track with refined new identities
and completes the missing segments within the tracks.

                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The network structure of motion affinity branch. The orange branch represents the history
tracklet encoder, whereas the blue branch represents the future tracklets encoder. Three possible
future candidates correspond to the three outputted motion affinity scores.


3.1     R E -ID
Based on the concept of object permanence, we assume any tracklets could potentially be terminated
prematurely due to occlusion, and any other tracklets that appeared after the termination could be
matched. The Re-ID model has two branches, the motion and the map branch. The motion branch
takes tracklet motion as input and outputs affinity scores based on vehicle dynamics. The map branch
takes motion and the lane map as inputs and outputs affinity scores based on map connectivity. Thus,
for each target history tracklet, the model computes motion affinity and map-based affinity scores for
it with all the possible future tracklets. The problem can thus be treated as a binary classification
task for each single matching pair. The final score is a weighted sum of the motion and map affinity
scores. We perform bipartite matching by greedily associating history tracklets with their future
candidate tracklets based on the final scores. The matching pair which has a tracking score lower
than a threshold is excluded from the association. The detailed formulation and input features are
introduced in Appendix D.1.

3.1.1     M OTION AFFINITY
To compute the motion affinity, we transform the trajectories from the global frame to the local
agent frame, where the origin aligns with the pose of the last observation of the history tracklet. The
motion feature of each tracklet contains the location, orientation, time and velocity information at
every time step. Given one history tracklet and all its possible future matching candidate tracklets,
the model takes the motion features as input and outputs affinity scores in the range of [0, 1] for all
future tracklet candidates. As shown in Fig. 2, the motion affinity branch has a simple structure that
only contains MLP and GRU. The GRU encoder encodes the history motion and outputs the last
hidden state as history encoding. The history encoding is then used as the initial hidden state for the
UGRU Rozenberg et al. (2021) to encode future motions so that the future encoder is also aware of
the history information when encoding the future motion. Unlike the normal U-RNN used in motion
prediction for encoding history motion features, our UGRU first does a forward pass and then does
a backward pass in reverse order to encode the future motion features. The future motion encodings
are concatenated with the history encoding to decode motion affinity scores.

3.1.2     M AP - BASED AFFINITY
To improve the association accuracy, we further extract information from the lane graph as another
branch. The lane centerlines provide information about the direction of traffic flow and the possible
path for the vehicles to follow, which can be utilized for occluded motion estimation over a long
horizon. We divide the lanes into sections with a maximum length of 20m. Each lane section is
encoded as a node in the graph. For each node, the corresponding lane section is discretized to
several poses with a resolution of 1m. Each lane pose feature contains the location, orientation, and
semantic information of the lane.
As shown in Fig. 3, the map branch starts by encoding the history and the future tracklets, using the
same encoder previously introduced in the motion branch (Sect. 3.1.1). The lane pose features are
also encoded in parallel using a single-layer MLP. The model then performs agent-to-lane attention


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: A brief overview of the map branch. The branch starts with three parallel encoders which
encode the future tracklet, lanes and history tracklet respectively. The model then propagates in-
formation between tracklets and the lane map by performing attention. Finally, map-based affinity
scores are decoded from the tracklet features.


to fuse the information from the tracklets to the lanes. The model selectively performs attention
such that the tracklet encodings are only aggregated to the surrounding lanes nearby. We adopted
the spatial attention layer in Liang et al. (2020) to aggregate the feature from tracklets to lane poses.
Then, the model aggregates the feature from each sub-node lane pose to get the lane node features.
We apply a 2-layer-GRU to aggregate sub-node features. The first GRU layer is bidirectional so
that the information can flow in both directions. After getting the lane node features carrying the
information of the tracklets, the model performs gloabl attention Vaswani et al. (2017) to propagate
information globally in the graph. Next, the model aggregates the updated lane features back to
tracklets by applying a lane-to-agent attention layer Liang et al. (2020). Finally, the future and
history tracklet encodings updated with global map information are concatenated together. An MLP
decoder is applied to the concatenated features to decode map affinity scores.

3.1.3    A SSOCIATION
To match n history tracklets with N future tracklets, we have an affinity score matrices Cmotion
and Cmap ∈ n × N from the two branches, we first filter the matching pairs whose affinity scores
are lower than a threshold, then we get the final matching score matrix:
                                C = w · Cmap + (1 − w) · Cmotion                                     (1)
where w ∈ [0, 1] is a scalar weight. During experiments, we simply set w to 0.5. C is the weighted
sum of the two affinity matrices. Finally, we solve the bipartite problem by maximizing the overall
matching scores. Due to the sparsity of C, we simply perform a greedy matching.

3.2     T RACK COMPLETION
With the upstream Re-ID results, we have associated multiple tracklet pairs together. Therefore,
we now have multiple fragmented tracks which have a missing segment in the middle. The track
completion model interpolates the gaps within the tracks. Based on the history and future motion,
the model first generates an initial trajectory in between. Then, a refinement head is applied to refine
the initial trajectory based on motion and map features. The trajectory completion model learns a
regression task as in most motion prediction methods Liang et al. (2020); Deo et al. (2022). The
detailed formulation is in Appendix D.2.
We first transform the future and history tracklets from the global frame to the local agent frame.
However, instead of using the last pose of the history tracklet as the origin, we set the origin as
the midpoint of the line connecting the two endpoints of the missing segment to reduce the over-
dependency on the history tracklet. Most prediction models generally have a fixed prediction hori-
zon Liang et al. (2020); Deo et al. (2022). But the occlusion horizon in reality is never fixed. We
thus use time features as input queries to decode poses at all the target timesteps. Specifically, each
time query feature at time t is given as [t, t/T ], where T is the total prediction horizon. So that we
can have a variable number of time queries corresponding to a variable prediction horizon.
The overall structure of the track completion model is shown in Fig. 4. It encodes time features as
queries and iteratively aggregates context information to the query features to refine the generated


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: A brief overview of the track completion model. The model stacks several sub-modules
together to sequentially aggregate features and refine the results.


tracks. The motion encoder first encodes the history and future motion features using two parallel
encoders. The UGRU in each encoder takes the final hidden state from the other, hence the informa-
tion can propagate through the temporal gap. The time features are encoded with a single-layer MLP
as initial queries. A cross-attention layer then aggregates the motion information to the time queries.
We also add a skip connection to concatenate the attention output with the motion encoding and time
features. To improve the result, we added a refinement phase to the initial trajectory. The model en-
codes lane features and performs lane-to-agent attention Liang et al. (2020) to fuse the extracted lane
information with the generated trajectory information. The trajectory encodings carrying the lane
information then go through the final trajectory refinement head which uses a self-attention layer
with a skip connection to propagate information within the track. The following bidirectional GRU
implicitly smooths the track by aggregating features from each pose to its adjacent poeses. Finally,
an MLP decodes the refined trajectory.

3.3   L OSS FUNCTION
The Re-ID model and the track completion model are trained separately. Since the losses are com-
monly used, we show them in Appendix E.
For the Re-ID model, we adopt the focal loss in Lin et al. (2017) to train the binary classification
task. In each sample, we only have one GT future tracklet as a positive match, and there are usually
multiple negative pairs. We thus use the focal loss for its capability to deal with class imbalance.
For the track completion model, we use the smooth ℓ1 loss as in Ye et al. (2022); Liang et al. (2020)
to train the coordinates regression head in both the initial trajectory decoder and the final refinement
blocks. For yaw angle regression, we first adjust all the GT yaw angles such that their absolute
differences with the predicted yaw angles are less than π. Then, we apply ℓ1 loss on the regressed
yaw angles. The final regression loss Lreg is a weighted sum of the coordinates regression loss
Lcoord and the yaw angle loss Lyaw .The weights are αcoord = 1.0 and αyaw = 0.5.

4     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1   T RAINING SETUP
Training data: While Qi et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2021) train their methods using online tracker
outputs, we train only using the GT, but additionally inject pseudo-occlusions by masking a partial
segment of each GT track. This gives two advantages: 1) More accurate inputs: Unlike the im-
perfect trajectories generated from an online tracker, the trajectories from the available autonomous
driving datasets are accurate and contain little noise. With proper data augmentation, our model can


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


still deal with imperfect data when inferencing with the trajectories produced from an online tracker.
2) More training samples: Since we have longer intact tracks as input, we can generate data with
longer occlusions.
Pseudo-occlusion: We randomize the length of the pseudo-occlusion for each track during the
training of the Re-ID and track completion models. The pseudo-occlusion duration is selected such
that the history tracklet and all the future tracklets have at least one observation.
Data augmentation: To deal with the possible imperfections from the online tracking result during
inference, we augment the data during training by randomly rotating the local frame in each sample
and adding random noise to the motion inputs.

4.2     E VALUATION SETUP
We train and evaluate our model on the nuScenes dataset Caesar et al. (2020). The standard MOT
evaluation on nuScenes could punish the fully occluded predictions since the evaluation code filters
out all the GT boxes with no points inside and then linearly interpolates the GT tracks. Therefore,
some of the bounding boxes recovered from occlusion could be regarded as false positives (FP) as
the GT boxes they are supposed to be matched with are linearly interpolated. We thus train and
validate our model on the training split of the nuScenes dataset. The evaluation is done on the
validation split instead of the test split so that we can adjust the evaluation procedure for occlusion
cases. In each of the experiments below, we use one of the following three evaluation setups as
indicated.
Official nuScenes setup: Following the official nuScenes MOT evaluation protocol, we filter out all
the empty GT boxes without any lidar or radar points inside. We thus focus on the visible GT boxes.
The evaluation result is thus comparable to the results shown on the nuScenes leaderboard.
All-boxes setup: To get a comprehensive evaluation result, we do not filter any GT boxes. There-
fore, the evaluation takes both the visible and the occluded boxes into account.
Pseudo-occlusion setup: To generate more occlusions with longer duration for evaluation, we take
the GT vehicle tracks from the nuScenes prediction validation set and mask a partial segment within
each track. Unlike the previous setups where the model takes the online tracking result as input, the
model takes the unoccluded GT tracklets as inputs under this setup.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We first evaluate our offline tracking model on the imperfect data generated from the online tracking
result. We show the relative improvements it brings to the original online tracking result on MOT
metrics. In this setting, the experiments evaluate the potential of the offline tracking model to be
applied in offline auto labeling. We use CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021) as the initial off-the-shelf
detector and tracker. Next, we evaluate our offline tracking model using human-annotated data.
We mask the vehicle tracks to create a large amount of pseudo-occlusion cases for evaluation. The
human-annotated data have little input noise, which excludes the imperfections from the online
tracker so the evaluation focuses solely on the offline tracking model we proposed. Furthermore, the
real occlusion cases only take a relatively small portion of the dataset compared to the unoccluded
cases and the occlusion duration is typically short. Unlike the real occlusions in the dataset, the
generated pseudo-occlusions are abundant and typically have longer durations. We focus our method
only on the vehicle classes. The implementation details are in Appendix F.

5.1     Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATION WITH ONLINE TRACKING RESULTS
5.1.1    R E -ID MODEL EVALUATION
In the sole evaluation of the Re-ID model, we adopt the official nuScenes setup which follows the
standard evaluation protocol of nuScenes and filters out the empty GT boxes for evaluation. We
only use the Re-ID model to reassociate the tracklets before and after occlusions, and we do not use
the track completion model to interpolate the trajectories between the gaps. Instead, the nuScenes
evaluation code automatically does a simple linear interpolation to fill all the gaps on both the GT
tracks and the predicted tracks. For comparison, we select the lidar-based SOTA methods that also
use CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021) detections from the nuScenes leaderboard.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Method                     Overall    Car      Bus     Truck    Trailer
             CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)         69.8      82.9     71.1     59.9     65.1
            SimpleTrack Pang et al. (2022)         70.0      82.3     71.5     58.7     67.3
                UVTR Li et al. (2022)              70.1      83.3     67.2     58.4     71.6
         Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)       70.5      83.3     71.6     59.6     67.5
          NEBP Satorras & Welling (2021)           70.8      83.5     70.8     59.8      69
         3DMOTFormer++ Ding et al. (2023)          72.3      82.1     74.9     62.6     69.6
           ShaSTA Sadjadpour et al. (2023)         73.1      83.8     73.3      65      70.4
            Offline Re-ID (Motion + Map)           73.4      84.2     75.1     64.1     70.3

Table 1: Comparison of AMOTA scores over the SOTA methods using CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)
detections on the nuScenes test split (official nuScenes setup).

                      Method                    AMOTP↓ / m          Recall↑    MOTA↑      IDS↓
            CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)         0.596              73.5       59.4       340
           SimpleTrack Pang et al. (2022)         0.582              73.7       58.6       259
               UVTR Li et al. (2022)              0.636              74.6       59.3       381
        Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)       0.609              74.5       59.9       155
         NEBP Satorras & Welling (2021)           0.598              74.1       61.9        93
        3DMOTFormer++ Ding et al. (2023)          0.542              73.0       58.6       210
          ShaSTA Sadjadpour et al. (2023)         0.559              74.3       61.2       185
           Offline Re-ID (Motion + Map)           0.532              74.2       61.3       204

Table 2: Comparison of MOT metrics over the SOTA methods using CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)
detections on the nuScenes test split (official nuScenes setup).


From the results in Tab. 1 and 2, our model effectively improves the original online tracking result
from CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021). Please also note that the Re-ID model only refines the limited
occlusion cases. Therefore, the improvement brought by the Re-ID model is upper bound by the
number of occlusions. Yet the result after refinement already outperforms the other SOTA methods
on AMOTA and AMOTP, indicating the Re-ID model can accurately reassociate the tracklets before
and after occlusions. We thus have demonstrated the potential of our Re-ID model to improve the
offline tracking result during auto labeling, especially for occlusion-rich scenes. We show the effects
of the map and the motion branches separately and the general improvements brought by our Re-ID
model to other SOTA online trackers on the validation split in Appendix B.

5.1.2    T RACK COMPLETION MODEL EVALUATION
Based on the Re-ID results, the track completion model recovers the missing trajectories between
all the matched tracklet pairs. Since we want to evaluate the ability of our model to recover the
occluded trajectories, we adopt the all-boxes setup and thus do not filter out any GT bounding
boxes. A detailed description of the experimental setup is in Appendix G.1. The results are shown
in Tab. 3. We have shown the improvements our model brings to multiple SOTA online trackers.
We have only tuned our model using the results from CenterPoint tracker Yin et al. (2021) and then
applied our model to the results from other trackers. The improvements have demonstrated that
our model can be used as a general plugin to recover the imperfections caused by occlusions during
offline autolabeling. Our model is compatible with any online tracker, thus it can be easily integrated
into the existing offline autolabeling frameworks Qi et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2021). We have also
shown the ability of our track completion model to recover the occluded objects in Appendix C.


          Track Completion              AMOTA↑         AMOTP↓ / m              IDS↓       Recall↑
                                        w/o   w         w/o    w             w/o   w    w/o     w
     CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)      70.2 72.4      0.634 0.615           254 183    73.7 74.5
    SimpleTrack Pang et al. (2022)      70.0 71.0      0.668 0.629           210 170    72.5 72.9
     VoxelNet Chen et al. (2023)        69.6 70.6      0.710 0.665           308 230    72.8 72.9
   ShaSTA Sadjadpour et al. (2023)      72.0 72.6      0.612 0.593           203 174    73.0 75.3

Table 3: Track completion evaluation on the nuScenes validation split (All-boxes setup). w: with
track completion. w/o: without track completion.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Method               CVM         Motion    Map    Motion + Map
               Association accuracy ↑      58.7%       90.1%    89.6%      90.3%

        Table 4: Re-ID evaluation on the nuScenes validation split (Pseudo-occlusion setup).

                     Method                 ADE↓ / m        Yaw error↓ / deg     MR↓
               HOME Gilles et al. (2021)     0.814                 -            24.3%
                     Motion                  0.705               2.38           14.9%
                  Motion + map               0.667               2.23           13.3%

Table 5: Track completion evaluation on the nuScenes validation split (Pseudo-occlusion setup).
The prediction horizon is 6s which is the same as the nuScenes prediction challenge.


5.2     Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATION WITH PSEUDO - OCCLUSIONS
5.2.1    R E -ID MODEL EVALUATION
We evaluate the Re-ID model on pseudo-occlusions following the setup in Appendix G.2. We also
include a constant velocity model (CVM) associator as our baseline. The CVM associator takes
the last observable position and velocity as inputs then predicts future trajectories with a constant
velocity. The future tracklet which has the shortest distance to the constant velocity prediction will
be matched. The association accuracies are listed in Tab. 4. Given inputs without noise, our model in
all settings achieves high association accuracies over 89% and outperforms the CVM associator by
a large margin over 30%. With the perfect motion input, the motion branch has a higher association
accuracy over the map branch by 0.5%. After the combination of the motion and the map branch,
the accuracy increases by 0.2% compared to the result using only the motion branch. Hence, the
two branches are complementary to each other.

5.2.2    T RACK COMPLETION MODEL EVALUATION
To standardize the evaluation, for each evaluated sample track, we mask 6 seconds of its trajectory
and take 2 seconds of history tracklet and future tracklet as inputs. We chose HOME Gilles et al.
(2021) as a baseline and re-implemented it on nuScenes. HOME originally decodes the predicted
trajectories from sampled endpoints. To make the comparison fair, we directly give the GT trajectory
endpoints to the HOME, so that the model is also aware of the future.
From the result, the performance is improved on every metric after using the map information for
trajectory refinement, indicating the extracted map prior improves the trajectory recovery. Our model
also outperforms HOME on both ADE and MR, demonstrating its potential to recover trajectories
under long occlusions.

5.3     Q UALITATIVE RESULTS
We have visualized several representative samples in the evaluation with the online tracking result
and pseudo-occlusions. Due to the page limit, we show them in Appendix A.

6     C ONCLUSION
While the previous point cloud-based offline auto labeling methods focused on generating accurate
bounding boxes over visible objects, we have proposed a novel offline tracking method focusing
on the occlusions on vehicles. The Re-ID module can effectively reduce IDS caused by premature
termination under occlusion. Based on the Re-ID result, the track completion model recovers the
occluded trajectories. Leveraging the idea from motion prediction, we innovatively extracted infor-
mation from the lane map and used it as a prior to improve the performance of our models. We have
demonstrated the ability of our model on the nuScenes validation split, using both the imperfect
online tracking results and the handcrafted pseudo-occlusion data. The offline tracking model im-
proves the original online tracking result and achieves SOTA performance, showing its potential to
be applied in auto labeling autonomous driving datasets. It also achieves good performances on the
handcrafted pseudo-occlusions and outperforms the baselines by large margins. Future work will
aim to unify the Re-ID and track completion modules as an end-to-end model.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Büchner and Abhinav Valada. 3d multi-object tracking using graph neural networks with
 cross-edge modality attention. RA-L, 7(4):9707–9714, 2022.
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush
  Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for
  autonomous driving. In CVPR, pp. 11621–11631, 2020.
Yukang Chen, Jianhui Liu, Xiangyu Zhang, Xiaojuan Qi, and Jiaya Jia. Voxelnext: Fully sparse
  voxelnet for 3d object detection and tracking. In CVPR, 2023.
Nachiket Deo, Eric Wolff, and Oscar Beijbom. Multimodal trajectory prediction conditioned on
  lane-graph traversals. In CoRL, pp. 203–212. PMLR, 2022.
Shuxiao Ding, Eike Rehder, Lukas Schneider, Marius Cordts, and Juergen Gall. 3dmotformer:
  Graph transformer for online 3d multi-object tracking. In ICCV, pp. 9784–9794, 2023.
Lue Fan, Yuxue Yang, Yiming Mao, Feng Wang, Yuntao Chen, Naiyan Wang, and Zhaoxiang Zhang.
  Once detected, never lost: Surpassing human performance in offline lidar based 3d object detec-
  tion. ICCV, 2023.
Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Hang Zhao, Yi Shen, Dragomir Anguelov, Congcong Li, and Cordelia
   Schmid. Vectornet: Encoding hd maps and agent dynamics from vectorized representation. In
   CVPR, pp. 11525–11533, 2020.
Thomas Gilles, Stefano Sabatini, Dzmitry Tsishkou, Bogdan Stanciulescu, and Fabien Moutarde.
  Home: Heatmap output for future motion estimation. In ITSC, pp. 500–507. IEEE, 2021.
Junru Gu, Chen Sun, and Hang Zhao. Densetnt: End-to-end trajectory prediction from dense goal
  sets. In ICCV, pp. 15303–15312, 2021.
Rudolph Emil Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Transactions of
  the ASME–Journal of Basic Engineering, 82(Series D):35–45, 1960.
Yanwei Li, Yilun Chen, Xiaojuan Qi, Zeming Li, Jian Sun, and Jiaya Jia. Unifying voxel-based rep-
  resentation with transformer for 3d object detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:18442–18455, 2022.
Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning
 lane graph representations for motion forecasting. In ECCV, pp. 541–556. Springer, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In ICCV, pp. 2980–2988, 2017.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2017.
Tao Ma, Xuemeng Yang, Hongbin Zhou, Xin Li, Botian Shi, Junjie Liu, Yuchen Yang, Zhizheng
  Liu, Liang He, Yu Qiao, et al. Detzero: Rethinking offboard 3d object detection with long-term
  sequential point clouds. ICCV, 2023.
Ziqi Pang, Zhichao Li, and Naiyan Wang. Simpletrack: Understanding and rethinking 3d multi-
  object tracking. In ECCV, pp. 680–696. Springer, 2022.
Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, Mahyar Najibi, Pei Sun, Khoa Vo, Boyang Deng, and Dragomir Anguelov.
  Offboard 3d object detection from point cloud sequences. In CVPR, pp. 6134–6144, 2021.
Raphaël Rozenberg, Joseph Gesnouin, and Fabien Moutarde. Asymmetrical bi-rnn for pedestrian
  trajectory encoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04419, 2021.
Tara Sadjadpour, Jie Li, Rares Ambrus, and Jeannette Bohg. Shasta: Modeling shape and spatio-
  temporal affinities for 3d multi-object tracking. RA-L, 2023.
Victor Garcia Satorras and Max Welling. Neural enhanced belief propagation on factor graphs. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 685–693. PMLR, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pavel Tokmakov, Jie Li, Wolfram Burgard, and Adrien Gaidon. Learning to track with object per-
  manence. In ICCV, pp. 10860–10869, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NIPS, 30, 2017.
Li Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Wenyuan Qin, Xiaoyu Li, Lei Yang, Zhiwei Li, Lei Zhu, Hong Wang, Jun
  Li, and Huaping Liu. Camo-mot: Combined appearance-motion optimization for 3d multi-object
  tracking with camera-lidar fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02540, 2022.
Qitai Wang, Yuntao Chen, Ziqi Pang, Naiyan Wang, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. Immortal tracker:
  Tracklet never dies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13672, 2021.
Xinshuo Weng, Jianren Wang, David Held, and Kris Kitani. 3d multi-object tracking: A baseline
  and new evaluation metrics. In IROS, pp. 10359–10366. IEEE, 2020.
Bin Yang, Min Bai, Ming Liang, Wenyuan Zeng, and Raquel Urtasun. Auto4d: Learning to label
  4d objects from sequential point clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06586, 2021.
Maosheng Ye, Jiamiao Xu, Xunnong Xu, Tongyi Cao, and Qifeng Chen. DCMS: Motion
 Forecasting with Dual Consistency and Multi-Pseudo-Target Supervision. arXiv e-prints, art.
 arXiv:2204.05859, April 2022.
Tianwei Yin, Xingyi Zhou, and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Center-based 3d object detection and tracking.
  In CVPR, pp. 11784–11793, 2021.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

In this appendix, we first present the qualitative results A. We also show supplementary experimental
results of the Re-ID model B and track completion model C on the validation split. Next, give the
detailed formulation of the Re-ID and the track completion D. We also give the formulas and the
hyper-parameters of the training loss functions E. Then, we describe the implementation details F.
Finally, we give a detailed explanation of the experimental setups G.


A     Q UALITATIVE RESULTS

A.1   J OINT EVALUATION WITH ONLINE TRACKING RESULTS


Figure 5: Qualitative results of the offline tracking model. In each sample, GT boxes are plotted
as rectangles. Each GT track is represented by a unique color. To separate the output of the model
from the GT tracks, we use arrows to represent the output poses from the model instead of rectangles.
Red and blue arrows are the history and future tracklets matched by the offline Re-ID model. The
recovered trajectories are plotted as purple arrows. The orange dotted lines are the lanes. In the
background, the white area is drivable. The gray area in the right plot is the pedestrian crossing. The
red cross is the average position of the ego vehicle during the occlusion.

As shown in Fig. 5, we applied our offline tracking model to improve the online tracking result by
jointly performing Re-ID and track completion. Three samples in the three plots show different
occlusion types. The left plot shows a long occlusion with a duration of 8s and a gap distance of
71m. The middle plot shows a relatively short occlusion with a duration of 3s and a gap distance
of 25m. The right plot shows an occlusion that happened on a turning vehicle at a crossroad. The
occlusion duration in the third sample is 3.5s and the gap distance is 13m. With the three samples,
we show the ability of our offline tracking model to deal with long and short occlusions, as well as
the non-linear motion under occlusion. Taking the online tracking results and the semantic map as
inputs, our offline tracking model first correctly associated together the tracklets belonging to the
same GT track. The associated future (blue) and history (red) tracklets in each plot are covered by
a single GT track. Then the model recovered the occluded trajectories by interpolating the gaps
between the associated tracklet pairs. The recovered trajectories (purple) also aligned well with the
corresponding GT tracks.

A.2   R E -ID MODEL EVALUATION ON PSEUDO - OCCLUSION

As shown in Fig. 6, a representative case is selected to show the map information extracted from the
lane graph can help correct the association. In the left sub-figure, the motion branch tends to assign
a high affinity score (red) to the future tracklet candidate above. Though this association fits the
motion pattern, it is a false match. After adding the map information, the affinity score of the false
future candidate is suppressed (colors become bluer), since it is not on the same lane as the history
tracklet. The affinity score of the true future tracklet increases in the map branch (colors become
redder), showing that our offline tracking model can utilize the map prior to accurately associating
tracklets.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Qualitative results of the Re-ID model evaluated with pseudo-occlusion. The history
tracklets are green. Future tracklets are colored according to their affinity scores. Higher scores
are represented in red and lower scores are in blue. The thin dotted lines represent the lanes from
the semantic map. The left figure shows the prediction from the motion branch. The middle figure
shows the prediction from the map branch, and the right figure shows the GT.


A.3   T RACK COMPLETION MODEL EVALUATION ON PSEUDO - OCCLUSION


Figure 7: Qualitative results of the track completion model evaluated with pseudo-occlusion. In the
plot, 2 pairs of prediction results are shown. In each pair, the left image shows the decoded trajectory
using only the motion feature, whereas the right image shows the trajectory after refinement. The
history tracklets, future tracklets, predicted trajectories and GT trajectories correspond to the green,
red, blue, and pink arrows respectively. The lanes are in orange.

As shown in Fig. 7, both the trajectories before and after refinement can predict the yaw angle very
well. However, the initial trajectories before refinement are not smooth sometimes. They constantly
deviate from the lane and GT trajectory. After refinement, the trajectories are smoother and tend
to follow the lane. Less deviation from the GT trajectory is observed. Hence it accords with our
previous quantitative evaluation, showing our track completion model is able to leverage the map
prior to generating accurate trajectories.

B     Q UANTITATIVE R E -ID RESULTS ON VALIDATION SPLIT
To ablate the effect of motion and map branches, we also separately evaluated our model on the
nuScenes validation split. The results are shown in Tab. 6 and 7. The performance of our model
generally improves after aggregating with map information. Our model outperforms the baselines
on AMOTA, including the offline method 3D-PM-CL-CP which uses camera and lidar data. Please
also note that we did not tune our model on the validation split. Also, the refinement is performed
only in limited scenarios where occlusion happens. Though the margin between our method and the
Immortal Tracker is not significant, we argue this is because the overall AMOTA is a simple macro
average over all classes. If the imbalanced box numbers in different classes are taken into account,
our model will be more advantageous, since our model can predict the abundant car class (58317
boxes) well, whereas the Immortal Tracker can predict the bus class (2112 boxes) well. Compared


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with the input result from the CenterPoint tracker Yin et al. (2021), our model reduces IDS by 45%
and increases AMOTA by 2% on the vehicle tracks after refinement.

                      Method                                Overall   Car      Bus     Truck      Trailer
            CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)                    70.9     84.3     83.0     69.1       47.1
        Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)                  72.8     84.0     87.1     69.4       50.4
        3D-PM-CP Büchner & Valada (2022)                    71.8     84.9     83.7     68.9       49.7
      3D-PM-CL-CP Büchner & Valada (2022)*                  72.4     85.1     85.5     69.5       49.3
            Offline Re-ID (Motion only)                      72.7     84.9     85.4     69.7       50.9
             Offline Re-ID (Map only)                        72.9     85.2     85.5     70.0       50.8
           Offline Re-ID (Motion + Map)                      72.9     85.3     85.5     70.0       50.8

Table 6: Comparison of AMOTA scores on the nuScenes validation split (official nuScenes setup).
* denotes the use of sensor data for tracking.

                     Method                          AMOTP↓ / m          Recall↑      MOTA↑       IDS↓
           CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)               0.623              73.0         60.5        267
        Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)            0.574              73.9         60.5        109
           Offline Re-ID (Motion only)                 0.613              74.8         62.1        168
            Offline Re-ID (Map only)                   0.603              74.6         62.2        145
          Offline Re-ID (Motion + Map)                 0.603              74.6         62.1        147

Table 7: Comparison of AMOTA scores on the nuScenes validation split (official nuScenes setup).
* denotes the use of sensor data for tracking.

                                            AMOTA↑            AMOTP↓ / m          IDS↓            Recall↑
             Offline Re-ID
                                            w/o   w            w/o    w         w/o   w         w/o     w
      CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)         70.9 72.9         0.623 0.603       267 183         73.0 74.6
     SimpleTrack Pang et al. (2022)         70.6 71.4         0.637 0.619       175 179         71.9 73.0
      VoxelNet Chen et al. (2023)           70.3 71.1         0.690 0.653       337 245         74.7 73.5
    ShaSTA Sadjadpour et al. (2023)         72.7 73.3         0.600 0.583       210 180         74.2 72.5

Table 8: Improvements brought by our offline Re-ID model over different SOTA online trackers
(official nuScenes setup). w: with Re-ID. w/o: without Re-ID.

In Tab. 8, we also show the improvements our Re-ID model can bring to online trackers. We have
only tuned our model using the results from CenterPoint tracker Yin et al. (2021). Still, our model
can generally improve the tracking results from other online trackers, which demonstrates the poten-
tial of our model to be used as a useful plugin to improve the tracking result in offline auto labeling.


C     O CCLUDED OBJECTS RECOVERY ON VALIDATION SPLIT

In Tab. 9, we show that the track completion model can effectively recover the occluded trajectories
by increasing the number of TP boxes and reducing the number of FN boxes. The number of FP is
less than using the Immortal Tracker adopted in Ma et al. (2023); Fan et al. (2023).

D     D ETAILED FORMULATION

D.1    R E -ID FORMULATION

The upstream online tracker provides a set of tracklets T in the scene. In T, history tracklets are
the tracklets that end earlier before the last frame of the scene. They are represented                   as H =

[H1 , . . . , Hn ]. For the i-th history tracklet Hi , it contains history observations of hi−Ti , . . . , hi0 ,
where hi0 is the last observation of Hi on the temporal horizon and hi−Ti the first observation. Each
observation contains the location, orientation, size, uncertainty, and velocity. It is defined as:
                                hit = xit , yti , zti , θti , lti , wti , hit , sit , vxt
                                                                                       i     i     i

                                                                                          , vyt , vzt         (2)


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Method                               AMOTA↑          TP↑    FP↓     FN↓
               CenterPoint Yin et al. (2021)                    70.2         59332   8197   14704
            Immortal Tracker Wang et al. (2021)                 72.3         59271   9593   14883
                Offline Track Completion                        72.4         60675   8953   13432

Table 9: Our track completion model can effectively recover the occluded objects by increasing TP
(All-boxes setup).


where l, w, h represent the size of the j-th bounding box. s is the confidence score, and vx , vy , vz
the velocities on x, y, z directions.
For
  i each history     tracklet Hi , it has a set of possible future candidate tracklets for matching: Fi =
 F1 , . . . , Fn . Each future tracklet Fji starts after the termination of Hi :
               i


                                      h                       i
                                 Fji = ftij , . . . , ftij +Tj , s.t. tj > τ                          (3)

In practice, we set tj > τ where τ is the horizon of the death memory of the online tracker since the
GT future tracklets reappearing within such period are likely to be associated by the online tracker.
Each tracklet has a feature dimension of T × 8, where T is the length of the tracklet. The 8 features
correspond to [x, y, θ, t, cos(θ), sin(θ), vx , vy ], where x, y are the local BEV coordinates, θ the yaw
angle, t the time relative to the last observation of the history tracklet and vx , vy the velocities on x
and y direction.
The model also extracts information from the fully connected lane graph G = (V, E) where each
node in V is a lane centerline section. E is the set containing all the edges for each pair of nodes.
Each lane node is encoded from a lanelet, which is a section of the lane with a maximal length
of 20m. A lanelet is represented as several lane poses. Each lane pose contains the feature of
[xlane , ylane , θlane , cos(θlane ), sin(θlane ), D, Llane ], where xlane , ylane are the BEV coordinates
of the lane poses in the local frame, θlane the yaw angle, D the binary flag indicating whether the
lane section ends. Following PGP Deo et al. (2022), we have also included Llane , a 2-D binary
vector indicating whether the pose lies on a stop line or crosswalk, to capture both the geometry as
well as traffic control elements along the lane. The graph thus has a feature with the dimension of
Nlane × l × 8, where Nlane is the number of lane nodes and l is the length of a lanelet.
Given a history tracklet Hi and a future tracklet Fji and lane graph G, the model outputs motion
affinity scores and map-based affinity scores:

                                i,j
                               Cmotion = N etmotion (Hi , Fji ) ∈ [0, 1]
                                   i,j
                                                                                                      (4)
                                  Cmap = N etmap (Hi , Fji , G) ∈ [0, 1]
where N etmotion and N etmap represent the networks of the motion branch and map branch respec-
                                                                                  i,j
tively. The final matching score for the association C i,j is a weighted sum of Cmotion      i,j
                                                                                        and Cmap .
Therefore, we can construct a matching score matrix C ∈ n × N for tracklet association, where N
is the number of tracklets T in the scene and n the number of history tracklets H.
                                                                      
                                          C 1,1           ···    C 1,N
                                    C =  ...             ..       ..                                 (5)
                                                                      
                                                             .      .  
                                                   n,1               n,N
                                               C          ···    C

Each row in C represents a history tracklet and each column represents a future tracklet. Based on
the established affinity matrix, bipartite matching is performed for association such that the sum of
the matching scores is maximized.


                                                     n X
                                                     X N
                                         max                     Ci,j Xi,j                           (6a)
                                     X∈{0,1}n×N
                                                     i=1 j=1



                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 n
                                                 X
                                          s.t.         Xi,j ≤ 1, ∀j                                   (6b)
                                                 i=1
                                                 N
                                                 X
                                                       Xi,j ≤ 1, ∀i                                   (6c)
                                                 j=1

For tracklet pairs violating the constraint Eq. 3, the corresponding elements will not be considered
for matching.

D.2    T RACK COMPLETION FORMULATION

Following the formulation in Sect. D.1, the model receives a historyh observation sequencei      Hi =
  i              i
                                                                       i           i
 h−Ti , . . . , h0 , and a matched future observation sequence Fi = fti , . . . , fti +T ′ , where ti is
                                                                                          i
the occlusion horizon of the i-th trajectory, Ti and Ti′ the lengths
                                                                           of history   and future sequence
respectively. The model predicts a motion sequence Pi = pi1 , . . . , piti −1 in between. Here, we
choose to output the x, y coordinates in the BEV plane, and the yaw angle θ.
                            pit = N etcompletion (Fi , Hi , G, t) = xit , yti , θti

                                                                                                        (7)
where N etcompletion represents the network of the track completion model. We use the same motion
features as in the previous Sect. D.1, with the exception that we do not use the velocity explicitly.
This results in a feature dimension of Tinput × 6. Given that the start and end pose of the predicted
are already known, the model can implicitly predict the velocity in between. Hence, we discard
the velocity features to reduce the possible noise from the imperfect online tracking result. For
the semantic map, we also parameterize the lanes in the same way as introduced in the previous
Sect. D.1.

E     L OSS FUNCTIONS
We adopt the focal loss Lin et al. (2017) to train the Re-ID model.

                                                                 γ
                                 Lcls (kt ) = −αt (1 − kt ) log (kt )

                                                 k       if y = 1                             (8)
                                          kt =
                                                 1 − k otherwise
where k is the predicted affinity score, and y is the GT score. αt and γ are two hyperparameters,
which are set to 0.5 and 2.0 respectively.
For the track completion model, we use Huber loss (i.e. smooth L1 loss) as in Ye et al. (2022); Liang
et al. (2020); Gu et al. (2021) to train the x, y regression heads in both the initial trajectory decoder
and the final refinement blocks:
                                                tf
                                             1 X
                                                    d mt − mgt

                                 Lcoord =                      t
                                            tf t=1
                                                                                                      (9)
                                              0.5 ∥xi ∥2    if ∥xi ∥ < 1
                                 d (xi ) =
                                              ∥xi ∥ − 0.5 otherwise
where mt = [xt , yt ] are the predicted x, y coordinates in local agent frame, tf the prediction horizon.
∥·∥ and ∥·∥2 denotes the ℓ1 and ℓ2 norm . For yaw angle regression, we first adjust all the GT yaw
angles such that their absolute differences with the predicted yaw angles are less than π. Then, we
apply ℓ1 loss on the regressed yaw angles:
                                                         tf
                                                    1 X
                                       Lyaw =             θt − θtgt                                   (10)
                                                   tf t=1

The final regression loss Lreg is:
                               Lreg = αcoord Lcoord + αyaw Lyaw                                       (11)
where αcoord and αyaw are the weights. We set αcoord = 1.0 and αyaw = 0.5.


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We train the Re-ID model for 50 epochs on Tesla V-100 GPU using a batch size of 64 with the
AdamW Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−3 , which
decays by a factor of 0.6 every 10 epochs. The training time is 11.5 hours. We train the track
completion model following the same setting except for a different decay factor of 0.5 every 10
epochs. The training time is 4.2 hours.
Our model is agnostic to the selections of the detector and online tracker. For the evaluation with
online tracking results, we use an association threshold of 0.9. If the the motion affinity and map-
based affinity scores are both lower than the threshold, the corresponding matching pair would not
participate in the association. For the evaluation with pseudo-occlusions, we use the tracks from
the nuScenes validation split provided by the nuScenes software devkit for the motion prediction
challenge.

G     S UPPLEMENT OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS
G.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR TRACK COMPLETION MODEL EVALUATION WITH ONLINE
       TRACKING RESULTS

We take the Re-ID result refined by the motion and the map branch as input. Based on the Re-ID
result, the track completion model interpolates the gaps and recovers the missing trajectories. If a
gap within a track is spatially larger than 3m or temporally longer than 1.8 seconds, it is considered
a possible occlusion, and the track completion model predicts the poses for the missing timestamps
in between. Otherwise, the evaluation code automatically does a linear interpolation to fill the small
gaps. The sizes of the recovered bounding boxes are linearly interpolated from the two bounding
boxes in the history tracklet and the future tracklet.

G.2    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR R E -ID MODEL EVALUATION WITH PSEUDO - OCCLUSIONS

We mask the GT tracks in the nuScenes validation split to create pseudo-occlusions to evaluate our
Re-ID model independently. In every evaluated sample, all future tracks are masked for random du-
rations to create diverse pseudo-occlusions. The durations range from 1.5s to each track’s maximal
length (12.5s at most) such that each future tracklet has at least one last pose visible. The history
tracklet in each sample is also randomly deprecated such that it has at least one pose left as input and
is at most 2.5 seconds long. The distribution of pseudo-occlusions is shown in Fig. 9. The number
of matching candidate tracklets ranges from 2 to 65, as shown in Fig. 8.


Figure 8: The distribution of the number of can-        Figure 9: The distribution of the pseudo occlu-
didate tracklets in Re-ID model evaluation with         sion durations in Re-ID model evaluation. The
pseudo-occlusions. The candidate tracklet num-          occlusion duration ranges from 1.5 seconds to
ber ranges from 2 to 65.                                12.5 seconds.


                                                   17
