Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTEXT IS E NVIRONMENT
 Sharut Gupta                  Stefanie Jegelka            David Lopez-Paz, Kartik Ahuja
 Meta AI, MIT CSAIL            MIT CSAIL                   Meta AI
 sharut@mit.edu                stefje@mit.edu              {dlp,kartikahuja}@meta.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         Two lines of work are taking center stage in AI research. On the one hand, the
         community is making increasing efforts to build models that discard spurious
         correlations and generalize better in novel test environments. Unfortunately, a
         hard lesson so far is that no proposal convincingly outperforms a simple empirical
         risk minimization baseline. On the other hand, large language models (LLMs)
         have erupted as algorithms able to learn in-context, generalizing on-the-fly to
         the eclectic contextual circumstances that users enforce by prompting. We argue
         that context is environment, and posit that in-context learning holds the key to
         better domain generalization. Via extensive theory and experiments, we show
         that paying attention to context—unlabeled examples as they arrive—allows our
         proposed In-Context Risk Minimization (ICRM) algorithm to zoom-in on the test
         environment risk minimizer, leading to significant out-of-distribution performance
         improvements. Furthermore, training with context helps the model learn a better
         featurizer. From all of this, two messages are worth taking home: researchers
         in domain generalization should consider environment as context, and harness
         the adaptive power of in-context learning. Researchers in LLMs should consider
         context as environment, to better structure data towards generalization. Code is
         available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/ICRM.


1   I NTRODUCTION
One key problem in AI research is to build systems that generalize across a wide range of test envi-
ronments. In principle, these algorithms should discard spurious correlations present only in certain
training environments, and capture invariant patterns appearing across conditions. For example, we
would like to build self-driving systems that, while trained on certain weather conditions, levels of
traffic, and driving rules, can perform satisfactorily in new circumstances. Unfortunately, this has
proven challenging—for instance, these models often fail to drive in unseen weather conditions (Lech-
ner et al., 2022), creating immediate hazards. Despite its importance, how to perform well beyond the
distribution of the training data remains a burning question. In fact, major international conferences
offer well-attended workshops dedicated to the issue (Wald et al., 2023), and news articles remind us
of the profound societal impact of the failures of ML systems (Angwin et al., 2016).
Research efforts have so far led to domain generalization algorithms that fall into two broad categories.
On the one hand, invariance proposals (Ganin et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019),
illustrated in Figure 1a, discard all environment-specific information, thus removing excessive signal
about the problem. On the other hand, marginal transfer proposals (Blanchard et al., 2011; Li et al.,
2016a; Zhang et al., 2020; Bao and Karaletsos, 2023), illustrated in Figure 1b, summarize observed
inputs in each environment as a coarse embedding, thus diluting important signal at the example
level. So far, the bitter lesson is that no algorithm geared towards out-of-distribution generalization
convincingly outperforms a simple empirical risk minimization (ERM) baseline, which pools the data
from environments, when evaluated across standard real-world benchmarks (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz,
2020; Gagnon-Audet et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022). Has the generalization project hit a dead end?
In parallel, large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023, LLMs) are taking the world
by storm. LLMs are next-token predictors built with transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and trained
on enormous amounts of natural language. One impressive capability of LLM systems is their ability
to learn in-context, that is, to generalize on-the-fly to the eclectic circumstances that users enforce
by prompting (Brown et al., 2020). For example, a trained LLM would complete the sequence


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          ŷie

                                                   classifier

                                                  ϕei
                             ŷie                                                                          ŷie
                                                  i−1
                                             1
                                                        ϕ(xej )
                                                  P
            classifier                      i−1
                                                  j=1                                    transformer

  xe1      ···    xei−1      xei      xe1         ···             xei−1   xei    xe1     ···     xei−1     xei

        (a) Invariance DG.             (b) Marginal transfer DG.                   (c) In-context DG (ours).

Figure 1: Three frameworks for domain generalization (DG), predicting the target yie from the input
xei in test environment e. Depicted in blue, the last example xei−1 contains relevant features for the
current prediction. (a) Invariance DG discards all of the previously observed information from the
test environment, removing too much predictive signal. (b) Marginal transfer DG summarizes all
of the previously observed test inputs as a coarse embedding, diluting predictive signal found at the
example level. (b) Our in-context DG directly observes all of the previous test inputs, allowing the
search of “needle-in-the-haystack” signals, such as the relevant one, i.e., xei−1 .


“France-Paris Italy-Rome Spain-” with the sequence “Madrid,” effectively learning, from the input
itself, that the user is demanding a capital prediction task. When interacting with LLMs, one feels
closer towards solving the puzzle of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. Could LLMs hold a
key piece to the OOD puzzle?
This paper suggests a positive answer, establishing a strong parallel between the concept of en-
vironment in domain generalization, and the concept of context in next-token prediction. In fact,
different environments describe varying contextual circumstances such as time, location, experimental
intervention, and other background conditions. On the one hand, describing environments as context
opens the door to using powerful next-token predictors off-the-shelf, with their adaptability to learn
in-context, to address domain generalization problems. This allows us to move from coarse domain
indices to fine and compositional contextual descriptions, helpful to amortize learning across similar
environments. On the other hand, using context as environment can help LLM researchers to use
various domain generalization methods such as distributionally robust optimization (Sagawa et al.,
2019; Xie et al., 2023, DRO) across varying contexts.
Based on these insights, we propose a natural algorithm, In-Context Risk Minimization (ICRM),
illustrated in Figure 1c. Given examples (xei , yie ) from environment e, we propose to address out-of-
distribution prediction as in-distribution context-based prediction, training a machine:
                                    yie ≈ h(xei ; xe1 , . . . , xei−1 ).                                       (1)
                                                  |        {z       }
                                                        environment ≈ context

While the requested prediction yie concerns only the input xei , the machine can now pay attention to
the test experience so far, extracting relevant environment information from instance and distributional
features. Our theoretical results show that such in-context learners can utilize context to zoom-in
on the empirical risk minimizer of the test environment, achieving competitive out-of-distribution
performance. Further, we show that the extended input-context feature space in ICRM can reveal
invariances that ERM-based algorithms ignore. A standout feature of ICRM is its capability to
improve feature learning through context-based training enabling ICRM to outperform counterparts
even in the absence of context. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of ICRM, and
extensive ablations dissect and deepen our understanding of it.
We organize the rest of the exposition as follows. Section 2 reviews the fundamentals of domain
generalization, centered around the concept of environment. Section 3 explains the basics of next-
token prediction, with an emphasis on learning from context. Section 4 knits these threads together
to propose ICRM, a framework to learn from contexts from multiple environments, supported by a


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


host of theory. Section 6 showcases the efficacy of our ideas in a variety of domain generalization
benchmarks, and Section 7 closes the exposition with some topics for future discussion.


2    T HE PROBLEM OF DOMAIN GENERALIZATION

The goal of domain generalization (DG) is to learn a predictor that performs well across a set
of domains or environments E (Muandet et al., 2013). Environment indices e ∈ E list different
versions of the data collection process—variations that may occur due to time, location, experimental
interventions, changes in background conditions, and other contextual circumstances leading to
distribution shifts (Arjovsky et al., 2019).
During training we have access to a collection of triplets D = {(xi , yi , ei )}ni=1 . Each triplet contains
a vector of features xi , a target label yi , and the index of the corresponding training environment
ei ∈ Etr ⊂ E. Each example (xi , yi ) is sampled independently from a joint distribution P e (X, Y ).
Using the dataset D, we learn a predictor h that maps features to labels, while minimizing the worst
risk across the set of all environments E:

                                       h∗ = arg min max Re (h),                                         (2)
                                                 h          e∈E


where Re (h) = E(X,Y )∼P e [ℓ(h(X), Y )] is the risk of the predictor h in environment e, as measured
by the expectation of the loss function ℓ with respect to the environment distribution P e .
As one example, we could train a self-driving model h to classify images xi into a label yi indicating
the presence of a pedestrian. Each training example (xi , yi ) is hereby collected from one of the
training cities ei ∈ Etr , with its own weather conditions. The goal of Equation (2) is to obtain a
predictor that correctly classifies x in new cities e ∈ Ete observed during test time. This has proved to
be challenging (Lechner et al., 2022), as predictors often exhibit penurious performance in unseen
weather conditions.
Domain generalization is challenging because we do not have access to test environments during
training time, rendering Equation (2) challenging to estimate. Therefore, to address the DG problem
in practice, researchers have proposed various algorithms that make different assumptions about
the invariances shared between Etr and Ete . In broad strokes, domain generalization algorithms
fall in one of the two following categories. In the first category, domain generalization algorithms
based on invariance (Muandet et al., 2013; Ganin et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al.,
2019), illustrated in Figure 1a, regularize predictors h(xei ) to not contain any information about
the environment e. This however results in removing a lot of signal about the prediction task. In
the second category, domain generalization algorithms based on marginal transfer (Blanchard et al.,
2011; Li et al., 2016a; Zhang et al., 2020; Bao and Karaletsos, 2023) extract environment-specific
                                                                               1
                                                                                   Pi−1
information. These methods implement predictors h(xei , ϕei ), where ϕei = i−1              e
                                                                                     j=1 ϕ(xj ) coarsely
summarizes the environment e in terms of previously observed instances. Different choices for ϕ
include kernel functions (Blanchard et al., 2011, MTL), convolutional neural networks (Zhang et al.,
2020, ARM), and patch embeddings (Bao and Karaletsos, 2023, Context-ViT). Alas, all of these
alternatives in the second category dilute relevant features found in individual examples. For example,
the size of the representation ϕ would have to grow linearly with the size of the training data to
describe aspects corresponding to a small group of examples, such as extreme value statistics.
As a result, and despite all efforts, no proposal so far convincingly outperforms a simple empirical risk
minimization baseline (Vapnik, 1998, ERM) across standard benchmarks (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz,
2020; Gagnon-Audet et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022). Effectively, ERM simply pools all training data
together and seeks the global empirical risk minimizer:
                                                X
                                 h† = arg min           P (E = e) · Re (h).                             (3)
                                           h    e∈Etr


Does the efficacy of ERM suggest that environmental information is useless? We argue that this is
not the case. The key to our answer resides in a recently discovered emergent ability of next-token
predictors, namely, in-context learning.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    paradigm      training data          testing data                      estimates
                                          e′
    ERM           x, y                   x                                 P (Y | X)
                                            ′
    IRM           x, y, e                xe                                P (Y | ϕinv (X))
    LLM           z                      zt and context zj<t               P (Zt+1 | Zt , . . . , Z1 )
                                            ′               ′      ′                              ′
    ICRM          x, y, e                xet and context cet = (xej )j<t   P (Y |X, C) ⇝ P e (Y | X)

Table 1: Different learning paradigms discussed in this work, together with their training data and
testing data formats, as well as the estimated predictors. In our ICRM, we amortize the current
        ′                  ′
input xe and its context ce , containing previously experienced unlabeled examples from the same
               ′
environment e , and “zoom-in” (⇝) to the appropriate local risk minimizer.


3    N EXT- TOKEN PREDICTORS AND IN - CONTEXT LEARNING

In next-token prediction, we aim to learn the conditional distribution

                               P (Zt+1 = zt+1 | Zt = zt , . . . Z1 = z1 ),                               (4)

describing the probability of observing the token zt+1 after having observed the sequence of tokens
(z1 , . . . , zt ). The quintessential next-token prediction task is language modeling (Bengio et al.,
2000), where the sequence of tokens represents a snippet of natural language text. Most LLMs
estimate Equation (4) via a transformer zt+1 ≈ h(zt ; zt−1 , . . . , z1 ) (Vaswani et al., 2017).
LLMs exhibit a certain ability, termed in-context learning (ICL), relevant to our interests. ICL is the
ability to describe and learn about a learning problem from the sequence of tokens (typically labeled
(x, y) pairs) itself, called the context or prompt. As an example, trained LLM would complete the
sequence “France-Paris Italy-Rome Spain-” with the sequence “Madrid,” demonstrating its ability to
infer from a few input-output pairs that the user is demanding a capital prediction task. To illustrate
this ability for contexts without labels, consider the two following sequences:

                    “You are talking to a teenager. Write a poem on gravitational fields.”
                    |             {z             } |                {z                   }
                                 context c1                                x1
           “You are talking to a Physics graduate. Write a poem on gravitational fields.”
           |                 {z                  } |               {z                   }
                            context c2                                     x2

As widely observed, LLMs answer differently to these two sequences, producing two poems, say
y1 and y2 , each adapted to the assumed audience. While nothing unexpected is happening here
at the sequence level—the model simply produces a high-likelihood continuation to each of the
two prompts—we observe a degree of compositional generalization, because the LLM can provide
different but correct answers to the same question x1 = x2 when presented under two contexts
c1 and c2 . By addressing the general task of in-distribution language modeling, LLMs can attain
significant out-of-distribution abilities in a multitude of specific tasks—such as writing poems. ICL is
reminiscent of meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Finn et al., 2017), yet it seamlessly accommodates
to contexts without labels, and does not require updating the parameters of the model. ICL is also
similar in spirit to test-time adaptation (Wang et al., 2020, TTA); however, TTA often requires
updating model parameters with an externally hand-crafted objective.
Notably, ICL emerges without supervision. The training corpus does not contain any explicit division
between questions and their context beyond the natural order of the words within each snippet
of language in the training data. However, since we train the machine to produce an enormous
amount of completions, some of which start with partially overlapping contexts, the predictor has the
opportunity to amortize learning to a significant degree i.e. use the trained model to generalize across
unseen distributions rather than explicitly optimizing a separate model for each distribution. While
the machine may have never observed the context c̃1 = “You are now speaking to a teenager,” its
semantic similarity to c1 above—plus other similar contexts where the word speaking appears— may
endow OOD generalization. This is the desired ability to generalize over environments described in
the previous section, which remained out of reach when using coarse domain indices.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    A DAPTIVE DOMAIN GENERALIZATION VIA IN - CONTEXT LEARNING
Our exposition has so far laid out two threads. First, Section 2 motivated the need for domain
generalization algorithms capable of extracting relevant environment-specific features, at both the
example and distributional levels. To this end, we have argued to move away from coarse environment
indices, and towards rich and amortizable descriptions shared in new circumstances. Second, Section 3
suggests understanding context as an opportunity to describe environments in precisely this manner.
We now knit these threads together with a protocol to address domain generalization with in-context
learners.
    In-Context Risk Minimization (ICRM, Figure 1c):

     • Collect a dataset of triplets D = {(xi , yi , ei )}ni=1 as described in Section 2. Initialize a
       context-based predictor ŷ = h(x; c), tasked with predicting the label y associated to the
       input x, as supported by the context c.
     • During training, select e ∈ Etr at random. Draw t examples from this environment at
       random, construct one input sequence (xe1 , . . . , xet ) and its associated target sequence
       (y1e , . . . , yte ). Update the context-based predictor to minimize the auto-regressive loss
       Pt                   e e  e                         e       e         e
           j=1 ℓ(h(xj ; cj ), yj ), where the context is cj = (x1 , . . . , xj−1 ), for all j = 2, . . . , t,
                e
       and c1 = ∅.
                                                      ′         ′
     • During test time, a sequence of inputs (xe1 , . . . , xet′ ) arrives for prediction, one by one, all
                                                                       ′      ′ ′     ′
       from the test environment e′ ∈ Ete . We predict ŷje = h(xej , cej ) for xej , where the context
          ′      ′             ′                                         ′
       cej = (xe1 , . . . , xej−1 ), for all j = 2, . . . , t′ , and ce1 = ∅.

A few critical remarks about the above proposal are in order. The idea of using contextual information
to aid the prediction through attention mechanisms in transformers has been used in earlier works on
neural processes (Kim et al., 2019; Nguyen and Grover, 2022), prior data fitted networks (Müller
et al., 2021) and more recent works that study the mechanisms underlying in-context learning (Garg
et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022). These works leverage labeled contextual data. Our proposal
embraces the challenge of domain generalization and only uses unlabeled data from the environments
both at train and test time. The most natural way to construct contexts is to use past samples that
appear in the natural order in which data was collected (e.g., video). Since existing DG datasets
do not provide such a refined ordering, we build contexts using environment indices that are more
readily available. The proposal also requires the data at test time to be sampled from the same or
slowly changing environments. While the proposal is strongly inspired from LLMs in that both pay
attention to current query and the contextual information, there are differences namely we predict the
label of the input and not the next x in the sequence.
Next, we develop theoretical guarantees on the behavior               of ICRM. The results below concern
the joint distribution of (X1 , · · · Xt ), (Y1 , . . . , Yt ), E , where each Xj , Yj is an independent draw
from environment E with distribution P E (X, Y ) . For query Xj , the context preceding it is Cj =
(X1 , · · · , Xj−1 ) and the environment underlying this context is E. To orient ourselves around these
results, we recall three predictors featured in the exposition so far. First, the global empirical risk
minimizer over the pooled training data, denoted by h† in Equation (3), estimates P (Y | X). Second,
the environment risk minimizer estimates P (Y | X, E). Third, our in-context risk minimizer, denoted
by
                                            Xt
                              h̃ = arg min       E(Xj ,Cj ,Yj ) [ℓ(h(Xj ; Cj ), Yj )].                     (5)
                                      h     j=1

estimates the conditional expectation E(Y | X, C). The sequel focuses on the binary cross-entropy
loss ℓ. Our first result shows that, in the absence of context, ICRM zooms-out to behave conserva-
tively.
Proposition 1 (Zoom-out). In the absence of context, ICRM behaves as the global empirical risk
minimizer across the support of the training environments, i.e., h̃(· ; ∅) = h† (·).

The above result is built on the insight that ICRM is Bayes optimal at all context lengths and ERM is
Bayes optimal for context c = ∅. Having established the connection between ICRM and ERM in


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the absence of any context, we now study the benefits of ICRM in the presence of sufficiently long
contexts. The following result shows that, when provided with context from a training environment
e ∈ Etr , our ICRM zooms-in and behaves like the appropriate environment risk minimizer, as shown
in Table 1. We assume that P (Y = 1 | X = x, E = e) is parametrized by a function h⋆ (x, θxe ),
where θxe describes features of the environment relevant to the query x, for all e ∈ E. We also assume
there exists an ideal amortization function b that takes as input the query X and context Ct preceding
                                                                  E
it—both sampled from environment E—and approximates θX              . Formally, the sequence of random
                                                                                      E
variables b(X, Ct ) indexed by t converges almost surely to the random variable θX      .
                                        ⋆      e
Theorem 1 (Full iid zoom-in). Let h (x, θx ) describe P (Y = 1 | X = x, E = e) for all e ∈ E.
                                                                         a.s. E
Further, we assume the existence of an amortization function b(X, Ct ) → θX      . Then, ICRM zooms-in
on the environment risk minimizer and achieves a cross-entropy loss over the training distribution
                                  lim H(Y | X, Ct ) = H(Y | X, E).
                                 t→∞

Further, if I(Y ; E | X) > 0, ICRM has better performance than the global risk minimizer.

Theorem 1 states that ICRM converges to empirical risk minimizer of the environment under infinitely
long contexts. Next, we show that ICRM can partially zoom-in on the appropriate environment risk
minimizer even with contexts of length of one.
Theorem 2 (Partial iid zoom-in). Suppose the joint distribution ((X1 , · · · Xt ), (Y1 , . . . , Yt ), E) is
Markov with respect to a Bayesian network. The query X and the environment E are statistically
dependent and form the Markov blanket of Y . Then ICRM partially zooms-in on the environment
risk minimizer, improving over the performance of the global empirical risk minimizer in terms of the
cross-entropy loss. Further, the improvement is strictly monotonic in context length t.

Next, we move to the out-of-distribution setting where the test environments can be different from
the training environments. To provide theory for a domain generalization result, we must place
some assumptions on the data generation process. In particular, and for all e ∈ E, let z | y, e ∼
N (µye , Σye ), and x ← g(z) where the latent variables z are sampled conditional on the label y and
environment e from a Gaussian distribution with mean and covariance depending on (y, e), and are
then mixed by     a map g to generate  the observations x. We summarize the environment as a parameter
vector γe = (pye , µye , Σye )y∈{0,1} , where pye is the probability of label y in environment e. Our next
result shows that ICL algorithms that learn h(x; c) exhibit robust behavior under distribution shifts.
In contrast, such guarantees are not known for algorithms that generate predictors of the form h(x).
Define δe to be a permutation of γe that swaps its two components. We construct the Voronoi cells
corresponding to the points in the union of sets {γe }e∈Etr and {δe }e∈Etr . The set of points in the
Voronoi cells corresponding to the set of points {γe }e∈Etr define the Voronoi cells of the training
environments. Next, we show that there exists an ICL algorithm, which takes the data from multiple
environments as input and outputs a predictor that takes current query and context as input, whose
output predictors perform well in novel test environments even those that are sufficiently far away
from the training environments, so long as they are in the Voronoi cells of training environments.
Theorem 3 (Full OOD zoom-in). Consider data triplets (x, y, e) generated from z ∼ N (µye , Σye )
and x ← g(z), ∀e ∈ E, where g is the identity map (see Appendix A for extension to general diffeo-
morphism g). There exists an ICL algorithm that in the limit of infinitely long contexts produces Bayes
optimal predictions for all the test environments in the Voronoi cells of the training environments.

5    ICRM UNDER THE LENS OF INVARIANCE
Common advice in domain generalization recommends following the invariance principle to learn
robust predictors (Peters et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019). One simple version of the invariance
principle is to “select those inputs leading to stable predictors across training environments.” At first
sight, one could argue that the proposed ICRM does not adhere to such a principle, as it is adapting to
environment-specific information provided in the form of context. As we shall now illustrate, ICRM’s
implementation of ERM on the extended input-context feature space reveals invariant predictors that
a vanilla implementation of ERM on the standard feature space fails to find. To see this, consider a
linear least-squares regression problem mapping two dimensional inputs x = (x1 , x2 ) into a target y
under environments e ∈ E as y = α · x1 + β · µ2e + ε, where µie = E[X i | E = e], the pair (α, β)


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are invariant regression coefficients, and ε is an independent noise term. We make one simplifying
assumption for pedagogic purposes. During training, we provide ICRM training directly with the
relevant extended feature space (x1 , x2 , µ1e , µ2e ), instead of requiring the algorithm to learn such
representation from general-form sequential context.
In this setup, ICRM learns to predict using α · x1 + 0 · x2 + 0 · µ1e + β · µ2e . In contrast, ERM
trains a linear model on (x1 , x2 ) and predicts using α̃ · x1 + β̃ · x2 . The main point is: if β ̸= 0 and
cov(X 1 , X 2 ) ̸= 0, then α̃ ̸= α, and the error of ERM in a new environment grows with the variance
of x1 . On the other hand, ICRM estimates the true invariant coefficient α. and the resulting error is
independent of variance of x1 , even in the absence of context during test time. As a result, ICRM
exhibits better out-of-distribution performance than ERM without any contextual information at test
time. For a derivation and generalization of these claims, see Appendix A.
We believe that ICRM, and more generally ICL, provide a novel view on invariance. On the one
hand, prior DG algorithms advocated to remove features as a guide to reveal invariance. On the other
hand, in-context learners suggest that extending features with context affords invariance otherwise
unnoticed. This needs further clarification: while the process of zooming-in to an environment risk
minimizer does not provide us with an invariant predictor over the original feature space, the process
of zooming-in is often an invariant mechanism over the extended feature space. These points are
reminiscent of the concept of “fragility” in the philosophy of causation (Menzies and Beebee, 2020).
Does smoking cause cancer? Not invariably across all contexts or environments. Yet, smoking does
cause cancer invariably—across all contexts or environments—when extending the feature space as to
include additional causes such as diet, genetic predispositions, and the number of smoked cigarettes.
The ever-growing collection of causes approaches what Mill (1856) called the total cause, a large
context sharpening invariance at the expense of constraining the diameter of the environment. In the
extreme, when constraining the environment to contain only one smoker, the outcome of lung cancer
disease invariably follows.

6     E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate the efficacy of ICRM, our experiments address the following questions:
      1. How does ICRM fare against competitive DG algorithms, for different context sizes?
      2. What is the impact of model architecture on ICRM’s gains?
      3. Can ICRM search for query relevant signals in the context?
In our experiments, we compare ICRM against marginal transfer methods such as Adaptive Risk
Minimization (Zhang et al., 2020, ARM), and test-time adaptation proposals such as TENT (Wang
et al., 2020). As a strong baseline, we also include ERM in our experimental protocol. To ensure a
fair comparison across different algorithms for each dataset, we use a standardized neural network
backbone (ConvNet or ResNet-50 depending on the dataset) as described in Appendix C.4. For ICRM,
the same backbone is used to featurize the input, which is then processed by the decoder-only GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019). During both training and inference for ICRM, data in a sequence is sampled
from the same environment. For fair comparisons, we adhere to DomainBed’s protocols for training,
hyper-parameter tuning, and testing (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz, 2020), details in Appendix C.4.
We assess these methods across six image classification benchmarks, featuring diversity shift –
FEMNIST (Cohen et al., 2017) contains MNIST digits and handwritten letters from individual
writers as environments. Rotated MNIST concerns varied rotational angles as environments. Tiny
ImageNet-C and CIFAR10-C (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019) introduce diverse image corruptions
to create multiple environments. WILDS Camelyon17 (Koh et al., 2021) studies tumor detection
with data from multiple hospitals as distinct environments and Imagenet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021)
contains various renditions (e.g., paintings, embroidery, etc.) of ImageNet object classes as domains.
More details are provided in Appendix C.3. We consider addressing correlation shifts (Ye et al.,
2022) as a future work of our paper, as it involves scenarios where the test domain contains naturally
occurring subpopulations or time-based shifts without clear domain separation

6.1   A DAPTATION TO DISTRIBUTION SHIFT

To study the adaptation of other approaches to distribution shifts, we report the average performance
on four datasets across three independent runs of the entire sweep for test context lengths of 0, 25, 50,


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Average/worst OOD test accuracy for different context lengths, for Adaptive Risk Mini-
mization (ARM), Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), Test Entropy Minimization (TENT) and our
ICRM on FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny-ImageNet-C.

           Data / method             Average test accuracy                   Worst case test accuracy
           FEMNIST             0       25        50     75      100     0        25      50         75     100
             ARM              49.5    83.9      84.4   84.7     84.6   23.6     59.5    60.7       57.0    58.8
             TENT             78.1    77.9      81.2   82.5     83.3   55.2     57.2    63.3       65.9    67.2
             ERM              79.3    79.3      79.3   79.3     79.3   59.0     59.0    59.0       59.0    59.0
             ICRM             78.7    87.2      87.4   87.5     87.8   59.8     69.3    70.6       70.6    70.6
           Rotated MNIST       0       25        50     75      100     0        25      50         75     100
             ARM              36.5    94.2      95.1   95.3     95.5   28.2     85.3    87.2       87.9    87.9
             TENT             94.1    88.0      91.9   93.8     94.3   80.2     88.5    88.5       80.2    81.3
             ERM              94.2    94.2      94.2   94.2     94.2   80.8     80.8    80.8       80.8    80.8
             ICRM             93.6    96.1      96.2   96.2     96.2   82.5     88.5    88.5       88.8    88.8
           WILDS Camelyon17    0       25        50     75      100     0        25     50          75      100
            ARM               61.2    59.5      59.7   59.7     59.7
            TENT              67.9    81.8      87.2   89.4     89.4
                                                                             same as average accuracy
            ERM               68.6    68.6      68.6   68.6     68.6
            ICRM              92.0    90.7      90.8   90.8     90.8
           Tiny ImageNet-C     0       25        50     75      100      0       25      50         75     100
             ARM              30.8    31.0      31.0   31.0     31.0    8.2      8.3     8.2        8.3     8.2
             TENT             31.7     1.6       1.7    2.0      2.1    9.4      1.2     1.4        1.6     1.6
             ERM              31.8    31.8      31.8   31.8     31.8    9.5      9.5     9.5        9.5     9.5
             ICRM             38.3    39.2      39.2   39.2     39.2   18.8     19.2    19.5       19.5    19.4


75, and 100 samples. The results for other datasets and more DG algorithms are reported in Table 7
and Table 8. As Table 2 shows, ICRM outperforms all methods across context lengths, except at null
context length on MNIST datasets, where ERM exceeds by 1%. Further, our gains persist over both
the worst group and average accuracy across testing environments. Figure 5 zooms into the model’s
performance between no-context and 25 context samples, highlighting the consistent superiority of
ICRM even with small contexts. Additionally, ICRM demonstrates gains in performance even in the
absence of test context. Specifically for both WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny ImageNet-C, ICRM
outperforms baselines despite not leveraging any context from the test environment. We hypothesize
that ICRM training still benefits from contexts as to find contextual features that ERM ignores.

6.2   U NDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF ARCHITECTURE

To dissect the performance gains potentially arising from ICRM’s transformer architecture, we
explore two additional competitors. First, we train an ERM baseline, ERM+ using an identical
architecture to ICRM, but without context. Second, we train an ARM baseline, ARM+ , where
the input and context coarse summary are sent to a GPT-2 such that the model now attends to the
summary through attention layers.

Table 3: Worst group OOD test accuracies for ARM+ and ERM+ in contrast to their base algorithms,
ARM and ERM across FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS, Camelyon17, and Tiny-ImageNet-C.

          Dataset                    ARM               ARM+                   ERM               ERM+
          # Context Samples     0        100           0       100       0        100          0          100
          FEMNIST             23.6       58.8      51.7        62.0    59.0      59.0        53.3         53.3
          Rotated MNIST       28.2       87.9      71.4        81.1    80.8      80.8        81.9         81.9
          WILDS Camelyon17    61.2       59.7      55.8        55.0    68.6      68.6        50.1         50.1
          Tiny ImageNet-C      8.2        8.2       1.9         1.9     9.5       9.5         8.3          8.3


Table 3 presents the performance of both ERM+ and ARM+ relative to ERM and ARM, across the
four datasets. ARM+ demonstrates superior zero-shot performance over ARM on both FEMNIST
and Rotated MNIST. However, ARM maintains a performance advantage over ARM+ across varying
counts of in-context samples on WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny ImageNet-C, with a pronounced


                                                           8
Attention          maps (final fig tiny with class name)
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  difference on the latter. Similarly, ERM either matches or outperforms ERM+ on all four datasets.
  Therefore, even with similar architectures, prior protocols fall short of the proposed ICRM.


           Query        0.15       0.13     0.13      0.20      0.23      0.16        0.00       0.00   0.00   0.00
           Bullet Train School bus Mantis   Rocking   Pizza     Bullet    Bullet
            Query         0.12     0.06     chair
                                              0.32    0.10      train
                                                                0.15      train
                                                                           0.10      0.05        0.11   0.00   0.00


           Query        0.16    0.24         0.12     0.12      0.11     0.15       0.11         0.00   0.00   0.00
            Queryball
           Volley       0.08
                        Beach     0.15
                                Academic     0.10
                                             Hog       0.04
                                                      Walking   0.21
                                                                Plate      0.03
                                                                         Volleyball   0.04
                                                                                    Volleyball   0.15   0.19   0.00
                        Wagon   Gown                  stick
                                                                    Query Image

  Figure 2: Attention scores for random test sequences, for ICRM on FEMNIST (top) and Tiny
  ImageNet-C (bottom), with the class label shown below. Samples following the query have an
  attention score of 0.0 because of the causal attention mechanism.


  6.3   I NVESTIGATING ATTENTION IN ICRM

  As discussed in Section 2, ICRM can learn an amortization function by paying attention to the input
  query and context. To understand this better, we construct a random data sequence from the test
  environment and analyze attention scores between each example in this context and a novel input
  query. Figure 2 illustrates attention scores from a single head for a query image (marked in blue) for
  FEMNIST and Tiny ImageNet-C. Note that samples following the query have an attention score of
  0.0 because of the causal attention mechanism. The top row reveals that the model selectively attends
  to images featuring at least two curved arcs (marked in green) while paying little attention to a partial
  circle (highlighted in red). Similarly, in the bottom row, the model effectively discerns individuals
  across samples within the sequence and also indicates a semantic understanding of similarity.

  7     D ISCUSSION
  We introduced In-Context Risk Minimization (ICRM), a framework to address domain generalization
  as context-based prediction. ICRM learns in-context about environmental features by paying
  attention to unlabeled instances as they arrive. In such a away, ICRM dynamically zooms-in on the
  test environment risk minimizer, enabling competitive out-of-distribution generalization.
  ICRM provides a new perspective on invariance. While prior work on DG focused on information
  removal as a guide to generalization, ICRM suggests that extending the feature space with the
  relevant environment information affords further invariance. By addressing the general problem of
  context-based prediction in-distribution, we amortize the performance over a multitude of specific
  out-of -distribution tasks. More generally, by framing DG as next-token prediction, our approach can
  be adapted to fully exploit data in natural order (such as in video or text, ordered by time and position),
  more closely mimicking the human learning experience—as Léon Bottou once said, Nature does
  not shuffle data. That said, we view extending ICRM to scenarios where the environment contains
  naturally occurring subpopulations or time-based shifts without clear separation as an exciting future
  direction. As a word of caution, we must conduct research to guarantee that in-context learners do
  not “zoom-in” on toxic spurious correlations with high predictive power in certain environments. We
  close with a quote from Andersen et al. (2022), for whom zooming-in
           refers to a cognitive agent’s ability to intelligently ignore irrelevant information and zero
           in on those aspects of the world that are relevant to their goals. The relevance realization
           framework suggests that the brain achieves this feat by attempting to balance the competing
           goals of remaining efficient in the current environment while also being resilient in the face
           of environmental perturbations.

  Paralleling the examples from Andersen et al. (2022), we would like to further understand how next-
  token prediction and in-context learning serves as a powerful mechanism to amortize and dynamically
  navigate trade-offs such as such as efficiency-resiliency, exploration-exploitation, specialization-
  generalization, and focusing-diversifying.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
SG and SJ acknowledge funding from the Office of Naval Research grant N00014-20-1-2023 (MURI
ML-SCOPE) and NSF award CCF-2112665 (TILOS AI Institute). We are thankful to Martin
Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Elvis Dohmatob, Badr Youbi Idrissi, Maxime Oquab, and Ahmed Touati for
their valuable feedback and help.

R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja and David Lopez-Paz. A closer look at in-context learning under distribution shifts.
  arXiv, 2023.
Kartik Ahuja, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Kush Varshney, and Amit Dhurandhar. Invariant risk
  minimization games. In ICML, 2020.
Kartik Ahuja, Ethan Caballero, Dinghuai Zhang, Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Yoshua Bengio,
  Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Irina Rish. Invariance principle meets information bottleneck for out-of-
  distribution generalization. NeurIPS, 2021.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Brett P Andersen, Mark Miller, and John Vervaeke. Predictive processing and relevance realization:
  exploring convergent solutions to the frame problem. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
  2022.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias.
  ProPublica,  2016.         URL    https://www.propublica.org/article/
  machine-bias-ri[REDACTED_API_KEY].
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv, 2019.
Robert B Ash and Catherine A Doléans-Dade. Probability and measure theory. 2000.
Yujia Bao and Theofanis Karaletsos. Contextual Vision Transformers for Robust Representation
  Learning. arXiv, 2023.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
  NeurIPS, 2000.
Gilles Blanchard, Aniket Anand Deshmukh, Ürun Dogan, Gyemin Lee, and Clayton Scott. Domain
  generalization by marginal transfer learning. JMLR, 2011.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang, Mo Yu, and Tommi S Jaakkola. Invariant rationalization. In ICML, 2020.
Yining Chen, Elan Rosenfeld, Mark Sellke, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Iterative feature
  matching: Toward provable domain generalization with logarithmic environments. NeurIPS, 2022.
Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and Andre Van Schaik. Emnist: Extending mnist to
  handwritten letters. In IJCNN, 2017.
Cian Eastwood, Alexander Robey, Shashank Singh, Julius Von Kügelgen, Hamed Hassani, George J
  Pappas, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Probable domain generalization via quantile risk minimization.
  NeurIPS, 2022.
Cian Eastwood, Shashank Singh, Andrei Liviu Nicolicioiu, Marin Vlastelica, Julius von Kügelgen,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Spuriosity didn’t kill the classifier: Using invariant predictions to harness
  spurious features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09933, 2023.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In ICML, 2017.
Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Kartik Ahuja, Mohammad Javad Darvishi Bayazi, Pooneh Mousavi,
  Guillaume Dumas, and Irina Rish. WOODS: Benchmarks for out-of-distribution generalization in
  time series. TMLR, 2023.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  JMLR, 2016.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes. In
 International conference on machine learning, pages 1704–1713. PMLR, 2018a.
Marta Garnelo, Jonathan Schwarz, Dan Rosenbaum, Fabio Viola, Danilo J Rezende, SM Eslami, and
 Yee Whye Teh. Neural processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01622, 2018b.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and perturbations. arXiv, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A critical
  analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pages 8340–8349, 2021.
Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Nate Gruver, and Andrew G Wilson. On feature learning in the
  presence of spurious correlations. NeurIPS, 2022.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Enforcing predictive invariance across structured
 biomedical domains, 2020.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In AISTATS, 2020.
Hyunjik Kim, Andriy Mnih, Jonathan Schwarz, Marta Garnelo, Ali Eslami, Dan Rosenbaum, Oriol
 Vinyals, and Yee Whye Teh. Attentive neural processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05761, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv, 2014.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv, 2022.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In ICML, 2021.
Masanori Koyama and Shoichiro Yamaguchi. Out-of-distribution generalization with maximal
 invariant predictor. arXiv, 2020.
David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Dinghuai
  Zhang, Remi Le Priol, and Aaron Courville. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapola-
  tion. arXiv, 2020.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodriguez, Yash Sharma, Katie E Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
   Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
   new principle for nonlinear ica. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Thomas A Henzinger, and
 Daniela Rus. Are all vision models created equal? a study of the open-loop to closed-loop causality
 gap. arXiv, 2022.
Ya Li, Mingming Gong, Xinmei Tian, Tongliang Liu, and Dacheng Tao. Domain generalization
  via conditional invariant representations. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, 2018.
Yanghao Li, Naiyan Wang, Jianping Shi, Jiaying Liu, and Xiaodi Hou. Revisiting batch normalization
  for practical domain adaptation. arXiv, 2016a.
Yanghao Li, Naiyan Wang, Jianping Shi, Jiaying Liu, and Xiaodi Hou. Revisiting batch normalization
  for practical domain adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04779, 2016b.
Divyat Mahajan, Shruti Tople, and Amit Sharma. Domain generalization using causal matching.
  arXiv, 2020.
Maggie Makar, Ben Packer, Dan Moldovan, Davis Blalock, Yoni Halpern, and Alexander D’Amour.
 Causally motivated shortcut removal using auxiliary labels. In AISTATS, 2022.
Peter Menzies and Helen Beebee. Counterfactual Theories of Causation. In The Stanford Encyclope-
  dia of Philosophy. 2020.
John Stuart Mill. A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, volume 1. 1856.
Krikamol Muandet, David Balduzzi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Domain generalization via invariant
  feature representation. In ICML, 2013.
Jens Müller, Robert Schmier, Lynton Ardizzone, Carsten Rother, and Ullrich Köthe. Learning robust
  models using the principle of independent causal mechanisms. arXiv, 2020.
Samuel Müller, Noah Hollmann, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Josif Grabocka, and Frank Hutter.
  Transformers can do bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10510, 2021.
Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04179, 2022.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv, 2023.
Giambattista Parascandolo, Alexander Neitz, Antonio Orvieto, Luigi Gresele, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Learning explanations that are hard to vary. In ICLR, 2021.
Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal inference by using invariant
  prediction: identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series
  B: Statistical Methodology, 2016.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.
Alexandre Rame, Corentin Dancette, and Matthieu Cord. Fishr: Invariant gradient variances for
  out-of-distribution generalization. In ICML, 2022.
Alexander Robey, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Model-based domain generalization. arXiv,
  2021.
Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Bernhard Schölkopf, Richard Turner, and Jonas Peters. Invariant models for
 causal transfer learning. JMLR, 2018.
Walter Rudin. Principles of mathematical analysis. 1953.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv, 2019.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Olawale Salaudeen and Oluwasanmi Koyejo. Target conditioned representation independence (tcri);
  from domain-invariant to domain-general representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11342, 2022.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to learn:
   the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Steffen Schneider, Evgenia Rusak, Luisa Eck, Oliver Bringmann, Wieland Brendel, and Matthias
  Bethge. Improving robustness against common corruptions by covariate shift adaptation. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 33:11539–11551, 2020.
Zheyan Shen, Jiashuo Liu, Yue He, Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, and Peng Cui. Towards
  out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. arXiv, 2021.
Yuge Shi, Jeffrey Seely, Philip HS Torr, N Siddharth, Awni Hannun, Nicolas Usunier, and Gabriel
  Synnaeve. Gradient matching for domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09937, 2021.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation. In
  ECCV Workshops, 2016.
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, and Anton van den Hengel. Unshuffling data for improved
  generalization. arXiv, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical learning theory. Wiley, 1998.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. NeurIPS, 2017.
Victor Veitch, Alexander D’Amour, Steve Yadlowsky, and Jacob Eisenstein. Counterfactual invariance
  to spurious correlations in text classification. NeurIPS, 2021.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Yoav Wald, Amir Feder, Daniel Greenfeld, and Uri Shalit. On calibration and out-of-domain
  generalization. NeurIPS, 2021.
Yoav Wald, Gal Yona, Uri Shalit, and Yair Carmon. Malign overfitting: Interpolation can provably
  preclude invariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15724, 2022.
Yoav Wald, Claudia Shi, Aahlad Puli, Amir Feder, Limor Gultchin, Mark Goldstein, Maggie Makar,
  Victor Veitch, and Uri Shalit. Workshop on spurious correlations, invariance and stability. ICML,
  2023. URL https://icml.cc/virtual/2023/workshop/21493.
Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. arXiv, 2020.
Haoxiang Wang, Haozhe Si, Bo Li, and Han Zhao. Provable domain generalization via invariant-
  feature subspace recovery. In ICML, 2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy Liang, Quoc V
  Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up language model
  pretraining. arXiv, 2023.
Sidney J Yakowitz and John D Spragins. On the identifiability of finite mixtures. The Annals of
  Mathematical Statistics, 1968.
Shen Yan, Huan Song, Nanxiang Li, Lincan Zou, and Liu Ren. Improve unsupervised domain
  adaptation with mixup training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00677, 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Huaxiu Yao, Caroline Choi, Bochuan Cao, Yoonho Lee, Pang Wei W Koh, and Chelsea Finn.
 Wild-time: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shift over time. NeurIPS, 2022.
Nanyang Ye, Kaican Li, Haoyue Bai, Runpeng Yu, Lanqing Hong, Fengwei Zhou, Zhenguo Li,
  and Jun Zhu. Ood-bench: Quantifying and understanding two dimensions of out-of-distribution
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 7947–7958, 2022.
Marvin Zhang, Henrik Marklund, Nikita Dhawan, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
 Adaptive risk minimization: Learning to adapt to domain shift. NeurIPS, 2020.
Yihua Zhang, Pranay Sharma, Parikshit Ram, Mingyi Hong, Kush Varshney, and Sijia Liu. What is
  missing in IRM training and evaluation? challenges and solutions. arXiv, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A Theorems and Proofs                                                                                15
    A.1 Proof of Proposition 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
    A.2 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
    A.3 Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
    A.4 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    A.5 Extension of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
    A.6 Comparing ICRM and ERM under the lens of invariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              27
    A.7 Illustration of failure of existing MTL methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29

B Related work                                                                                       30

C Supplementary experimental details and assets disclosure                                           30
    C.1 Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
    C.2 Hardware and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
    C.3 Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
         C.3.1    Federated Extended MNIST (FEMNIST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             30
         C.3.2    Rotated MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
         C.3.3 WILDS Camelyon17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            31
         C.3.4    CIFAR10-C and Tiny ImageNet-C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          31
         C.3.5    ImageNet R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
    C.4 Experimental protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32

D Additional experiments                                                                             33
    D.1 Adaptation curves of various algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33
    D.2 Domain generalization accuracies per algorithm and dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . .         34
         D.2.1 Adaptation to distribution shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34
         D.2.2 Robustness of ICRM in the absence of environment labels . . . . . . . . .             37
         D.2.3 Understanding the impact of architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          37
    D.3 Comparison of ICRM with In-Context Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            41
    D.4 Investigating the features learned by ICRM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41


A     T HEOREMS AND P ROOFS

A.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Lemma 1. ICRM is Bayes optimal at all context lengths. Suppose ℓ is the binary cross-entropy
loss and the labels Y are binary. The optimal in-context learner h̃ (equation 5) satisfies the following
condition, i.e., for each k ∈ [t]

                               h̃(xk ; ck ) = E[Y |Xk = xk , Ck = ck ],                              (6)


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for almost all (ck , xk ) in the support of training distribution except over a set of a measure zero, and
where the expectation is over Y conditional on [ck , xk ]. In other words, the in-context learner is
Bayes optimal at each context length.

Proof. In this result, we consider the problem of binary classification. Suppose h(x   k ; ck ) is the
predicted probability of class Y = 1 conditional on xk and ck . Define h̄(xk ; ck ) = h(xk ; ck ), 1 −
h(xk ; ck ) describing the probability of both the classes.
From equation 5, recall that the objective of ICRM is to minimize
                                    t
                                    X
                                          E(Xj ,Cj ,Yj ) [ℓ(h(Xj ; Cj ), Yj )].                         (7)
                                    j=1


Consider one of the terms in the sum above - E ℓ(h(Xk ; Ck ), Yk ) . Substituting ℓ as the cross-entropy
in this term, we obtain

           E ℓ(h(Xk ; Ck ), Yk ) = H(Yk |Xk , Ck ) + E KL P (Yk |Xk , Ck ) h̄(Xk ; Ck ) .

If h̄(Xk ; Ck ) = P (Yk |Xk , Ck ), then the second term in the above is zero and E ℓ(h(Xk ; Ck ), Yk )
equals H(Yk |Xk ; Ck ). Since KL divergence  is always non-negative,
                                                                         H(Yk |Xk , Ck ) corresponds to
the lowest value that can be achieved by E ℓ(h(Xk ; Ck ), Yk ) . If h̄(Xk ; Ck ) = P (Yk |Xk , Ck ) for
all k ∈ [t], then each of the terms in the sum in equation 7 are minimized. As a result, h̄(Xk ; Ck ) =
P (Yk |Xk , Ck ) for all k ∈ [t] is a solution to equation 5.
                                ′                                                               ′
Consider another minimizer       h of equation 5 and′ define the  corresponding distribution
                                                                                        ′
                                                                                               h̄ . For each
k ∈ [t], the second term E KL(P (Yk |Xk , Ck )∥h̄ (Xk ; Ck ) has to be zero for h̄ to be a minimizer.
                               ′                                        ′
If E KL(P (Yk |Xk , Ck )∥h̄ (Xk ; Ck ) = 0, then we claim that h̄ (xk ; ck ) = P (Yk |Xk = xk , Ck =
ck ) for almost all (xk , ck ) in the support of training distribution except over a set of measure zero. If
the probability measure associated with Xk , Ck is absolutely continuous w.r.t Lebesgue measure, then
this claim follows from Theorem 1.6.6 (Ash and Doléans-Dade, 2000). If the probability measure
associated with Xk , Ck is absolutely continuous w.r.t counting measure, then this claim trivially
follows.

We proved the above result for classification and cross-entropy loss for measures over X, C that are
either absolutely continuous w.r.t Lebesgue measure or the counting measure. It is easy to extend the
above result for regressions and least square loss; see Lemma 1 in Ahuja and Lopez-Paz (2023).
Proposition 1 (Zoom-out). In the absence of context, ICRM behaves as the global empirical risk
minimizer across the support of the training environments, i.e., h̃(· ; ∅) = h† (·).

Proof. From Lemma 1, it follows that h̃(xk ; ck ) = E[Y |Xk = xk , Ck = ck ]. The solution to
empirical risk minimization is h† (x) = E[Y |X1 = x], where the expectation is computed over the
training distribution of Y conditional on x. When the context is empty, then we have h̃(x; ∅) =
E[Y |X1 = x] = h† (x) for almost all x in the support of training distribution except over a set of
measure zero.

A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Before stating the proof of Theorem 1, we provide an example of an ideal amortization map b(·).

Example of ideal amortization map. Consider the example from equation ??, where y = α · x1 +
β · µ2e + ε. P (Y = y|X = x, E = e) = pε (y − αx1 − βµ2e ), where pε is the probability density of
noise. Observe that P (Y = y|X = x, E = e) is parametrized in terms of µ2e and the sequence of
                              1
                                 Pt−1 2                                2          2
random variables b(X, Ct ) = t−1     j=1 Xj converge almost surely to µe , where Xj is the second
component of Xj and Ct = (X1 , · · · , Xt−1 ).


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For ease of exposition, we start with the case when all the concerned random variables
X, Y, Ct , E, b(X, Ct ), where X is the current query and Y is its label and Ct is the context preceed-
ing it sampled from environment E, and b(·) is the ideal amortization map, are discrete-valued with a
finite support. Subsequently, we study more general settings.
Theorem 1 (Full iid zoom-in). Let h⋆ (x, θxe ) describe P (Y = 1 | X = x, E = e) for all e ∈ E.
                                                                       a.s. E
Further, we assume the existence of an amortization function b(X, Ct ) → θX   . Then, ICRM zooms-in
on the environment risk minimizer and achieves a cross-entropy loss over the training distribution
                                  lim H(Y | X, Ct ) = H(Y | X, E).
                                 t→∞

Further, if I(Y ; E | X) > 0, ICRM has better performance than the global risk minimizer.

Proof. As stated above, in this proof, we work with discrete-valued X, Y, Ct , E, b(X, Ct ) that also
have finite support, where X is the current query and Y is its label and Ct is the context preceeding it
sampled from environment E, and b(·) is the ideal amortization map. Subsequently, we study more
general settings.
Since each (Xj , Yj ) is sampled independently given a training environment E, we can conclude
I(Y ; Ct |X, E) = 0. Therefore,
                     I(Y ; Ct |X, E) = 0 =⇒ H(Y |X, E) = H(Y |X, E, Ct ).

Observe that for all t ∈ Z+
               H(Y |X, E) = H(Y |X, E, Ct ) ≤ H(Y |X, Ct ) ≤ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )),                         (8)
where Z+ is the set of all positive integers. The first inequality in the above follows from the fact that
conditioning reduces entropy. For the second inequality, we use the following property. Consider U, V
as two random variables and define W = a(V ). Observe that I(U ; W |V ) = 0 =⇒ H(U |V ) =
H(U |V, W ) ≤ H(U |W ).
Since the inequality above equation 8 holds for all t, we obtain

                    H(Y |X, E) ≤ lim H(Y |X, Ct ) ≤ lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )).                              (9)
                                    t→∞                     t→∞

In the above, we use the following property. If an ≤ bn , ∀n ∈ Z+ and limn→∞ an and limn→∞ bn
exist, then limn→∞ an ≤ limn→∞ bn . In what follows, we will show that both the limits
limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) and limt→∞ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) exist. First observe that H(Y |X, Ct+1 ) ≤
H(Y |X, Ct ) for all t as a result the sequence is decreasing bounded below by 0 and thus from
monotone convergence theorem (Rudin, 1953) limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) exists. Next, we will show that
limt→∞ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) = H(Y |X, E). We will then combine it equation 9 to obtain what we
intend to prove, i.e., limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) = H(Y |X, E).
                                                                                                  a.s.
For each X = x and E = e in the support of training distribution, we argue that b(X, Ct ) → θxe .
Suppose this was not true. This implies that the probability that P (limt→∞ b(X, Ct ) ̸= θxe |X =
x, E = e) = β > 0. Since X = x, E = e occurs with a finite probability (as X and E are
discrete-valued and x, e is in the support) say α, then αβ fraction of sequences of b(X, Ct ) do not
                                                                  a.s. E
converge to θxe , which contradicts the assumption that b(X, Ct ) → θX   .
                                           E
Consider a (x, θ) from the support of (X, θX ), where X is the current query and E is the envi-
ronment from which X and context preceeding it is sampled. Let us consider the distribution
P (Y |X, b(X, Ct )).


                                                        P (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
               P (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =                                                      (10)
                                                            P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)

We simplify limt→∞ P (Y |X, b(X, Ct )) below.


                                                  limt→∞ P (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
       lim P (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =                                                          (11)
      t→∞                                             limt→∞ P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)

                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We show that the limits of the numerator and denominator exist (and non-zero for the denominator)
and we simplify these separately below.
                                                X
  lim P (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = lim        P (Y = y, X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
  t→∞                                                 t→∞
                                                            e
        X
  =          P (Y = y|X = x, E = e) lim P (X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ)                                 (12)
                                              t→∞
        e
        X
  =          P (Y = y|X = x, E = e)P (X = x, E = e) lim P (b(X, Ct ) = θ|X = x, E = e)
                                                                  t→∞
        e


In the simplification above, we firstly used the fact that we can interchange sum and limits, this is
true because e only takes finitely many values. In the simplification above, we also use the fact
Y ⊥ Ct |X, E. Since b(X, Ct ) converges to θxe almost surely, the distribution limt→∞ P (b(X, Ct ) =
θ|X = x, E = e) takes a value one if θ = θxe and zero otherwise. As a result, the above expression
becomes

                                                        X
   lim P (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =                        P (Y = y|X = x, E = e)P (X = x, E = e).
   t→∞
                                                       e∈Ex,θ
                                                                                             (13)
where Ex,θ is the set of all the environments observed conditional on X = x with θxe = θ. Observe
that all the environments in Ex,θ have the same P (Y = 1|X = x, E = e) given by h⋆ (x, θ). We can
write

                                                                            X
                 lim P (Y = 1, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = h⋆ (x, θ)                    P (X = x, E = e).   (14)
                t→∞
                                                                           e∈Ex,θ


We simplify limt→∞ P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) in a similar manner to obtain
                                                    X
                  lim P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =         P (X = x, E = e).                              (15)
                           t→∞
                                                                  e∈Ex,θ


                                                                                        E
Observe that the denominator is positive and not zero because x, θ is in support of X, θX . We use
equation 14 and equation 15 to obtain


                                                      limt→∞ P (Y = 1, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
   lim P (Y = 1|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =
  t→∞                                                     limt→∞ P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
                                                      h⋆ (x, θ) e∈Ex,θ P (X = x, E = e)
                                                                P                                   (16)
                                                                                           ⋆
                                                    =      P                            = h (x, θ).
                                                              e∈Ex,θ P (X = x, E = e)


Therefore,
                        lim P (Y = 1|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = P (Y = 1|X = x, E = e).                    (17)
                       t→∞

where e is any environment in Ex,θ , i.e., it is in the support of data sampled with X = x and that also
satisfies θxe = θ.

                                    X
  lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) =                lim P (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) lim H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
 t→∞                                      t→∞                                t→∞
                                    x,θ
 X  X
                      P (X = x, E = ẽ)       lim H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
                                              t→∞
  x,θ       ẽ∈Ex,θ
                                                                                                        (18)

                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the above simplification, we again swap limits and sum because the summation is over a finite
set of values. From equation 17, it follows that limt→∞ H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = H(Y |X =
x, E = e), where e is any environment in Ex,θ . We use this in the above to get
                                     X  X
          lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) =                 P (X = x, E = ẽ) H(Y |X = x, E = e)
         t→∞
                                            x,θ   ẽ∈Ex,θ
              X  X
          =                     P (X = x, E = ẽ) H(Y |X = x, E = ẽ)                                (19)
              x,θ     ẽ∈Ex,θ
              X
          =          P (X = x, E = ẽ)H(Y |X = x, E = ẽ) = H(Y |X, E).
              x,ẽ


We combine the above with equation 9 to obtain limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) = H(Y |X, E). Finally,
observe that if I(Y ; E|X) > 0 =⇒ H(Y |X, E) < H(Y |X). Since limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) =
H(Y |X, E), ICRM impoves over ERM that attains a cross-entropy loss of H(Y |X).
This completes the proof.



We now extend the argument to setting beyond discrete random variables. In particular, we consider
settings where X, E, b(X, Ct ) can be either discrete or continuous random variables. In the notation
to follow, we use dP to denote the Radon-Nikodym derivatives. For discrete random variable, the
Radon-Nikodym derivatives correspond to the standard probability mass function and for continuous
random variables it would correspond to standard probability density functions. We operate under
some regularity assumptions. We assume that the support of E has a finite volume and the support of
(X, b(X, Ct )) has a finite volume for all t. Further, we assume that the Radon-Nikodym derivative of
the joint dP (X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ) is bounded above. While much of the proof that follows
is same as the previous proof, we repeat the arguments for completeness.
Theorem 4. Let h⋆ (x, θxe ) describe dP (Y = 1 | X = x, E = e) for all e ∈ E. Further, we assume
                                                     a.s. E
the existence of an amortization function b(X, Ct ) → θX    . Then, ICRM zooms-in on the environment
risk minimizer and achieves a cross-entropy loss over the training distribution
                                      lim H(Y | X, Ct ) = H(Y | X, E).
                                      t→∞

Further, if I(Y ; E | X) > 0, ICRM has better performance than the global risk minimizer.

Proof. Since each (Xj , Yj ) is sampled independently given a training environment E, we can
conclude I(Y ; Ct |X, E) = 0. Therefore,
                        I(Y ; Ct |X, E) = 0 =⇒ H(Y |X, E) = H(Y |X, E, Ct ).

Observe that for all t ∈ Z+
                H(Y |X, E) = H(Y |X, E, Ct ) ≤ H(Y |X, Ct ) ≤ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )),                    (20)
where Z+ is the set of all positive integers. The first inequality in the above follows from the fact that
conditioning reduces entropy. For the second inequality, we use the following property. Consider U, V
as two random variables and define W = a(V ). Observe that I(U ; W |V ) = 0 =⇒ H(U |V ) =
H(U |V, W ) ≤ H(U |W ).
Since the inequality above equation 20 holds for all t, we obtain

                       H(Y |X, E) ≤ lim H(Y |X, Ct ) ≤ lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )).                       (21)
                                        t→∞                  t→∞

In the above, we use the following property. If an ≤ bn , ∀n ∈ Z+ and limn→∞ an and limn→∞ bn
exist, then limn→∞ an ≤ limn→∞ bn . In what follows, we will show that both the limits
limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) and limt→∞ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) exist. First observe that H(Y |X, Ct+1 ) ≤
H(Y |X, Ct ) for all t as a result the sequence is decreasing bounded below by 0 and thus
from Monotone convergence theorem limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) exists. Next, we will show that


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


limt→∞ H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) = H(Y |X, E). We will then combine it with equation 21 to obtain what
we intend to prove, i.e., limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) = H(Y |X, E).
For each X = x and E = e in the support except over a set of probability measure zero, we
                     a.s.
argue that b(X, Ct ) → θxe . Suppose this was not true. Define Γ to be the set of values of x, e for
                   a.s.
which b(X, Ct ) ̸→ θxe . Let P ((X, E) ∈ Γ) > 0 and the probability that P (limt→∞ b(X, Ct ) ̸=
 E
θX |(X, E) ∈ Γ) > 0. If this is true then P (limt→∞ b(X, Ct ) ̸= θxe ) > 0 contradicts the fact that
          a.s. E
b(X, Ct ) → θX   . Therefore, P ((X, E) ∈ Γ) = 0.
                                           E
Consider a (x, θ) from the support of (X, θX ) except from Γ, where X is the current query and E is
the environment from which X and context preceeding it is sampled. Let us consider the distribution
dP (Y |X, b(X, Ct )).


                                                      dP (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
               dP (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =                                                 (22)
                                                          dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)

We simplify limt→∞ dP (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) below.


                                                limt→∞ dP (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
     lim dP (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =                                                       (23)
    t→∞                                             limt→∞ dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)

We simplify the numerator and the denominator of the above separately.

                                               Z
    lim dP (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = lim   dP (Y = y, X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
   t→∞                                     t→∞ e
      Z
   = dP (Y = y|X = x, E = e) lim dP (X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
                                  t→∞
      Ze
   = dP (Y = y|X = x, E = e)dP (X = x, E = e) lim dP (b(X, Ct ) = θ|X = x, E = e)
       e                                                   t→∞
                                                                                                 (24)
In the above, we use dominated convergence theorem (Ash and Doléans-Dade, 2000) to swap limit
and the integrals (to use dominated convergence theorem, we use the fact that the dP (X = x, E =
e, b(X, Ct ) = θ) is bounded and support of E has a finite volume). In the simplification above,
we also use the fact Y ⊥ Ct |X, E. Since b(X, Ct ) converges to θxe almost surely, the distribution
limt→∞ dP (b(X, Ct ) = θ|X = x, E = e) evaluates to probability one when θ = θxe and is zero
otherwise. As a result, the above expressions become

                                            Z
 lim dP (Y = y, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =               dP (Y = y|X = x, E = e)dP (X = x, E = e).
t→∞                                          e∈Ex,θ
                                                                                                 (25)
where Ex,θ is the set of all the environments observed conditional on X = x with θxe = θ. Observe
that all the environments in Ex,θ have the same dP (Y = 1|X = x, E = e) given by h⋆ (x, θ).
Similarly,
                                                       Z
                     lim dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =              dP (X = x, E = e).             (26)
                    t→∞                                  e∈Ex,θ

As a result, we can write
                                                                  Z
             lim dP (Y = 1, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = h⋆ (x, θ)               dP (X = x, E = e).
           t→∞                                                     e∈Ex,θ


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use this to obtain


                                                  limt→∞ dP (Y = 1, X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
  lim dP (Y = 1|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) =
  t→∞                                                 limt→∞ dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
                                                  h⋆ (x, θ) e∈Ex,θ dP (X = x, E = e)
                                                           R                                     (27)
                                                                                        ⋆
                                                =      R                             = h (x, θ).
                                                        e∈Ex,θ
                                                               dP (X = x, E = e)

Therefore,
                    lim dP (Y = y|X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = dP (Y = y|X = x, E = e).                     (28)
                    t→∞


where e is any environment that is in the support of data sampled with X = x and that also satisfies
θxe = θ.

                          Z
 lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) =       lim dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) lim H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
t→∞                        x,θ t→∞                           t→∞
   Z  Z
=              dP (X = x, E = ẽ) lim H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)
      x,θ       ẽ∈Ex,θ                        t→∞
                                                                                                       (29)

In the above, we use dominated convergence theorem to swap the limits and integrals (Recall that
dP (X = x, E = e, b(X, Ct ) = θ) is bounded say by say ς and the volume of the support of E
is bounded say by φ. As a result, dP (X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ)H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) ≤
ςφ log(2).). From equation 28, it follows that limt→∞ H(Y |X = x, b(X, Ct ) = θ) = H(Y |X =
x, E = e), where e is any environment in Ex,θ . We use this in the above to get
                                Z  Z
      lim H(Y |X, b(X, Ct )) =                  dP (X = x, E = ẽ) H(Y |X = x, E = e)
      t→∞                                x,θ   ẽ∈Ex,θ
            Z       Z
      =                        dP (X = x, E = ẽ) H(Y |X = x, E = ẽ)                                  (30)
            x,θ      ẽ∈Ex,θ
            Z
      =            dP (X = x, E = ẽ)H(Y |X = x, E = ẽ) = H(Y |X, E).
            x,ẽ


We combine the above with equation 21 to obtain limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) = H(Y |X, E). Finally,
observe that if I(Y ; E|X) > 0 =⇒ H(Y |X, E) < H(Y |X). Since limt→∞ H(Y |X, Ct ) =
H(Y |X, E), ICRM impoves over ERM that attains a cross-entropy loss of H(Y |X).
This completes the proof.



A.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (Partial iid zoom-in). Suppose the joint distribution ((X1 , · · · Xt ), (Y1 , . . . , Yt ), E) is
Markov with respect to a Bayesian network. The query X and the environment E are statistically
dependent and form the Markov blanket of Y . Then ICRM partially zooms-in on the environment
risk minimizer, improving over the performance of the global empirical risk minimizer in terms of the
cross-entropy loss. Further, the improvement is strictly monotonic in context length t.

Proof. Let us consider the setting where the context is of length one. We denote the current query
as X with corresponding label Y and environment E. The example in the context is X̃ which has
corresponding label Ỹ and it shares the same environment E. Recall that as part of the context, the
learner only sees X̃ and not Ỹ . Both Y and E are real-valued scalars and X is a d dimensional
vector.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Following the assumption in the theorem, the distribution of (X̃, Ỹ , X, Y, E) is Markov with respect
to a Bayesian network. We first establish that E cannot be a child of any variable in the directed
acyclic graph (DAG). The assumption (X, Y ) ⊥ (X̃, Ỹ )|E implies X ⊥ X̃|E and Y ⊥ Ỹ |E.
Suppose E is a child variable of Y . Due to the symmetry, (X, Y, E) and (X̃, Ỹ , E) follow the same
distribution. As a result, E is also a child variable of Ỹ , which implies Y ̸⊥ Ỹ |E (since E is a
collider on the path from Y to Ỹ ). This contradicts Y ⊥ Ỹ |E. Suppose E is a child variable of
some component of X say X i . Due to symmetry, E is also a child variable of X̃ i , which implies
X i ̸⊥ X̃ i |E. This contradicts X ⊥ X̃|E. Therefore, E cannot be a child of any of the variables in
the DAG.
Since both X and E form the Markov blanket of Y , there are two possible cases. Either E is directly
connected to Y or E is connected to Y through some element of X.
In the first case, E can only have an arrow into Y and not the other way around as E is not a child
of any other node. Let us consider the setting when E is one of the parents of Y and denote it as
E → Y . Since X (X̃) is on the Markov Blanket of Y (Ỹ ), we claim that each component of X is
either a parent of Y or a child of Y . Suppose this was not the case. This implies that there exists a
component of X say X i , which is on the Markov Blanket as a parent of E. But that would make E a
child of Y . However, E cannot be a child variable as shown above. As a result, each component of
X is either a parent or a child of Y . We now consider two subcases.
Let us consider the setting when there exists a child X i of Y . Observe that X̃ i is a child of Ỹ and
it has a path to E and as a result it has a path to Y . This path from elements of X̃ i to Ỹ passes
through E. This path has no colliders and does not contain any element of X on it (We show this case
in Figure 3a). As a result, Y ̸⊥ X̃ i |X. Thus I(Y ; X̃|X) > 0 (use chain rule of mutual information).
Let us consider the other setting when each X i is a parent of Y (shown in Figure 3b). In this case,
E has to have a path to some element of X, say X j as otherwise E ⊥ X, which contradicts the
assumption that E ̸⊥ X. Consider the path X̃ j to E to Y . Observe that this path is not blocked. As a
result, I(Y ; X̃|X) > 0.
Let us consider the other possibility when Y is connected to E through X. Here the only way this is
possible is if some element of X say X i is a child of Y and E is a parent of that element (as shown
in Figure 3c). Therefore, we know that X̃ i is connected to Y through E and X i .
Observe that this path from X̃ i to Y is not blocked as X i is a collider. Therefore, I(Y ; X̃|X) > 0.
We showed the result so far assuming that the context length was one. Suppose that the context has
k − 1 examples denoted as Ck = [X1 · · · , Xk−1 ]. The chain rule of mutual information tells us
I(Y ; Ck |X) = I(Y ; Xk−1 |X) + I(Y ; Ck−1 |X, Xk−1 ). The proof above already demonstrates that
the first term I(Y ; Xk−1 |X) is strictly positive. Since mutual information is non-negative, we can
conclude that I(Y ; Ck |X) > 0.
Next, we want to argue that entropy strictly reduces as context length increases. In other words,
                  H(Y |X, Ck ) < H(Y |X, Ck−1 ) ⇐⇒ I(Y ; Xk |X, Ck−1 ) > 0.

We want to show Y ̸⊥ Xk |(X, Ck−1 ). In the proof above, we had three cases shown in Figure 3. In
each of these cases, we argued that the path from Xk to Y is not blocked. Even if we condition on
contexts Ck−1 this continues to be the case. In the first two cases, the path from Xk to Y is direct
and does not contain any element from the conditioning set. In the third case, the direct path involves
a collider X from the conditioning set and thus is also not blocked. As a result, Y ̸⊥ Xk |(X, Ck−1 ).
This completes the proof.



Remark on the Theorem 2 It is possible to extend Theorem 2 to the case when only a subset of
X and E form the Markov blanket. Observe that the analysis of Case a) and Case c) in Figure 3a,
Figure 3c does not change. The analysis of Case b) is more nuanced now. In Case b), we used the
fact that E is connected to X that is on the Markov blanket. This need not be the case if only a subset
of X is on the Markov blanket. Suppose XMB denote the set of X that are on the Markov Blanket. If
E is connected to any member of XMB , the same analysis as Case b) continues to hold. Consider the


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            E


  Y                  Ỹ                          X               E                 X̃             Y                 E               Ỹ


           Xi                  X̃ i                      Y                    Ỹ                               Xi            X̃ i

            (a) Case 1.                                      (b) Case 2.                                       (c) Case 3.

                          Figure 3: Illustrating the different key cases for Theorem 2.


case when E is connected to some other member of X that is not in XMB . Denote this member as
X i . Observe that the same element X̃ i from X̃ will have a direct path into Y through E that is not
blocked. As a result, even in this case conditioning on X̃ helps.

A.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Theorem 3 (Full ood zoom-in) Consider data triplets (x, y, e) generated from z ∼ N (µye , Σye ) and
x ← g(z), for all environments e ∈ E, where g is the identity map. There exists an ICL algorithm that
in the limit of infinitely long contexts produces Bayes optimal predictions for all the test environments
that fall in the Voronoi cells of the training environments.

Proof. The learning algorithm works as follows. For each e, y pair in the training data, define the
set of x′ s as Dxe,y . Maximize the likelihood of Dxe,y assuming that the underlying distribution is
Gaussian. This can be stated as
                                           X h                    i
                   µ̂ye , Σ̂ye = arg min       ∥x − µye ∥2(Σye )−1 − log(det(Σye )) .
                                      µy   y
                                       e ,Σe         e,y
                                                  x∈Dx


The solution to the above are standard sample mean based estimators of means and covariance. Also,
use a sample mean based estimator to estimate the probability of each class in environment e and
denote it as p̂ye . Define γ̂e = [(p̂0e , µ̂0e , Σ̂0e ), (p̂1e , µ̂1e , Σ̂1e )]. The model at test time works as follows.
                                           ′
        • We are given samples Dxe at test time from some environment e′ ∈ Ete . Estimate the param-
          eters of Gaussian mixture model with two mixture components to maximize the likelihood
                          ′
          of observing Dxe . We denote the estimated parameters as θe′ = [pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ , p̃e′ , µ̃e′ , Σ̃e′ ].
          Define a permutation of θe′ as βe′ = [p̃e′ , µ̃e′ , Σ̃e′ , pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ ].
        • Find the closest environment to the estimated parameters in the training set.

                                   min min{∥θe′ − γ̂e ∥, ∥βe′ − γ̂e ∥}                                                               (31)
                                               e∈Etr

          Suppose ẽ is the closest training environment that solves the above. If θe′ is closer to γ̂ẽ
          than βe′ , then pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ correspond to the label 0 and p̃e′ , µ̃e′ , Σ̃e′ correspond to the label
          1. For the query x, the probability assigned to label 0 is

                                                                         −∥x−µe′ ∥2(Σ      )−1
                                                                p e′ e                  e′
                                  c(x) =               −∥x−µe′ ∥2                        −∥x−µ̃e′ ∥2
                                                                                                               .
                                                                  (Σ ′ )−1                         (Σ̃ ′ )−1
                                                p e′ e              e         + p̃e′ e                e



           If βe′ is closest to this environment, then pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ correspond to the label 1 and
           p̃e′ , µ̃e′ , Σ̃e′ is the label 0. For the query x, the probability assigned to label 0 is 1 − c(x).

For the training environments, in the limit of infinitely long contexts the estimated parameters take
exact values, i.e., γ̂e = γe , for all e ∈ Etr .


                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         γe′
                                               γẽ
                                         γe                                           Voronoi cell
                                                                                      of training environment


                                                                         δẽ
                                                                    δe

        ￼


                    Figure 4: Illustration of Voronoi cells of training environment.


                        0 0 0 the 1true 1 set 1 of  parameters that generate the data are γe′ ,
For the test environment,
where
  1 1 1  γ e ′  =       (pe′ , µe′ , Σe ′ ), (pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ ) . Define the permutation of γe′ as δe′ =
 (pe′ , µe′ , Σe′ ), (p0e′ , µ0e′ , Σ0e′ ) .
There can be two types of test environments. One in which the mean and covariance for both classes
are identical. The method above assigns a probability of 12 to both the classes, which is the Bayes
optimal prediction. Let us consider the latter environments, where the class conditional parameters
for x are not the same. In the limit of infinitely long contexts at test time, there are two possible values
θe′ can take, either θe′ = γe′ or θe′ = δe′ . This follows from identifiability of Gaussian mixtures,
Yakowitz and Spragins (1968).
Consider the first case, θe′ = γe′ . In this case, the equation 31 becomes

                               min min{∥γe′ − γe ∥, ∥δe′ − γe ∥} .
                                 e∈Etr


Suppose some environment ẽ solves the above optimization. Following the assumption in we know
that γe′ falls in the Voronoi region of some γẽ and thus γe′ is closer to γẽ than δẽ (see Figure 4). As
a result, p0e′ , µ0e′ , Σ0e′ is associated with class 0, which is actually correct and thus the final predictor
would match the Bayes optimal predictor for the test environment. In the second case, θe′ = δe′ .
Therefore, βe′ = γe′ and p1e′ , µ1e′ , Σ1e′ would be correctly associated with class one thus leading to
Bayes optimal predictions. This completes the argument we set out to prove.
We now briefly explain how the method fails if test parameter is outside the Voronoi cell of training
parameters. Suppose θe′ = γe′ but γe′ is in Voronoi region of some δe . In this case, βe′ would be
closest to γe and p0e′ , µ0e′ , Σ0e′ would be incorrectly associated with class 1. This shows that beyond
the Voronoi region the proposed algorithm fails.



A.5    E XTENSION OF T HEOREM 3

In the previous theorem, we assumed that g is identity. We now describe how the result can be
extended to general non-linear mixing maps g. For this result, we leverage the theoretical results
from identifiable variational autoencoders (i-VAE) (Khemakhem et al., 2020).

A short review of identifiable variational autoencoders (Khemakhem et al., 2020) We are
provided with observations x’s that are generated from a latent variable z using an injective map g,


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where x ← g(z). The theory of i-VAE provides with a method and the conditions under which the
underlying true latent variables z can be identified up to permutation and scaling. In i-VAEs, it is
assumed that along with each sample x, we are provided with auxiliary information, which they term
as u. For our results, auxiliary information is available to us in the form of the environment index and
the label of the data point. In the theory of i-VAE, the distribution of the latent variables are assumed
to follow a conditionally factorial exponential distribution stated as follows.

                                           Y Qi (zi )           k
                                                                X
                           pT,λ (z|u) =                  exp         Ti,j (zi )λi,j (u)                   (32)
                                            i
                                                Mi (u)         j=1


where Ti = (Ti,1 , · · · , Ti,k ) are the sufficient statistics, λi (u) = (λi,1 (u), · · · , λi,k (u)) are the
parameters of the distribution that vary with u, Qi is a base measure and Mi is a normalizing constant.
We concatenate Ti ’s and λ′i s across d latent dimensions to make construct dk dimensional vectors
denoted as λ(u) and T (z). Thus the data generation process is summarized as


                                                z ∼ pT,λ (·|u),
                                                                                                          (33)
                                                x ← g(z),
where g, T, λ are the parameters. We now revisit the data generation process that we consider and
explain how it falls under the umbrella of the data generation processes considered in i-VAE. For all
e ∈ E,
                                            z|y, e ∼ N (µye , Σye ),
                                                                                                          (34)
                                            x ← g(z),
where the latent variables z are sampled conditional on the label y and environment e from a Normal
distribution whose mean and covariance depend on both y, e. Define X as the image of g, i.e.,
X = g(Rd ). We further assume that the covariance matrix has a diagonal structure as stated below.
Assumption 1. Each Σye is a diagonal matrix.

Since Σye is a diagonal matrix, we denote the ith diagonal element as (σey (i))2 . Similarly, the
ith component of µye is denoted as µye (i). Observe that the distribution of z conditional on y, e
belongs to the family conditionally factorial exponential distributions studied in i-VAE (Khemakhem
                                                                        y   2   y    2                 2µy (i)
et al., 2020). If we substitute Qi (zi ) = √12π , Mi (y, e) = e (µe (i)) /(σe (i)) , λi,1 (y, e) = (σeye(i))2 ,
λi,2 (y, e) = − (σey 1(i))2 , Ti,1 (z) = z and Ti,2 (z) = z 2 , then we obtain the distribution of z described
by equation 34.
Definition 1. We define an equivalence relation between sets of parameters of the model as follows.
            (g, T, λ) ∼ (g̃, T̃ , λ̃) ⇐⇒ ∃A, c | T (g −1 (x)) = AT̃ (g̃ −1 (x)) + c, ∀x ∈ X .             (35)
If A is invertible, then we denote the relation by ∼A . If A is a block permutation matrix, then we
denote it by ∼P .

We now state some key results from (Khemakhem et al., 2020).
Theorem 5. Assume that the data is sampled from the data generation in equation 33 according to
with parameters (g, T, λ). Assume the following holds

       • The mixing function g is injective
       • The sufficient statistics Ti,j are differentiable almost everywhere, and (Ti,j )1≤j≤k are
         linearly independent on any subset of X of measure greater than zero.
       • There exists dk + 1 distinct points u0 , · · · , udk such that the matrix
                                   L = (λ(u1 ) − λ(u0 ), · · · , λ(udk ) − λ(u0 ))
          of size dk × dk is invertible.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then the parameters (g, T, λ) are ∼A identifiable.
Theorem 6. Assume the hypotheses of the Theorem 5 holds, and k ≥ 2. Further assume:

       • The sufficient statistics Ti,j are twice differentiable.
       • The mixing function g is C 2 -diffeomorphism.

then the parameters (g, T, λ) are ∼P identifiable.

We can leverage the above two theorems (Theorem 5, Theorem 6 and Theorem 4 from Lachapelle
et al. (2022)) and arrive at the following corollary for the Gaussian data generation process from
equation 34.
Theorem 7. If the data generation process follows equation 34, where g is a C 2 -diffeomorphism.
Suppose there exist 2d + 1 points u0 = (y0 , e0 ), · · · , u2d = (y2d , e2d ) in the support of (y, e)
observed in training distribution such that
                                  (λ(u1 ) − λ(u0 ), · · · , λ(u2d ) − λ(u0 ))
is invertible. If pg,T,λ (·|y, e) = pg̃,T̃ ,λ̃ (·|y, e) for all y, e in the support of (y, e) in the training
distribution, then z̃ = ΛΠz + r, where z̃ = g̃ −1 (x) and z = g −1 (x).

Proof. We equate the probability of observations x under two models g, T, λ and g̃, T̃ , λ̃ for each
y, e. Consider a z ∼ pT,λ (·|y, e) and the corresponding x = g(z). These x’s follow pg̃,T̃ ,λ̃ (·|y, e)
since pg,T,λ (·|y, e) = pg̃,T̃ ,λ̃ (·|y, e). Define z̃ = g̃ −1 (x) and these z̃ follow pT̃ ,λ̃ (·|y, e). We can
write z̃ = a(z), where a = g̃ −1 ◦ g.
Observe pz (z|y, e) = pz̃ (a(z)|y, e)det(Da(z)) and


                              log pz z|yk , ek = log pz̃ (a(z)|yk , ek ) + log det(Da(z)),

                               log pz z|y0 , e0 = log pz̃ (a(z)|y0 , e0 ) + log det(Da(z)),               (36)

    log pz z|yk , ek − log pz (z|y0 , e0 ) = log pz̃ (a(z)|yk , ek ) − log pẑ (a(z)|y0 , e0 ) .

Substituting the exponential form we obtain that
                   T (z)⊤ [λ(yk , ek ) − λ(y0 , e0 ))] = T (z̃)⊤ [λ̃(yk , ek ) − λ̃(y0 , e0 ))]

If we use sufficient variability conditions, we obtain T (z) = AT (z̃) + c. We now use the fact that
sufficient statistics T (z) = (z, z 2 ) are minimal to conclude that
                                             T (z) = AT (z̃) + c
where A is invertible. In the above, we use the line of reasoning used in in the proof of Theorem 4 in
(Lachapelle et al., 2022).
After this point, we leverage Theorem 6 to conclude that

                                           Ti (zi ) = ATj (z̃j ) + c.

We can expand the above to write

                                             z̃j      z
                                                  = D 2i + e.
                                             z̃j2     zi

Note that the above relationship holds for all z ∈ Z. If z̃j depends on zi2 , then z̃j2 would be a degree
four polynomial in zi and it would be equated to a degree 2 polynomial zi stated in the RHS. This
cannot be true for all zi in the support. As a result, z̃j is a scalar multiple of zi . Since for every i
there is such a j, it follows that z̃ = ΛΠz + r.



                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 8. (Zoom-in [ood]) Consider the data generation process in equation 34. We make a few
additional assumptions on the data generation stated below.

       • Each Σye is a diagonal matrix
       • There exist 2d + 1 points u0 = (y0 , e0 ), · · · , u2d = (y2d , e2d ) in the support of (y, e)
         observed in training distribution such that
                                                (λ(u1 ) − λ(u0 ), · · · , λ(u2d ) − λ(u0 ))
          is invertible.
       • g is a C 2 -diffeomorphism.

Under the above assumptions, we can guarantee that there exists an in-context learning algorithm that
in the limit of infinitely long contexts generates Bayes optimal predictions for all the test environments
that fall in Voronoi cells of training parameters weighted by a certain vector.

Proof. The training proceeds as follows. Train an autoencoder on training data under the constraint
that the output of the encoder follow a Gaussian distribution with independent components conditional
on each y, e. This is stated as the following minimization.

                                                                           X
  ĝ, fˆ, µ̂ye , Σ̂ye = arg       min
                                   y  y
                                        E[∥(g̃ ◦ f˜(x) − x)∥2 ] + α               KL pz̃ (·|y, e) ∥ N (µye , Σye )  (37)
                              g̃,f˜,{µe ,Σe }                               y,e

where z̃ = f˜(x), pz̃ (·|y, e) is the distribution of z̃. The first term is standard reconstruction loss
and the second term is the KL divergence between distribution of z̃ and a Normal distribution with
independent components. Also, estimate the class probabilities for each environment and denote
them as p̂ye . Similar to the proof of Theorem 3 define γ̂e = [(p̂ye , µ̂ye , Σ̂ye )y∈{0,1} ]

The model at test time works as follows. We first use the trained encoder fˆ and generate z̃ for
test time inputs. After this the model operates in exactly the same way on z̃ ′ s as in the proof
of Theorem 3. Basically the output of encoder takes place of raw x’s in the procedure described in
proof of Theorem 3.
The assumptions in this theorem along with following i) z̃ follows a Gaussian distribution with
independent components, ii) g(z̃) follows distribution of x conditional on y, e for each y, e, implies
we can use the previous result in Theorem 7 to conclude that z̃ = ΛΠz + r. Observe that z̃ also
follows a Gaussian distribution with independent components conditional on each y, e. In the
limit of infinitely long contexts, γ̂e is equal to scaled means of original training environments and
covariances also scaled componentwise according to the transform ΛΠ. We can now apply the
previous Theorem 3 on z̃ ′ s as follows. If the parameters of the test environment are in the Voronoi
cell of the train distribution of z̃ ′ s, then the procedure described above continues to generate Bayes
optimal predictions in those environments.



A.6    C OMPARING ICRM AND ERM UNDER THE LENS OF INVARIANCE

The label y is related to x1 and mean of x2 in environment e as follows.
                                                     y ← αx1 + βµ2e + ε                                            (38)

ERM learns a linear model on two dimensional feature vector x = (x1 , x2 ). The closed form
solution for linear regression is Λ−1 ρ, where Λ = E[XX ⊤ ], which is assumed to be invertible, and
                                                             σ2 σ
ρ = E[XY ]. The covariance matrix of X is defined as Σ = 1 122 .
                                                             σ12 σ2
Proposition 2. Let E[X 1 |E = e] = 0 for all e ∈ E. If Σ is invertible, β ̸= 0, σ12 ̸= 0, µ2e ̸= 0 for
some e ∈ Etr , then the coefficient estimated by ERM for x1 is not the same as the invariant coefficient
α.


                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We compute ρ first.

                                                αE[(X 1 )2 ] + βE[µ2E X 1 ]
                               ρ = E[XY ] =
                                                 αE[X 1 X 2 ] + β[µ2E X 2 ]
                                                                                                          (39)
                                                     σ12

                                              =α         β     ,
                                                  σ12 + α δ
where δ = E[(µ2E )2 ].
Next, we compute Λ.

                                                               σ12 σ12
                                     Λ = E[XX ⊤ ] =                        .                              (40)
                                                             σ12 σ22 + δ

The solution to ERM is

                                                                 σ12
                        ′                       2
                       α           α           σ2 + δ − σ12
                           = 2                                             .                              (41)
                       β′   (σ2 + δ)σ12 − σ12
                                           2      −σ12 σ12    σ12 + αβ
                                                                       δ
Simplifying the above, we obtain the coefficient for x1 to be
                                                     σ12 βE[(µ2E )2 ]
                                  α′ = α −                                .                               (42)
                                                                       2
                                              σ12 σ22 + E[(µ2E )2 ] − σ12

Owing to the assumptions, β ̸= 0, σ12 ̸= 0 and µ2e for some e we obtain that the second term in the
above is not zero. As a result, the estimate computed by ERM for α is biased.
Proposition 3. Let E[X1 |E = e] = 0 for all e ∈ E. If Σ is invertible, β ̸= 0, σ12 ̸= 0, µ2e ̸= 0. The
error of ERM in test environment increases in σ12

Proof. The error of ERM is given as


  E[(αX 1 + βµ2e − α′ X 1 − β ′ X 2 )2 ] + σε2
             ′                                                     ′                                      (43)
   = (α − α )2 σ12 + β 2 E[(µ2E )2 ] + (β ′ )2 E[(X 2 )2 ] − 2ββ E[(µ2E )2 ] − 2(α − α′ )βσ12 + σε2 ,
where σε2 is the variance of the noise variable ε. If we take the derivative of the above error w.r.t σ12 ,
we obtain (α − α′ )2 , which is positive. This completes the proof.



ICRM learns a linear model on (x1 , x2 , µ1e , µ2e ). We study two settings to analyze the error of ICRM
at test time. If at test time, the model has seen sufficiently long contexts, then it knows the means
corresponding to x1 and x2 and the model achieves the test error of σε2 . On the other hand, if the
context is empty, then also note that the expected error of the model is β 2 ∥µ2e′ ∥2 (assuming the model
uses a default value of zero for the mean in the absence of any context), where µ2e′ is the mean of x2
in environment e′ . Since the error of ICRM in the absence of any context is independent of variance
of x1 , the error of ERM can be much worse than that of ICRM in this setting as well.

Extending the above example beyond linear settings. Let us consider a more general setting.


                                             y = u(x1 , µ2e ) + ε,
                                                                                                          (44)
                                             x2 = v(µ2e , ϑ),

where u(·) and v(·) are maps (potentially non-linear), ε and ϑ are independent zero mean noise
variables. Following the same line of thought as the above example. ICRM learns a non-linear model
on (x1 , x2 , µe1 , µe2 ) and learns E[Y |x1 , x2 , µ1e , µ2e ]. From equation 44, it follows that
          Y ⊥ (X 2 , µ1E )|(X 1 , µ2E ) =⇒ E[Y |x1 , x2 , µ1e , µ2e ] = E[Y |x1 , µ2e ] = u(x1 , µ2e ).


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the above it follows that ICRM learns u(x1 , µ2e ). In comparison, consider standard ERM
learns a non-linear model on (x1 , x2 ). Consider the DAG corresponding to setting equation 44. We
assume that the joint distribution described in equation 44 is Markov w.r.t to the following DAG
X 1 → Y ← µ2E → X 2 . As a result, Y ̸⊥ X 2 |X 1 . This follows from the fact there is a path Y to
X 2 through µ2E and is not blocked by X 1 . From Y ̸⊥ X 2 |X 1 it follows that ERM learns a predictor
that relies on both x1 and x2 . Therefore, ICRM learns the right invariant model and does not rely on
x2 and ERM relies on spurious feature x2 .


A.7    I LLUSTRATION OF FAILURE OF EXISTING MTL METHODS

In this section, we provide a simple example to show
                                                  P the failure mode of marginal transfer learning
                                               1
(MTL) methods that are based on averaging |c|       xi ∈c Φ(·) to summarize information about the
environment. These methods can be summarized to take the following form:


                                                  1 X
                                         f                Φ(xi ), x .                                 (45)
                                                 |c| x ∈c
                                                     i



We are only going to consider maps Φ that are differentiable.

Example.     Suppose we want to learn the following function


                                                     1 X
                                     w(x, c) =           I(x < xi ),                                  (46)
                                                    |c|
                                                         xi ∈C


where xi is the ith input in the context and x is the current query and I(·) is indicator function
that
    takes a value of  one if the argument inside is true and zero otherwise. We claim that if
f |c| xi ∈c Φ(xi ), x = w(x, c) for all x ∈ R, c ∈ R|c| , then the output dimension of Φ grows in
     1
       P

context length |c|. Suppose this was not the case. If Φ′ s output dimension is smaller than |c|, then Φ
                                                                                  ′
cannot P                Pbijection. As a result, there exists two contexts c and c of same length for
       be a differentiable
which xi ∈c Φ(xi ) = xi ∈c′ Φ(xi ). We argue that there exists an x such that w(x, c) ̸= w(x, c′ ).

                                            1
                                              P
This would lead to a contradiction as f |c| xi ∈c Φ(xi ), x = w(x, c) for all x, c. Without loss
of generality, suppose that the smallest value of context c is smaller than that in context c′ . If x is
larger than smallest value of c but lesser than smallest value of c′ , then w(x, c′ ) = 1 on the other
                      1
hand w(x, c) ≤ 1 − |c|  .
We can translate the insight from the above example into more general settings. Consider any map
                                                                                     ′
w(x, c), that satisfies the following
                                      property. For no two  distinct contexts c and c , w(x, c) = w(x, c′ )
                                        1                                                      ′
                                          P
for all x ∈ R. Maps of the form f |c|        xi ∈c Φ(xi ), x can only approximate such w s provided

dimension of Φ grows in length of c.
We explain how the above example can be described by attention-based architectures with             much

                                                                                                    x
fewer parameters. First take the current query x and transform it through a linear map x̃ =             and
                                                                                                    1
transform
             the past context values through a linear map as well to obtain
                                                                                a transform for xi to x̃i =
  1                                                                        −1   0
      . We set the Query Q and Key K matrices such that Q⊤ K =                      and thus x̃⊤ Q⊤ K x̃i =
  xi                                                                       0 1
(−x + xi ). Instead of softmax, if we pass the output through a sigmoid, we obtain σ(τ x̃⊤ Q⊤ K x̃i ) =
       1
 1+e−τ (xi −x)
               . If τ is sufficiently large, then this approximates I(x < xi ). Therefore, one layer linear
attention with sigmoid and sufficiently high τ achieves the target, i.e., xi ∈c σ(τ x̃⊤ Q⊤ K x̃i ) ≈
                                                                                P
P
   xi ∈C I(x < xi ).


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     R ELATED WORK
A brief tour of domain generalization. Muandet et al. (2013) developed kernel methods to learn
transformations such that the distance between the feature distributions across domains is minimized
and the information between the features and the target labels is preserved. The pioneering work of
Ganin et al. (2016) proposes a method inspired from generative adversarial networks to learn feature
representations that are similar across domains. Sun and Saenko (2016) developed a method based on
a natural strategy to match the means and covariances of feature representations across domains. Li
et al. (2018) went a step further to enforce invariance on the distribution of representations conditional
on the labels. In a parallel line of work, led by Peters et al. (2016); Rojas-Carulla et al. (2018);
Arjovsky et al. (2019), the proposals sought to learn representations such that the distribution of
labels conditional on the representation are invariant across domains. These works were followed by
several interesting proposals to enforce invariance – (Teney et al., 2020; Krueger et al., 2020; Ahuja
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2020; Koyama and Yamaguchi, 2020;
Müller et al., 2020; Parascandolo et al., 2021; Robey et al., 2021; Wald et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Eastwood et al., 2022; Rame et al., 2022; Veitch et al., 2021;
Makar et al., 2022; Wald et al., 2022; Salaudeen and Koyejo, 2022; Eastwood et al., 2023) – which is
an incomplete representative list. See Shen et al. (2021) for a more comprehensive survey of these
works. Most of the above works have focused on learning features that enable better generalization.
Recently there been an intriguing line of work from Kirichenko et al. (2022); Izmailov et al. (2022)
that shifts the focus from feature learning to last layer retraining. These works show that under certain
conditions (e.g., avaiability of some data that does not carry spurious correlations) one can carry out
last layer retraining and achieve significant out-of-distribution performance improvements.
In the main body of the paper, we already discussed the other prominent line of work in domain
generalization on marginal transfer learning, where the focus is to leverage the distributional features
and learn environment specific relationships. This line of work was started by the notable work of
Blanchard et al. (2011) and has been followed up by several important proposals such as Zhang et al.
(2020); Bao and Karaletsos (2023).

Context-supported prediction frameworks. Existing works have exploited contextual information
to develop a variety of prediction frameworks. The works on neural processes and conditional neural
processes (Garnelo et al., 2018b;a) combined the uncertainty estimation capabilities of Gaussian
processes with function aprpoximation capabilities of neural networks and showed promising results
on meta-learning. These works were later improved through transformer based archictectures in atten-
tive neural processes (Kim et al., 2019; Nguyen and Grover, 2022). Context-based architectures have
also been used to study in-context learning in (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald
et al., 2023). These works use labeled data in the context to enable adaptation. In contrast, our work
adheres to the constraints of domain generalization and only leverages unlabeled data.

C     S UPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND ASSETS DISCLOSURE
C.1     A SSETS

We do not introduce new data in the course of this work. Instead, we use publicly available widely
used image datasets for the purposes of benchmarking and comparison.

C.2     H ARDWARE AND SETUP

Each experiment was performed on 8 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs with 32GB accelerator RAM for a
single training run. The CPUs used were Intel Xeon E5-2698 v4 processors with 20 cores and 384GB
RAM. All experiments use the PyTorch deep-learning framework.

C.3     DATASETS

C.3.1    F EDERATED E XTENDED MNIST (FEMNIST)
Building on the Extended MNIST (EMNIST) dataset, which includes images of handwritten
uppercase and lowercase alphabets along with digits, FEMNIST (Zhang et al., 2020) enriches


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this data by attributing each data point to its originating writer. This extension associates each
28×28-sized image in the dataset to one of the 62 classes. In our setup, each writer serves as a
distinct environment. We evaluate the performance of each method based on both worst-case and
average accuracy across a set of 35 test users, who are distinct from the 262 training users and 50
validation users. Unlabelled data from an environment in this dataset could provide cues about the
writing style of the user and disambiguate data points.


C.3.2    ROTATED MNIST

We employ a customized version of the MNIST dataset as in Zhang et al. (2020). The dataset
contains images rotated in increments of 10 degrees, ranging from 0 to 130 degrees. Each degree
of rotation constitutes a separate environment, effectively acting as a distinct value. The training
set for the two most extreme rotations, 120 and 130 degrees, contains only 108 data points each.
For rotations between 90 and 110 degrees, each environment includes 324 data points. The total
training set comprises 32,292 points. For evaluation, test images are generated from the MNIST
test set, and are duplicated for each environment. Performance metrics include both worst-case and
average accuracy across these testing domains. Analogous to FEMNIST, unlabeled samples from an
environment within this dataset can assist in distinguishing images that may seem similar due to their
rotated orientations.


C.3.3    WILDS C AMELYON 17

We use the Camelyon17 dataset, part of the WILDS benchmark (Koh et al., 2021), which features
image patches derived from whole-slide lymph node sections of patients with potential metastatic
breast cancer. Each patch is labeled to indicate the presence or absence of a tumor. In our
experimental design, each participating hospital is treated as a distinct environment. The dataset is
partitioned in alignment with the official WILDS configuration: three hospitals contribute to the
training set, a fourth is designated for validation, and the remaining hospital’s data is used for testing.


C.3.4    CIFAR10-C AND T INY I MAGE N ET-C

Adapting the methodology from Hendrycks and Dietterich (2019), we introduce 56 distinct
distortions to the training set, treating each as a separate environment. For evaluation, we use a
non-overlapping set of 22 test distortions, largely differing in nature from those used in training. For
Tiny ImageNet-C, each 64×64-sized distorted image is associated with one of the 200 classes in the
dataset. The same set of corruptions are employed to augment the CIFAR10 dataset, resulting in
32 × 32-sized images for the CIFAR10-C dataset.This setup permits an investigation into whether
exposure to distortions during training equips the model to better manage novel distortions during
testing. We assess performance through both worst-case and average accuracies across these test
distortions.


C.3.5    I MAGE N ET R

ImageNet-R comprises a diverse range of artistic and creative content, encompassing art, cartoons,
deviant art, graffiti, embroidery, graphics, origami, paintings, patterns, plastic objects, plush objects,
sculptures, sketches, tattoos, toys, and video game interpretations of ImageNet classes. This dataset
consists of renditions for 200 ImageNet classes, totaling 30,000 images. For our experiments,
we utilize images from categories of cartoons, paintings, stickers, graphics, sculptures, sketches,
tattoos, toys, and video games for training. Validation is conducted using images from embroidery,
miscellaneous, and graffiti categories, while the test environments incorporate images from art,
deviant art, and origami categories. This segregation introduces extreme real-world distribution shifts,
where the data features during testing differ significantly from those observed during training.



                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4   E XPERIMENTAL PROTOCOLS

To ensure a fair comparison across different algorithms for each dataset, we use a standardized neural
network backbone. The details for these architectures are provided in Table 4 and Table 5. We use
the ConvNet architecture as outlined in Zhang et al. (2020). ‘
For ICRM, the same backbone is used to featurize the input, which is then processed by the decoder-
only Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture from the GPT-2 Transformer family (Radford
et al., 2019). Our model is standardized to have 12 layers, 4 attention heads, and a 128-dimensional
embedding space across all datasets. Linear layers are employed to map both the input sequence
to the transformer’s latent embedding and the model’s predicted output vector to the output label.
For training ICRM on larger datasets like ImageNet R, CIFAR10-C, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny
ImageNet-C, we start with a ResNet50 model pre-trained on ImageNet (as shown in Table 4) and
freeze all batch normalization layers before fine-tuning.
We adopt the same Context Network as used in ARM, specifically retaining their choice of output
channels – one for smaller datasets like FEMNIST and Rotated MNIST, and three for the others.
For TENT, all reported metrics are based on its episodic version, where the model is reset to its trained
state after processing each batch. This ensures a fair comparison with other methods. Additionally,
during testing, the model’s parameters are updated for 10 steps using stochastic gradient descent by
minimization test entropy across all datasets.


                                                                   Table 5: ConvNet architecture for
                                                                   (Zhang et al., 2020). We use 2×2
   Table 4: Network architectures for each dataset.                kernels and “same” padding.
                                   Architecture                      #    Layer
 Dataset
                        ICRM                      Others
                                                                     1    Conv2D (in=d, out=128)
 FEMNIST               ConvNet + GPT2                                2    BatchNorm2d (dim=129)
                                                  ConvNet
 Rotated MNIST         Transformer                                   3    ReLU
 CIFAR10-C                                                           4    Max Pooling (2)
 Camelyon17                                                          5    Conv2D (in=128, out=128)
                       ResNet-50 + GPT2           ResNet-50          6    BatchNorm2d (dim=128)
 Tiny ImageNet-C       Transformer
 ImageNet R                                                          7    ReLU
                                                                     8    Max Pooling (2)
                                                                     9    Global average-pooling


We list all hyperparameters, their default settings, and search boundaries for random sweeps in Table 6.
The maximum context length, or support, is fixed at 100 for all algorithms. All models are optimized
using the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014). To ensure a fair comparison, we perform a random
search of 5 trials across the hyperparameter range (refer to Table 6) for each algorithm. The model
with the highest validation set accuracy is selected for each run. We then report the average of this
number across three independent runs of the entire sweep, and its corresponding standard error.

        Table 6: Hyperparameters, their default values and distributions for random search.

               Condition      Parameter        Default value     Random distribution
                              learning rate    0.0001            10Uniform(−5,−3.5)
               ResNet
                              weight decay     0                 10Uniform(−6,−2)
                              learning rate    0.0001            10Uniform(−4.5,−2.5)
               not ResNet
                              weight decay     0                 10Uniform(−6,−2)


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
D.1   A DAPTATION CURVES OF VARIOUS ALGORITHMS

                                                                                                                         0.9

              Worst Group Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Average Test Accuracy
                                                                                                                         0.8
                                          0.6
                                                                                                                         0.7
                                          0.4                                                                            0.6                                         ARM
                                                                                                                                                                     ERM
                                                                                                                                                                     ICRM
                                          0.2                                                                            0.5                                         TENT

                                                 0   10       20        30        40   50                                      0   10       20        30        40     50
                                                          # In-context examples                                                         # In-context examples
              Worst Group Test Accuracy


                                          0.8


                                                                                                 Average Test Accuracy
                                                                                                                         0.8
                                          0.6
                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                     ARM
                                          0.4                                                                                                                        ERM
                                                                                                                         0.4                                         ICRM
                                          0.2                                                                                                                        TENT

                                                 0   10       20        30        40   50                                      0   10       20        30        40     50
                                                          # In-context examples                                                         # In-context examples
           Worst Group Test Accuracy


                                          0.9                                                                            0.9
                                                                                             Average Test Accuracy



                                          0.8                                                                            0.8
                                          0.7                                                                            0.7                                         ARM
                                                                                                                                                                     ERM
                                          0.6                                                                            0.6                                         ICRM
                                                                                                                                                                     TENT
                                                 0   10      20      30      40        50                                      0   10      20      30      40          50
                                                       # In-context examples                                                         # In-context examples

                                          0.20                                                                           0.4
              Worst Group Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Average Test Accuracy


                                          0.15                                                                           0.3

                                          0.10                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     ARM
                                                                                                                                                                     ERM
                                          0.05                                                                           0.1                                         ICRM
                                                                                                                                                                     TENT
                                          0.00                                                                           0.0
                                                 0   10        20       30        40   50                                      0   10       20        30        40     50
                                                          # In-context examples                                                         # In-context examples


Figure 5: Accuracy adaptation curves for worst accuracy (left) and average accuracy (right) across the
test environment as a function of increasing count of context samples. Showing results in order for
FEMNIST(top), RotatedMNIST, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny ImageNet-C(bottom). The average
and worst-case accuracy plots for WILDS Camelyon17 are identical since the dataset contains only a
single test environment.


                                                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2     D OMAIN GENERALIZATION ACCURACIES PER ALGORITHM AND DATASET

D.2.1    A DAPTATION TO DISTRIBUTION SHIFT
In our experiments, we compare ICRM against marginal transfer methods such as Adaptive Risk
Minimization (Zhang et al., 2020, ARM), test-time adaptation proposals such as TENT (Wang et al.,
2020) and Empirical Risk Minimization (Vapnik, 1998, ERM). We also include comparisons with six
additional baselines, including approaches that follow the invariance-based paradigm like Fish (Shi
et al., 2021) and IB-IRM (Ahuja et al., 2021), alongside those that use contextual information differ-
ently, such as BN Adapt (Schneider et al., 2020; Li et al., 2016b) and Bayesian BN Adapt (Schneider
et al., 2020). BN Adapt replaces the global batch normalization statistics learned during training with
test batch statistics at inference. On the other hand, Bayesian BN Adapt assumes the global statistics
of the training data as a prior and linearly interpolates between these statistics and the test batch
statistics during inference. Additionally, we evaluate methods that employ classic regularization tech-
niques such as Mixup (Yan et al., 2020) and IB-ERM (Ahuja et al., 2021). Table 2 shows the average
performance attained by these methods across four benchmark datasets. Further, Table 7 and Table 8
demonstrate the average and worst group out-of-distribution performance, respectively, accompanied
by the corresponding standard errors. These statistics are computed across three independent runs of
the entire sweep, wherein the model selected for evaluation is the one with hyper-parameters yielding
the highest validation accuracy.


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Average out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding standard errors
for various counts of context samples. The methods compared include Adaptive Risk Minimization
(ARM), Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), Test Entropy Minimization (TENT), Batch Norm
Adaptation (BN Adapt), Bayesian Batch Norm Adaptation (Bayesian BN Adapt), Fish, IB-ERM,
IB-IRM, Mixup and our method ICRM on FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17,
Tiny-ImageNet-C, ImageNet R and CIFAR10-C.

               Dataset / algorithm         Average test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
               FEMNIST                    0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 49.5 ± 1.0   83.9 ± 0.5   84.4 ± 0.5   84.7 ± 0.6   84.6 ± 0.3
                 TENT                78.1 ± 1.2   77.9 ± 1.2   81.2 ± 0.9   82.5± 0.9    83.3 ± 0.8
                 BN Adapt            78.3 ± 0.6   76.9 ± 1.4   80.3 ± 0.9   81.5 ± 0.7   82.4 ± 0.6
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   78.3 ± 1.8   79.6 ± 1.0   81.3 ± 0.6   82.2 ± 0.7   82.9 ± 0.8
                 Fish                77.2 ± 0.6   77.2 ± 0.6   77.2 ± 0.6   77.2 ± 0.6   77.2 ± 0.6
                 IB-ERM              79.0 ± 1.5   79.0 ± 1.5   79.0 ± 1.5   79.0 ± 1.5   79.0 ± 1.5
                 IB-IRM              79.0 ± 0.4   79.0 ± 0.4   79.0 ± 0.4   79.0 ± 0.4   79.0 ± 0.4
                 Mixup               78.6 ± 0.9   78.6 ± 0.9   78.6 ± 0.9   78.6 ± 0.9   78.6 ± 0.9
                 ERM                 79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4
                 ICRM                78.7 ± 0.5   87.2 ± 0.4   87.4 ± 0.5   87.5 ± 0.2   87.8 ± 0.2
               Rotated MNIST              0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 36.5 ± 5.2   94.2 ± 0.7   95.1 ± 0.4   95.3 ± 0.4   95.5 ± 0.3
                 TENT                94.1 ± 0.3   88.0 ± 0.4   91.9 ± 0.3   93.8 ± 0.2   94.3 ± 0.2
                 BN Adapt            94.6 ± 0.8   87.0 ± 2.3   91.5 ± 1.5   93.7 ± 1.2   94.3 ± 1.0
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   94.6 ± 1.0   91.2 ± 1.6   93.4 ± 1.2   94.3 ± 1.0   94.7 ± 1.0
                 Fish                94.8 ± 0.4   94.8 ± 0.4   94.8 ± 0.4   94.8 ± 0.4   94.8 ± 0.4
                 IB-ERM              92.2 ± 0.5   92.2 ± 0.5   92.2 ± 0.5   92.2 ± 0.5   92.2 ± 0.5
                 IB-IRM              91.0 ± 1.1   91.0 ± 1.1   91.0 ± 1.1   91.0 ± 1.1   91.0 ± 1.1
                 Mixup               93.6 ± 0.0   93.6 ± 0.0   93.6 ± 0.0   93.6 ± 0.0   93.6 ± 0.0
                 ERM                 94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3
                 ICRM                93.6 ± 0.2   96.1 ± 0.1   96.2 ± 0.1   96.2 ± 0.1   96.2 ± 0.1
               WILDS Camelyon17           0           25           50           75          100
                ARM                  61.2 ± 5.2   59.5 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.3   59.7 ± 4.2
                TENT                 67.9 ± 7.6   81.8 ± 1.1   87.2 ± 1.1   89.4 ± 1.1   89.4 ± 1.0
                BN Adapt             67.5 ± 5.9   82.0 ± 0.3   87.4 ± 0.3   89.7 ± 0.3   89.9 ± 0.3
                Bayesian BN Adapt    67.5 ± 6.1   82.0 ± 0.3   87.3 ± 0.3   89.6 ± 0.2   89.7 ± 0.3
                Fish                 53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8
                IB-ERM               51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0
                IB-IRM               53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3
                Mixup                62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7
                ERM                  68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8
                ICRM                 92.0 ± 0.6   90.7 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8
               Tiny ImageNet-C            0            25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 30.8 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2
                 TENT                31.7 ± 0.5    1.6 ± 0.1    1.7 ± 0.1    2.0 ± 0.1    2.1 ± 0.1
                 BN Adapt            31.7 ± 0.7   1.7 ± 0.1    1.7 ± 0.1    1.9 ± 0.1    2.1 ± 0.1
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   31.7 ± 0.8   2.2 ± 0.1    2.1 ± 0.1    2.3 ± 0.1    2.4 ± 0.1
                 Fish                33.7 ± 0.8   33.7 ± 0.8   33.7 ± 0.8   33.7 ± 0.8   33.7 ± 0.8
                 IB-ERM              35.5 ± 0.4   35.5 ± 0.4   35.5 ± 0.4   35.5 ± 0.4   35.5 ± 0.4
                 IB-IRM              35.4 ± 0.3   35.4 ± 0.3   35.4 ± 0.3   35.4 ± 0.3   35.4 ± 0.3
                 Mixup               35.5 ± 0.3   35.5 ± 0.3   35.5 ± 0.3   35.5 ± 0.3   35.5 ± 0.3
                 ERM                 31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6
                 ICRM                38.3 ± 0.1   39.2 ± 0.3   39.2 ± 0.3   39.2 ± 0.3   39.2 ± 0.3
               ImageNet R                 0            25          50           75          100
                 ARM                 56.3 ± 0.8   58.1 ±0.3    58.8 ± 0.8   59.8 ± 0.8   59.0 ± 0.3
                 TENT                58.9 ± 0.5   10.1 ± 0.2   10.7 ± 0.1   12.1 ± 0.2   13.0 ± 0.1
                 BN Adapt            58.9 ± 0.5    9.9 ± 0.1   10.9 ± 0.1   12.2 ± 0.2   13.1 ± 0.1
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   58.9 ± 0.5   11.9 ± 0.1   12.3 ± 0.1   13.9 ± 0.3   14.6 ± 0.1
                 Fish                58.6 ± 1.0   58.6 ± 1.0   58.6 ± 1.0   58.6 ± 1.0   58.6 ± 1.0
                 IB-ERM              58.5 ± 0.5   58.5 ± 0.5   58.5 ± 0.5   58.5 ± 0.5   58.5 ± 0.5
                 IB-IRM              57.8 ± 0.0   57.8 ± 0.0   57.8 ± 0.0   57.8 ± 0.0   57.8 ± 0.0
                 Mixup               58.8 ± 0.8   58.8 ± 0.8   58.8 ± 0.8   58.8 ± 0.8   58.8 ± 0.8
                 ERM                 58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5
                 ICRM                57.4 ± 0.4   59.7 ± 0.4   59.6 ± 0.6   59.4 ± 0.4   60.5 ± 0.3
               CIFAR10-C                  0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 65.9 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3
                 TENT                66.1 ± 1.6   63.9 ± 2.1   68.4 ± 2.1   69.9 ± 2.0   70.5 ± 2.0
                 BN Adapt            66.1 ± 1.6   63.9 ± 2.1   68.4 ± 2.1   69.9 ± 2.0   70.1 ± 2.0
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   66.1 ± 1.6   65.1 ± 2.1   68.9 ± 2.0   69.8 ± 2.0   70.0 ± 2.0
                 Fish                72.3 ± 1.0   72.3 ± 1.0   72.3 ± 1.0   72.3 ± 1.0   72.3 ± 1.0
                 IB-ERM              65.2 ± 2.9   65.2 ± 2.9   65.2 ± 2.9   65.2 ± 2.9   65.2 ± 2.9
                 IB-IRM              64.3 ± 2.6   64.3 ± 2.6   64.3 ± 2.6   64.3 ± 2.6   64.3 ± 2.6
                 Mixup               72.8 ± 0.4   72.8 ± 0.4   72.8 ± 0.4   72.8 ± 0.4   72.8 ± 0.4
                 ERM                 66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6
                 ICRM                70.6 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.3

                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Worst environment out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding stan-
dard errors for various counts of context samples. The methods compared include Adaptive Risk
Minimization (ARM), Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), Test Entropy Minimization (TENT),
Batch Norm Adaptation (BN Adapt), Bayesian Batch Norm Adaptation (Bayesian BN Adapt),
Fish, IB-ERM, IB-IRM, Mixup and our method ICRM on FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS
Camelyon17, Tiny-ImageNet-C, ImageNet R and CIFAR10-C.

               Dataset / algorithm        Worst case test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
               FEMNIST                    0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 23.6 ± 1.7   59.5 ± 3.5   60.7 ± 3.8   57.0 ± 7.3   58.8 ± 4.0
                 TENT                55.2 ± 2.5   57.2 ± 2.2   63.3 ± 0.4   65.9 ± 0.6   67.2 ± 1.0
                 BN Adapt            52.7 ± 6.2   56.2 ± 2.5   61.9 ± 0.1   64.7 ± 2.5   65.3 ± 0.9
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   54.3 ± 2.6   60.4 ± 1.2   64.7 ± 0.9   65.5 ± 2.2   66.3 ± 1.2
                 Fish                52.8 ± 1.2   52.8 ± 1.2   52.8 ± 1.2   52.8 ± 1.2   52.8 ± 1.2
                 IB-ERM              58.6 ± 3.4   58.6 ± 3.4   58.6 ± 3.4   58.6 ± 3.4   58.6 ± 3.4
                 IB-IRM              57.3 ± 2.6   57.3 ± 2.6   57.3 ± 2.6   57.3 ± 2.6   57.3 ± 2.6
                 Mixup               57.0 ± 1.9   57.0 ± 1.9   57.0 ± 1.9   57.0 ± 1.9   57.0 ± 1.9
                 ERM                 59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2
                 ICRM                59.8 ± 0.7   69.3 ± 0.0   70.6 ± 2.3   70.6 ± 1.5   70.6 ± 0.7
               Rotated MNIST              0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 28.2 ± 2.1   85.3 ± 1.6   87.2 ± 1.0   87.9 ± 1.0   87.9 ± 0.9
                 TENT                80.2 ± 1.3   88.5 ± 0.8   88.5 ± 0.9   80.2 ± 1.0   81.3 ± 1.0
                 BN Adapt            80.5 ± 2.4   70.9 ± 2.8   76.9 ± 2.5   79.8 ± 2.7   80.9 ± 2.3
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   80.5 ± 2.9   75.4 ± 3.1   79.2 ± 2.6   80.7 ± 2.8   81.3 ± 2.5
                 Fish                83.2 ± 1.9   83.2 ± 1.9   83.2 ± 1.9   83.2 ± 1.9   83.2 ± 1.9
                 IB-ERM              72.0 ± 0.9   72.0 ± 0.9   72.0 ± 0.9   72.0 ± 0.9   72.0 ± 0.9
                 IB-IRM              69.9 ± 3.4   69.9 ± 3.4   69.9 ± 3.4   69.9 ± 3.4   69.9 ± 3.4
                 Mixup               81.2± 0.7    81.2± 0.7    81.2± 0.7    81.2± 0.7    81.2± 0.7
                 ERM                 80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1
                 ICRM                82.5 ± 0.5   88.5 ± 0.5   88.5 ± 0.5   88.8 ± 0.5   88.8 ± 0.4
               WILDS Camelyon17           0           25           50           75          100
                ARM                  61.2 ± 5.2   59.5 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.3   59.7 ± 4.2
                TENT                 67.9 ± 7.6   81.8 ± 1.1   87.2 ± 1.1   89.4 ± 1.1   89.4 ± 1.0
                BN Adapt             67.5 ± 5.9   82.0 ± 0.3   87.4 ± 0.3   89.7 ± 0.3   89.9 ± 0.3
                Bayesian BN Adapt    67.5 ± 6.1   82.0 ± 0.3   87.3 ± 0.3   89.6 ± 0.2   89.7 ± 0.3
                Fish                 53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8   53.9 ± 2.8
                IB-ERM               51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0   51.8 ± 1.0
                IB-IRM               53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3   53.9 ± 1.3
                Mixup                62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7   62.8 ± 5.7
                ERM                  68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8
                ICRM                 92.0 ± 0.6   90.7 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8
               Tiny ImageNet-C            0           25            50           75          100
                 ARM                  8.2 ± 0.3   8.3 ± 0.3     8.2 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.2 ± 0.3
                 TENT                 1.2 ± 0.4   1.4 ± 0.0     1.6 ± 0.1    1.6 ± 0.0    1.6 ± 0.0
                 BN Adapt            9.4 ± 0.7    1.3 ± 0.0    1.4 ± 0.0    1.6 ± 0.0     1.7 ± 0.0
                 Bayesian BN Adapt    9.4 ± 0.7   1.6 ± 0.2    1.6 ± 0.1    1.8 ± 0.0    1.8 ± 0.0
                 Fish                11.1 ± 0.1   11.1 ± 0.1   11.1 ± 0.1   11.1 ± 0.1   11.1 ± 0.1
                 IB-ERM              15.8 ± 0.6   15.8 ± 0.6   15.8 ± 0.6   15.8 ± 0.6   15.8 ± 0.6
                 IB-IRM              15.9 ± 0.4   15.9 ± 0.4   15.9 ± 0.4   15.9 ± 0.4   15.9 ± 0.4
                 Mixup               11.3 ± 0.5   11.3 ± 0.5   11.3 ± 0.5   11.3 ± 0.5   11.3 ± 0.5
                 ERM                  9.5 ± 0.4   9.5 ± 0.4     9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4
                 ICRM                18.8 ± 0.2   19.2 ± 0.1   19.5 ± 0.2   19.5 ± 0.1   19.4 ± 0.2
               ImageNet R                 0           25            50           75          100
                 ARM                 47.4 ± 1.1   45.3 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 1.9   49.8 ± 1.2   47.4 ± 1.0
                 TENT                48.0 ± 1.0   8.6 ± 0.1     8.4 ± 0.1    8.9 ± 0.1    9.1 ± 0.1
                 BN Adapt            48.0 ± 1.0   8.5 ± 0.1     8.5 ± 0.1    8.9 ± 0.1    9.1 ± 0.0
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   48.0 ± 1.0   10.5 ± 0.2   10.3 ± 0.2   10.7 ± 0.2   10.9 ± 0.2
                 Fish                46.0 ± 2.1   46.0 ± 2.1   46.0 ± 2.1   46.0 ± 2.1   46.0 ± 2.1
                 IB-ERM              47.2 ± 1.3   47.2 ± 1.3   47.2 ± 1.3   47.2 ± 1.3   47.2 ± 1.3
                 IB-IRM              47.2 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 0.4
                 Mixup               47.9 ± 2.1   47.9 ± 2.1   47.9 ± 2.1   47.9 ± 2.1   47.9 ± 2.1
                 ERM                 48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0
                 ICRM                45.4 ± 0.7   48.0 ± 0.2   47.2 ± 0.8   46.9 ± 0.4   50.6 ± 1.3
               CIFAR10-C                  0           25           50           75          100
                 ARM                 39.3 ± 1.7   39.3 ± 1.7   39.4 ± 1.7   39.3 ± 1.7   39.4 ± 1.7
                 TENT                39.8 ± 2.5   45.4 ± 2.1   48.9 ± 2.1   49.7 ± 2.0   52.6 ± 2.0
                 BN Adapt            39.8 ± 2.5   43.8 ± 2.1   45.1 ± 2.0   47.8 ± 2.0   48.6 ± 2.0
                 Bayesian BN Adapt   39.8 ± 2.5   44.5 ± 2.0   46.8 ± 2.0   49.6 ± 2.0   51.0 ± 2.1
                 Fish                49.9 ± 1.5   49.9 ± 1.5   49.9 ± 1.5   49.9 ± 1.5   49.9 ± 1.5
                 IB-ERM              44.9 ± 3.4   44.9 ± 3.4   44.9 ± 3.4   44.9 ± 3.4   44.9 ± 3.4
                 IB-IRM              43.3 ± 2.3   43.3 ± 2.3   43.3 ± 2.3   43.3 ± 2.3   43.3 ± 2.3
                 Mixup               53.9 ± 2.4   53.9 ± 2.4   53.9 ± 2.4   53.9 ± 2.4   53.9 ± 2.4
                 ERM                 39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5
                 ICRM                54.6 ± 0.4   56.0 ± 0.5   55.8 ± 0.5   55.8 ± 0.5   55.9 ± 0.5

                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2.2     ROBUSTNESS OF ICRM IN THE ABSENCE OF ENVIRONMENT LABELS
As outlined in Section 4, the training regimen of ICRM assumes a dataset D = {(xi , yi , ei )}ni=1
collected under multiple training environments ei ∈ Etr . However, in scenarios lacking such domain
separation during training, does ICRM continue to show an edge over ERM baselines? To study
this question, we modify the sampling strategy: rather than constructing context vectors containing
examples from one environment, we construct context vectors containing iid samples from all of the
environments pooled together. To continue to test for out-of-distribution generalization, however,
we evaluate the performance on examples from a novel test environment. We term this modified
approach ICRM-Mix.
Table 9 and Table 10 contrasts the performance of ICRM with ICRM-Mix. ICRM consistently
outperforms ICRM-Mix across varying counts of in-context samples on both FEMNIST and Rotated
MNIST. Surprisingly, ICRM-Mix and ICRM perform similarly on WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny
ImageNet-C. Consider a setting where the model benefits the most attending to examples from the
same class or related classes. If classes are distributed uniformly across domains, then ICRM and
ICRM-mix are bound to perform similarly. Consider another setting where the model benefits the
most by attending to environment-specific examples such as characters drawn by the same user. In
such a case, ICRM and ICRM-mix have very different performances.

Table 9: Average out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding standard errors for
ICRM and ICRM-Mix across FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny-ImageNet-
C. ICRM-Mix trains on sequences with samples drawn i.i.d. from the unified dataset comprising
various environments.

        Dataset / algorithm          Average test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
        FEMNIST                    0            25           50            75          100
          ICRM                78.7 ± 0.5    87.2 ± 0.4   87.4 ± 0.5    87.5 ± 0.2   87.8 ± 0.2
          ICRM-Mix            77.6 ± 0.8    81.1 ± 0.2   81.1 ± 0.2    80.9 ± 0.3   80.9 ± 0.1
        Rotated MNIST              0            25           50            75          100
          ICRM                93.6 ± 0.2    96.1 ± 0.1   96.2 ± 0.1    96.2 ± 0.1   96.2 ± 0.1
          ICRM-Mix            88.9 ± 1.4    92.6 ± 0.3   92.7 ± 0.2    92.6 ± 0.3   92.7 ± 0.2
        WILDS Camelyon17           0            25           50            75          100
         ICRM                 92.0 ± 0.6    90.7 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8    90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8
         ICRM-Mix             92.9 ± 0.3    90.7 ± 0.6   90.8 ± 0.5    90.7 ± 0.5   90.7 ± 0.5
        Tiny ImageNet-C            0            25           50            75          100
          ICRM                38.3 ± 0.1    39.2 ± 0.3   39.2 ± 0.3    39.2 ± 0.3   39.2 ± 0.3
          ICRM-Mix            38.4 ± 0.2    39.3 ± 0.2   39.3 ± 0.2    39.3 ± 0.2   39.3 ± 0.2
        Imagenet R                 0            25           50            75          100
          ICRM                57.4 ± 0.4    59.7 ± 0.4   59.6 ± 0.6    59.4 ± 0.4   60.5 ± 0.3
          ICRM-Mix            54.9 ± 1.0    54.9 ± 1.0   57.8 ± 1.0    57.8 ± 1.0   57.8 ± 1.0
        CIFAR10-C                  0            25           50            75          100
          ICRM                70.6 ± 0.2    71.0 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.2    71.0 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.3
          ICRM-Mix            69.2 ± 0.2    69.4 ± 0.3   69.4 ± 0.3    69.4 ± 0.3   69.4 ± 0.3


D.2.3     U NDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF ARCHITECTURE
Table 3 presents the average performance of both ERM+ and ARM+ relative to ERM and ARM,
across the four datasets. Further, Table 11 and Table 12 demonstrate the average and worst group
out-of-distribution performance of these approaches, respectively, along with the corresponding
standard errors. These statistics are computed across three independent runs of the entire sweep,
wherein the model selected for evaluation is the one with hyper-parameters yielding the highest
validation accuracy.



                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Worst environment out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding
standard errors for ICRM and ICRM-Mix across FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17
and Tiny-ImageNet-C. ICRM-Mix trains on sequences with samples drawn i.i.d. from the unified
dataset comprising various environments.

      Dataset / algorithm        Worst case test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
      FEMNIST                    0           25           50           75          100
        ICRM                59.8 ± 0.7   69.3 ± 0.0   70.6 ± 2.3   70.6 ± 1.5   70.6 ± 0.7
        ICRM-Mix            57.5 ± 1.4   62.7 ± 1.1   65.0 ± 0.3   64.1 ± 1.5   62.9 ± 2.3
      Rotated MNIST              0           25           50           75          100
        ICRM                82.5 ± 0.5   88.5 ± 0.5   88.5 ± 0.5   88.8 ± 0.5   88.8 ± 0.4
        ICRM-Mix            68.8 ± 3.8   77.1 ± 0.7   76.8 ± 0.9   76.4 ± 0.9   76.6 ± 0.9
      WILDS Camelyon17           0           25           50           75          100
       ICRM                 92.0 ± 0.6   90.7 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8   90.8 ± 0.8
       ICRM-Mix             92.9 ± 0.3   90.7 ± 0.6   90.8 ± 0.5   90.7 ± 0.5   90.7 ± 0.5
      Tiny ImageNet-C            0           25           50           75          100
        ICRM                18.8 ± 0.2   19.2 ± 0.1   19.5 ± 0.2   19.5 ± 0.1   19.4 ± 0.2
        ICRM-Mix            18.7 ± 0.2   19.2 ± 0.2   19.4 ± 0.1   19.5 ± 0.1   19.4 ± 0.1
      Imagenet R                 0           25           50           75          100
        ICRM                45.4 ± 0.7   48.0 ± 0.2   47.2 ± 0.8   46.9 ± 0.4   50.6 ± 1.3
        ICRM-Mix            44.4 ± 1.7   46.9 ± 0.4   48.1 ± 1.6   46.6 ± 0.6   48.7 ± 1.0
      CIFAR10-C                  0           25           50           75          100
        ICRM                54.6 ± 0.4   56.0 ± 0.5   55.8 ± 0.5   55.8 ± 0.5   55.9 ± 0.5
        ICRM-Mix            53.3 ± 0.0   54.2 ± 1.1   54.2 ± 1.1   54.3 ± 1.1   54.2 ± 1.1


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Average out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding standard errors
for ARM+ and ERM+ in contrast to their base algorithms, ARM and ERM across FEMNIST, Rotated
MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny-ImageNet-C.

      Dataset / algorithm           Average test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
      FEMNIST                     0            25           50           75          100
        ARM                  49.5 ± 1.0    83.9 ± 0.5   84.4 ± 0.5   84.7 ± 0.6   84.6 ± 0.3
        ARM+                 71.4 ± 1.2    83.4 ± 0.2   84.0 ± 0.2   83.8 ± 0.2   83.5 ± 0.1
        ERM                  79.3 ± 0.4    79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4   79.3 ± 0.4
        ERM+                 77.4 ± 1.3    77.4 ± 1.3   77.4 ± 1.3   77.4 ± 1.3   77.4 ± 1.3
      Rotated MNIST               0            25           50           75          100
        ARM                  36.5 ± 5.2    94.2 ± 0.7   95.1 ± 0.4   95.3 ± 0.4   95.5 ± 0.3
        ARM+                 86.9 ± 2.0    92.6 ± 0.7   92.7 ± 0.6   92.8 ± 0.6   92.8 ± 0.6
        ERM                  94.2 ± 0.3    94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3   94.2 ± 0.3
        ERM+                 94.3 ± 0.4    94.3 ± 0.4   94.3 ± 0.4   94.3 ± 0.4   94.3 ± 0.4
      WILDS Camelyon17            0            25           50           75          100
       ARM                   61.2 ± 5.2    59.5 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.3   59.7 ± 4.2
       ARM+                  55.8 ± 0.8    55.1 ± 1.7   55.0 ± 1.7   55.0 ± 1.8   55.0 ± 1.8
        ERM                  68.6 ± 7.8    68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8
        ERM+                 50.1 ± 0.1    50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1
      Tiny ImageNet-C             0            25           50           75          100
        ARM                  30.8 ± 0.2    31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2   31.0 ± 0.2
        ARM+                 5.5 ± 0.2     5.7 ± 0.2    5.7 ± 0.2    5.7 ± 0.2    5.7 ± 0.2
        ERM                  31.8 ± 0.6    31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6   31.8 ± 0.6
        ERM+                 29.7 ± 0.3    29.7 ± 0.3   29.7 ± 0.3   29.7 ± 0.3   29.7 ± 0.3
      Imagenet R                  0            25            50          75          100
        ARM                  56.3 ± 0.8    58.1 ±0.3    58.8 ± 0.8   59.8 ± 0.8   59.0 ± 0.3
        ARM+                 1.8 ± 0.2     1.5 ± 0.2     1.5 ± 0.2   1.5 ± 0.2    1.5 ± 0.1
        ERM                  58.9 ± 0.5    58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5   58.9 ± 0.5
        ERM+                 57.0 ± 0.4    57.0 ± 0.4   57.0 ± 0.4   57.0 ± 0.4   57.0 ± 0.4
      CIFAR10-C                   0            25           50           75          100
        ARM                  65.9 ± 1.3    66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3   66.0 ± 1.3
        ARM+                 42.7 ± 0.1    44.2 ± 0.1   44.3 ± 0.1   44.3 ± 0.1   44.3 ± 0.1
        ERM                  66.1 ± 1.6    66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6   66.1 ± 1.6
        ERM+                 66.5 ± 1.2    66.5 ± 1.2   66.5 ± 1.2   66.5 ± 1.2   66.5 ± 1.2


                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: Worst environment out-of-distribution test accuracies along with their corresponding
standard errors for ARM+ and ERM+ in contrast to their base algorithms, ARM and ERM across
FEMNIST, Rotated MNIST, WILDS Camelyon17 and Tiny-ImageNet-C.

      Dataset / algorithm        Worst case test accuracy (by # in-context examples)
      FEMNIST                    0           25           50           75          100
        ARM                 23.6 ± 1.7   59.5 ± 3.5   60.7 ± 3.8   57.0 ± 7.3   58.8 ± 4.0
        ARM+                51.7 ± 2.2   63.0 ± 2.1   64.0 ± 0.8   60.7 ± 1.6   62.0 ± 0.8
        ERM                 59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2   59.0 ± 0.2
        ERM+                53.3 ± 2.7   53.3 ± 2.7   53.3 ± 2.7   53.3 ± 2.7   53.3 ± 2.7
      Rotated MNIST              0           25           50           75          100
        ARM                 28.2 ± 2.1   85.3 ± 1.6   87.2 ± 1.0   87.9 ± 1.0   87.9 ± 0.9
        ARM+                71.4 ± 2.6   80.9 ± 1.8   81.0 ± 1.8   81.2 ± 1.9   81.1 ± 1.8
        ERM                 80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1   80.8 ± 1.1
        ERM+                81.9 ± 0.7   81.9 ± 0.7   81.9 ± 0.7   81.9 ± 0.7   81.9 ± 0.7
      WILDS Camelyon17           0           25           50           75          100
       ARM                  61.2 ± 5.2   59.5 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.2   59.7 ± 4.3   59.7 ± 4.2
       ARM+                 55.8 ± 0.8   55.1 ± 1.7   55.0 ± 1.7   55.0 ± 1.8   55.0 ± 1.8
        ERM                 68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8   68.6 ± 7.8
        ERM+                50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1   50.1 ± 0.1
      Tiny ImageNet-C           0            25           50           75          100
        ARM                 8.2 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.2 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.2 ± 0.3
        ARM+                1.9 ± 0.1    1.9 ± 0.1    1.9 ± 0.1    1.9 ± 0.1    1.9 ± 0.1
        ERM                 9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4    9.5 ± 0.4
        ERM+                8.3 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3    8.3 ± 0.3
      Imagenet R                 0           25           50           75          100
        ARM                 47.4 ± 1.1   45.3 ± 0.4   47.2 ± 1.9   49.8 ± 1.2   47.4 ± 1.0
        ARM+                1.4 ± 0.2    0.9 ± 0.3    1.0 ± 0.4    0.8 ± 0.3    1.0 ± 0.3
        ERM                 48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0   48.0 ± 1.0
        ERM+                45.3 ± 1.0   45.3 ± 1.0   45.3 ± 1.0   45.3 ± 1.0   45.3 ± 1.0
      CIFAR10-C                  0           25           50           75          100
        ARM                 39.3 ± 1.7   39.3 ± 1.7   39.4 ± 1.7   39.3 ± 1.7   39.4 ± 1.7
        ARM+                24.5 ± 0.7   24.7 ± 0.6   24.8 ± 0.5   24.8 ± 0.5   24.8 ± 0.6
        ERM                 39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5   39.8 ± 2.5
        ERM+                40.4 ± 1.8   40.4 ± 1.8   40.4 ± 1.8   40.4 ± 1.8   40.4 ± 1.8


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3    C OMPARISON OF ICRM WITH I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING

The first and most popular conception of In-context learning (Brown et al., 2020) involves providing
the model with contextual information, typically a few sample (x, y) pairs that represent a specific
“task”. In contrast, our approach ICRM introduces an alternative perspective on in-context learning,
where unlabeled inputs x act as the contextual backdrop for a task, also known as an environment.
Note that, in order to benefit from in-context learning in domain generalization, the context itself
must be a sequence of unlabeled inputs since at test-time the learner only has access to the unlabeled
x’s from the test environment and not the labels y’s.
Our method, ICRM, can seamlessly adapt to supervised settings, functioning with input sequences
containing both (x, y) pairs, instead of just x. We refer to this approach as Supervised ICRM or
ICL. We evaluate both Supervised ICRM and ICRM on FEMNIST and Rotated MNIST datasets. As
anticipated, Supervised ICRM demonstrates superior performance compared to ICRM. However, it
is not suitable for domain generalization settings where data labels are unavailable at inference.

Table 13: Average/worst OOD test accuracy for different context lengths, for ICRM and Supervised
ICRM on FEMNIST and Rotated MNIST. Supervised ICRM refers to ICRM trained on labeled input
sequences containing (x, y) pairs as context.

    Data / method               Average test accuracy              Worst case test accuracy
    FEMNIST               0       25     50      75     100     0      25       50     75     100
    ICRM                 78.7    87.2   87.4    87.5    87.8   59.8    69.3    70.6   70.6    70.6
    Supervised ICRM      79.0    87.8   87.7    88.2    87.9   61.2    72.2    73.5   74.5    74.9
    Rotated MNIST         0       25    50       75     100     0       25      50     75     100
    ICRM                 93.6    96.1   96.2    96.2    96.2   82.5    88.5    88.5   88.8    88.8
    Supervised ICRM      93.3    96.3   96.3    96.3    96.3   82.0    89.0    89.0   89.1    89.3


D.4    I NVESTIGATING THE FEATURES LEARNED BY ICRM

Figure 2 presents attention maps for two randomly sampled sequences for FEMNIST and Tinu
ImageNet-C datasets. Figure 6 shows similar visualization for two other random sequences. Par-
ticularly in the second row, attention is predominantly allocated to lines of length similar to that of
the query (also in green), thereby disregarding shorter lines (shown in red). Similarly, the third row
shows that the model, when presented with a query image of a “train”, attends not only on other
trains but also on a “bus”—indicating a semantic understanding of similarity.
The key takeaway from this visualization is that ICRM effectively learns to attend to a select few
samples in an input sequence. Interestingly, these samples either belong to the same class or exhibit
similar features, despite potentially belonging to different classes.
To gain deeper insights into the features learned by ICRM, we examine its capability to transition
from broad domain indices to nuanced, compositional contextual descriptions of environments. This
analysis is crucial for understanding how ICRM facilitates amortization across similar environments.
In particular, we extract embeddings from the penultimate layer of our trained model, for data from
every environment within the training set. Subsequently, we train a linear classifier to predict the
corresponding environment from each embedding. We repeat the experiment for models trained using
both ICRM and ICRM-Mix.
As illustrated in Figure 7, the linear model using embeddings from ICRM attains an accuracy of
up to 75% on FEMNIST and 98% on Rotated MNIST. This efficacy suggests that ICRM embeds
representations that are linearly separable with respect to their environmental origins. Additionally,
ICRM not only exhibits superior accuracy but also a faster rate of convergence in comparison to
ICRM-Mix. This advantage is likely due to ICRM’s i.i.d data sampling from each environment. In


                                                 41
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Attention maps (final fig tiny with class name)
                 Query        0.12      0.06          0.32          0.10          0.15                    0.10   0.05          0.11         0.00          0.00


                  Query       0.08      0.15         0.10           0.04          0.21                    0.03   0.04          0.15         0.19          0.00


                Query        0.15       0.13       0.13             0.20          0.23                0.16        0.00         0.00        0.00           0.00
                Bullet Train School bus Mantis     Rocking          Pizza         Bullet              Bullet
                                                   chair                          train               train


                Query         0.16    0.24           0.12       0.12              0.11               0.15       0.11           0.00        0.00           0.00
                Volley ball   Beach   Academic       Hog        Walking           Plate              Volleyball Volleyball
                              Wagon   Gown                      stick
                                                                                     Query Image

    Figure 6: Attention scores for random test sequences, for ICRM on FEMNIST (top two rows) and
    Tiny ImageNet-C (bottom two rows).


    contrast, a linear model trained on embeddings from a ICRM-Mix model also achieves significant
    accuracy, reaching 70% on FEMNIST and 91% on Rotated MNIST. This further explains ICRM-
    Mix’s robust performance in out-of-distribution generalization even in the absence of explicit domain
    separation during training, as analyzed in Appendix D.2.2.

                                                                                                    1.0
                0.6                                                                                 0.8
     Accuracy


                                                                                         Accuracy


                0.4                                                                                 0.6

                                                                                                    0.4
                0.2
                                                                ICRM                                0.2                                               ICRM
                                                                ICRM-Mix                                                                              ICRM-Mix
                0.0
                      0       1000    2000       3000        4000          5000                             0    1000        2000       3000       4000          5000
                                      # Training epochs                                                                      # Training epochs


                                        (a)                                                                                    (b)

    Figure 7: Evolution of the classification accuracy of the linear model trained on the retrieved
    embeddings as a function of training epochs for (a) FEMNIST (b) Rotated MNIST


                                                                                  42
