Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A LT-T EXT WITH C ONTEXT:
I MPROVING ACCESSIBILITY FOR I MAGES ON T WITTER
 Nikita Srivatsan                                           Sofı́a Samaniego
 Carnegie Mellon University                                 sofia.samaniego.f@gmail.com
 nsrivats@cmu.edu

 Omar Florez                                              Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick
 LatinX in AI                                             University of California San Diego
 omarflorez.research@gmail.com                            tberg@ucsd.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         In this work we present an approach for generating alternative text (or alt-text) de-
         scriptions for images shared on social media, specifically Twitter. More than just
         a special case of image captioning, alt-text is both more literally descriptive and
         context-specific. Also critically, images posted to Twitter are often accompanied
         by user-written text that despite not necessarily describing the image may provide
         useful context that if properly leveraged can be informative. We address this task
         with a multimodal model that conditions on both textual information from the
         associated social media post as well as visual signal from the image, and demon-
         strate that the utility of these two information sources stacks. We put forward a
         new dataset of 371k images paired with alt-text and tweets scraped from Twitter
         and evaluate on it across a variety of automated metrics as well as human evalu-
         ation. We show that our approach of conditioning on both tweet text and visual
         information significantly outperforms prior work, by more than 2x on BLEU@4.


1   I NTRODUCTION
An increasingly important aspect of the social media user experience centers around the sharing and
discussion of visual content. However, for users who are blind or have low vision (BLV), this type of
content is often inaccessible. One solution to this problem is alt-text, an HTML attribute associated
with digital images, which is intended to provide a literal natural language description of an image’s
content, and can be rendered by a screen reader or braille display. Despite being infrequently in-
cluded, it is incredibly important from an accessibility standpoint, as it allows users to perceive the
content of the image and thus have a better online experience. Some social media websites, notably
Twitter, have recently given users the option to write their own alt-text for images that they upload
(an example is shown in Figure 1). This approach however offloads the responsibility of making the
site accessible onto the users, who frequently either for convenience or lack of awareness simply
do not choose to do so (Gleason et al., 2019). We find that as many as 98% of images uploaded to
Twitter even after the widespread feature rollout do not have alt-text, to say nothing of the quality of
those that do. When a screen reader encounters such an image, it will simply say “Image”, leaving
the user with no meaningful information about what the image is actually of. Even when images on
Twitter do have accompanying user-written alt-text, the quality is inconsistent as not all users are
well informed regarding best practices.
Note that while there is a long line of existing research on the broader task of captioning images
more generally, alt-text generation for social media is a special case of this task, which in turn
comes with its own challenges. Well written alt-text is generally more explicitly descriptive than a
high level caption and may emphasize specific details in the image based on context (Kreiss et al.,
2022a). See Figure 1 for an example. Furthermore, the distribution of image types on Twitter differs
substantially from those found in traditional captioning datasets, and may contain digital artwork,
promotional graphics, or screenshots containing text. An additional challenge is that Twitter users
are not well trained in the practice of writing alt-text, and therefore native “gold” examples can vary


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Tweet text 𝒕 𝒊
    a non-descriptive
   caption, subjective
  and likely to contain
    info not apparent                                                                        Our Dataset                       Conceptual Captions
           from image



          Image 𝒙 𝒊
       likely to contain
    visual elements or
    text referenced by
               the tweet


        Alt-text 𝒚 𝒊
           a descriptive
     caption, objective
     and functional but
   likely to emphasize
        visual elements
     also mentioned in
               the tweet                                                         Alt-text: Delicious pink margarita sits   Caption: having cocktail at person
                                                                                 on a table full of salsa and chips        who wants to join ?


Predicted ClipCap 𝒑 𝒚    " 𝒊 𝒙 𝒊 : “A pile of books on a table…”
         "(𝒊) Ours 𝒑 𝒚
alt-text 𝒚           " 𝒙 𝒊 , 𝒕 𝒊 : “A pile of election flyers on a table…”
                       𝒊


Figure 1: Left: An image that requires textual context to write accurate alt-text for. Without condi-
tioning on the tweet text, the election flyers are indistinguishable from books to a traditional caption-
ing system. Right: Two similar images from our dataset and Conceptual Captions with their gold
labels. The alt-text for the first image is literally descriptive while the second is more colloquial.


substantially in their level of quality. To support continued research in this area, we collect and
release a first-of-its-kind dataset of image and alt-text pairs scraped from Twitter.
Our central motivating idea is that despite the challenges associated with this domain, social media
images come with additional contextual information that if properly leveraged can significantly im-
prove the quality of automatically generated alt-text. Images posted to social media often require
some amount of background knowledge to adequately caption. For example the left image in Fig-
ure 1 may easily be mistaken for a stack of books or magazines. However, we do in fact have a source
of text that might provide context not present in the visual information contained in the image itself,
namely the text associated with the actual post which more specifically identifies the pamphlets as
election flyers. We therefore see an opportunity to augment existing captioning systems with textual
conditioning in order to allow them to achieve better performance on this challenging task.
One model that is easily modifiable to accept multimodal inputs is ClipCap (Mokady et al., 2021).
ClipCap operates using a prefix method, where an image encoder — in this case CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) — produces a vector embedding of the image which is then projected to a sequence of
embeddings that occupy the same dimensionality as word embeddings. These (despite not actually
being the embedding of any specific language sequence) can then be taken as inputs to a language
model decoder — in this case GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) — which then autoregressively completes
the sequence to produce the caption.
Our approach (shown in Figure 2) supplements the text-like image embedding sequence with an em-
bedding of the tweet text, in the hopes that these two information sources will provide meaningfully
non-overlapping signal to the decoder, in order to produce more accurate captions. This reduces
the burden on the image encoder to be able to distinguish very similar object types, and allows the
decoder access to details that may be very difficult to glean from the visual features.
In summary our contributions are as follows: (1) We collect a novel benchmark dataset for the
task of alt-text prediction on social media including both images and surrounding textual context
(2) We introduce a novel alt-text generation method that allows for multimodal conditioning with a
unimodal language model (3) We perform a quantitative analysis of this approach on our collected
dataset, outperforming prior work on captioning (ClipCap, Mokady et al. (2021)) and vision-and-
language pretraining (BLIP-2, Li et al. (2023)) by more than 2x on BLEU@4. We also conduct
human evaluation which substantiates these findings.


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Prefix in Word
                                                   Embedding Space
                                      Image
          Input Image 𝑥   !          Encoding      Image      Embedded                     Predicted Alt-Text 𝑦! !
                                                 Projection    Tweet


                                                                                                                   gosling
                                           Map


                                                                                              Small
                                                                   this


                                                                                                            cute
                                                                               …                                             …


                                                                                                      and
                              CLIP                                                 GPT-2


                                                              Ok


                                                                          is
                                           Net

                                                         𝑝⨁𝑡
          Ok, this is definitely a
          pic of one of our goslings

                 Tweet Text 𝑡 !

Figure 2: Overview of the alt-text model. An image is encoded via CLIP to obtain an embedding of
visual features. This gets projected via a mapping network into word embedding space, where it is
then concatenated with an embedded representation of the text from the corresponding tweet. This
prefix is passed to a finetuned GPT-2 which autoregressively generates the alt-text caption.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Image captioning in a generic sense is a relatively well studied task. Since the introduction of the
COCO benchmark (Lin et al., 2014) a variety of systems have been released, and state-of-the-art
quantitative performance has risen across several metrics (Vinyals et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2015;
Bernardi et al., 2016). Alt-text generation is relatively understudied by comparison, and there are
few established datasets for it.
Kreiss et al. (2022b) collected one such dataset of images with descriptive alt-text and contextual
captions from Wikipedia. This corpus was smaller than the one we put forward here at 97k images,
and also represents a fundamentally different domain as Wikipedia contains different image types
than social media, more frequently has gold alt-text, and has much more carefully curated text
captions. They do however demonstrate that conditioning on textual context can improve the quality
of generated alt-text, suggesting the value of a similar approach for our setting.
Examining alt-text in the context of social media posts has been studied as well, albeit to an even
more limited extent. Twitter A11y (Gleason et al., 2020) is a browser extension based on a pipeline
system that primarily works through scraping matching alt-text from alternate sources, only gener-
ating it abstractively through a separate caption generator if other methods fail.
Facebook developed and published a system they refer to as Automatic Alt-Text (AAT) (Wu et al.,
2017). The approach described does not generate text abstractively, and instead essentially outputs
a list of tags indicating various objects detected within the image. While this is arguably more
informative than nothing, it’s worth emphasizing that this format does not strictly speaking adhere
to alt-text best practices. The system has since been refined to include additional details regarding
position, count, and size (Meta, 2021). Facebook’s AAT has been critically examined, notably by
Hanley et al. (2021) who focused particularly on how it describes personal identity categories. They
summarize a variety of limitations BLV users experience with it including a lack of detail, a reliance
on tags as opposed to fluid natural language captions, and an inability to reason about the contextual
salience of various parts of the image.
Chiarella et al. (2020) outlined steps to increase the accessibility of scientific images posted to
Twitter. Alt-Textify (Belle. et al., 2022) proposed a method specifically designed for generating
alt-text on SVG-based data visualizations and charts, and Chintalapati et al. (2022) put forward a
dataset and analysis of visualizations within HCI publications. Li et al. (2020) introduced a method
for generating alt-text specifically for mobile UI elements.
One prominent recent example of a more general-purpose system for aligning text with images is
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). While CLIP is not exactly a captioning system, it can be used to
score text/image pairs as a way of reranking or selecting captions from a candidate list. Elements of
CLIP’s architecture have however found success within the pipelines of broader captioning models.
One example is ClipCap (Mokady et al., 2021), which uses a mapping network to project a CLIP


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image embedding into word embedding space and then feeds the result as a prefix to a language
model which outputs the caption. We inherit this basic architectural framework, but extend it to
multimodal prefixes which also contain textual context.
While there are other existing datasets for image captioning, they do differ from the one put forward
in this paper in a few key ways. One of the most similar examples is Conceptual Captions (Sharma
et al., 2018), a dataset of images with short and descriptive text captions. These captions are pro-
duced by processing the alt-text descriptions found within HTML to simplify and improve fluency.
However, the distribution of images is fundamentally different from that found on social media,
and the captions are not generally descriptive enough for accessibility purposes (as a result their
captions average only 10 tokens, whereas ours average 40). An example showing this contrast is
provided in Figure 1. Furthermore this dataset does not include surrounding textual context, which
we demonstrate to be extremely informative for improved alt-text generation.
More recently the emerging subfield of large language models (LLMs) has expanded into exploring
multimodal systems capable of conditioning on images interleaved with text. Systems including
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) have gained popularity, although their
closed nature makes them difficult to study. Further, there is strong reason to prefer federated sys-
tems that are small and controllable by end users rather than through paid opaque APIs that are
subject to change without notice and make scientific reproducibility impossible. Open source alter-
natives such as OpenFlamingo (Awadalla et al., 2023) and BLIP (Li et al., 2022; 2023) have also
emerged. These models are capable of captioning images based on few if any in-context examples,
despite not being specifically trained on this task. It should be emphasized that these models are
however not only incomparable due to their massive and unequal training sets, but are arguably inef-
ficiently overparameterized in their capacity to model a wide variety of tasks beyond captioning. The
system we propose instead is trainable on reasonable compute hardware, does not require esoteric
prompting strategies, and as we will demonstrate still outperforms BLIP-2 on alt-text generation.
Certain large pretrained language models have also been shown to exhibit disability bias (Herold
et al., 2022) which is undesirable in general and especially in this context.

3       M ODEL

At a high level, our model’s primary innovation is being able to condition on not just visual infor-
mation from the image, but also on textual content from the tweet itself. This is in contrast to prior
work which captions images in isolation from the text alongside which they appear. We will now
describe the multimodal conditioning setup more formally, and over the rest of this section describe
our model’s architecture for parameterizing the relevant distributions. Suppose that we are given
a dataset X = {x(1) , ..., x(N ) } of images and corresponding tweet text T = {t(1) , ..., t(N ) }1 as
well as gold alt-text descriptions Y = {y (1) , ..., y (N ) }. Our model defines a conditional distribution
p(y|x, t; θ) over the captions given the tweet and image. Having optimized this distribution with
respect to θ over our dataset at train time, at test time our task is to predict ŷ = arg maxy p(y|x, t).
Note that prior work can be thought of as a special case where the tweet t is not considered.

3.1       M ULTIMODAL C ONDITIONING

Our model’s decoder must output text in order to generate the alt-text caption. A natural choice for
this is an autoregressive transformer-based language model – we specifically opt for GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019). Conveniently, such architectures’ masked self-attention mechanisms make them inher-
ently well suited to conditioning on text. In order to generate alt-text conditioned on the tweet, we
can simply feed the tweet to the language model as a prompt and train the model to autoregressively
complete it with the corresponding alt-text. The more challenging step is allowing the language
model to condition on visual information from the image as well. However, we would also like
to avoid fundamentally modifying the decoder’s architecture and still be able to leverage unimodal
pretraining. In order to solve this, what we require is a way to project image features into text space
(or more specifically word embedding space) so that we can directly incorporate them into the tweet
prefix. Fortunately, this is something that prior work has addressed. ClipCap (Mokady et al., 2021)
learns a mapping network on top of a pretrained CLIP image encoder that projects the visual vector
    1
        Note t(i) = t(j) if images i, j are from the same tweet.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


encoding into a sequence of embeddings that while not directly corresponding to specific words, are
still in word embedding space and therefore acceptable by a pretrained language model.
It’s worth emphasizing that the crux of this method relies on “translating” image features into a
format which the language model can receive as input as if it were a text prefix. An observable
artifact of this is that the mapping network often places its outputs near embeddings corresponding
to words that are relevant to the contents of the image (Mokady et al., 2021). The prefix can thus
be “de-embedded” back into text as a rough means of inspecting what information about the image
it encodes. Crucially, this also suggests that further context not present in the image itself could
be provided to the decoder in the form of additional text added to the prefix. In this way, we can
effectively create a prefix reflecting multimodal information that nonetheless exists in a unimodal
space, and can be input to a pretrained unimodal language model.
See Figure 2 for an overview of our model’s pipeline. Drawing inspiration from ClipCap’s archi-
tecture (see Mokady et al. (2021) for details), we pass an image x through a pretrained CLIP image
encoder, and project the output to word embedding space using a mapping network. This is param-
eterized by a multi-layer perceptron that takes in a 512 dimensional vector CLIP embedding and
outputs a k long sequence of 768 dimensional vectors (the same size GPT-2 expects for each token).
These embeddings constitute a prefix p which is the correct shape to be passed to GPT-2.
Having obtained p, a sequence of token embedding-esque vectors, the procedure for combining
it with the tweet text to produce a prefix containing both visual and textual information is fairly
straightforward. We simply concatenate that projection with the embedded tweet text t (note that
they are both sequences in word embedding space) to obtain the complete prefix p ⊕ t. We can
condition on this, treating it as something analogous to a multimodal prompt to our language model,
which then autoregressively outputs the alt-text caption ŷ. Our decoder can therefore condition both
on the tweet text, which is the same modality as its output, and the image itself which is not.
To train the model, we simply teacher force and optimize the cross entropy loss between the pre-
dicted logits and the gold reference. We backpropagate into the weights of both the mapping network
and GPT-2, but leave CLIP frozen both for speed and performance reasons, following Mokady et al.
(2021). Further implementation details are provided in Appendix C.

3.2   D ECODING

After training, there are important choice points for how we decode captions at test time that can
significantly impact performance. While ClipCap originally used greedy decoding, we instead opt
for beam search with a beam size of 5. Furthermore, as with many language models we noticed
that ours occasionally repeated words or short phrases towards the end of captions. We solve this
with the trigram blocking strategy described by Paulus et al. (2017). For fair comparison we use this
same decoding method for ClipCap in our experiments.

3.3   R ERANKING

We also experiment with reranking the candidates from beam search by their similarity to the tweet
text, as the highest likelihood caption might not necessarily score best under our nondifferentiable
evaluation metrics. While the tweet text is not itself a descriptive caption, it may reference specific
things in the image that are especially relevant, and therefore high quality alt-text will likely have
a significant degree of ngram overlap with it. While the model does get to condition on the tweet
text through the prefix, we may wish to ensure that that information does ultimately appear in the
final output. In order to steer our generations in this direction, we choose a new best caption among
the top 5 candidates returned by beam search based on their ROUGE-L similarity to the tweet text
t. We also experimented with reranking based on BLEU and CLIP text embedding similarity but
found that neither of these performed as well as ROUGE-L.

4     DATASET C OLLECTION
One contribution of this paper is the collection and release of a large-scale benchmark dataset for
training and evaluating alt-text generation systems. We now describe how we collect a publicly
available dataset of tweets containing images and corresponding user-written alt-text descriptions.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


These tweets were scraped via the public Twitter APIv2 from a 21 day period in the summer of 2022.
We focused on English tweets containing still images with user-written alt-text. One important
consideration was the removal of duplicates. We noticed that many accounts — especially bots and
promotional accounts — would post the same image multiple times, and others (e.g. those tracking
extreme weather events or stock prices) often post extremely similar images with only a few words
differing between their corresponding alt-text captions. We addressed this by deduplicating based
on textual and visual matches. For more details on filtering see Appendix B.
We also took steps to reduce the incidence of names in our data. While many users caption im-
ages using the real names of the people in them, predicting a person’s name from an image would
implicitly require learning to perform facial recognition, something well beyond the scope of this
work. Furthermore, from a user privacy standpoint, we would not want our model to be able to
output the names of real people, regardless of whether they actually appear in that image. We used
the existing NER system of Mishra et al. (2020); Eskander et al. (2020) to identify named entities in
our alt-text, and replaced all instances of the Person type with the string “person”. While this sub-
stitutes no additional visual description of the person, and can lead to grammatically cumbersome
transformations, we leave further improvements to future work.
This yielded a dataset of 371,270 images. We split into train (330,449), val (20,561), and test
(20,260) sets based on tweet ID (i.e. images from the same tweet are assigned to the same split) to
prevent leakage of tweet text. The corresponding alt-text captions were on average 144 characters
long, which translates to 40 tokens. The tweet text was similarly 152 characters long on average, or
46 tokens. We also hard crop both the alt-text and tweet text at 150 tokens max length. While the
raw data cannot be distributed directly in order to protect users’ right to be forgotten, we release the
dehydrated tweet IDs and media URLs 2 .
In order to quantitatively assess the quality of the user-written alt-text descriptions, we randomly
sampled 200 tweets from the validation set, and manually inspected them to determine if they were
fluent, and descriptive of the image. We found that of the 68.0% of images that still loaded and
passed our preprocessing filters (described above), 94.1% were fluently written, and 86.0% con-
tained some form of literal description of the visual contents. Of those that didn’t, the majority
simply did not provide enough detail or treated the field as a second caption that provided context
for what was being depicted, but not a visual description.

5       E XPERIMENTS

Having described our method, and our dataset collection procedure, we now conduct experiments to
assess how well existing models perform on this new task, and by how much our multimodal system
improves over those approaches. This section gives an overview of our experimental setup.

5.1      BASELINES

We examine a few key baselines and ablations in our experiments in addition to our full model. The
first of these is a Nearest Neighbor system, which returns the verbatim alt-text caption associated
with the most visually similar image from the training set. We determine visual similarity based on
the dot product of the pretrained CLIP features of the images (the same visual encoding used by
our full models). The second baseline always returns the corresponding tweet text as the predicted
alt-text, which we refer to as Copy Tweet Text. This tells us to what extent the tweet text is already
a reasonable alt-text caption without transformation. Following our motivation for conditioning on
the tweet text, we would expect that this system would occasionally return something informative
albeit likely not well formed and certainly redundant from the perspective of a BLV user. This can
also be thought of as a simpler variant of our text only system, described below.
Our first neural baseline is ClipCap, described previously, using its publicly available implementa-
tion. ClipCap is already pretrained on a large captioning dataset, so we evaluate it both out of the
box, and finetuned on our own data. For fair comparison, we also use the same updated decoding
strategy for our ClipCap experiments. We also compare to pretrained BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023) using
their OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) 2.7B checkpoint.
    2
        https://github.com/NikitaSrivatsan/AltTextPublicICLR


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Model        Decoding    BLEU@4      METEOR   ROUGE-L   CIDEr
             Naive Baselines
                    Nearest Neighbor               -       0.563    1.827    5.074    1.671
                     Copy Tweet Text               -       0.230    2.066    4.801    0.453
             Neural Baselines
                     BLIP-2 (Frozen)             BS        0.111    1.449    6.744    1.381
                    ClipCap (Frozen)        BS (NR)        0.372    1.400    6.690    0.830
                 ClipCap (Finetuned)        BS (NR)        0.681    2.685    8.620    1.557
              ClipCap (From Scratch)        BS (NR)        0.696    2.643    8.483    1.588
             Tweet Text Conditioning
                    Ours (Rand Text)        BS (NR)        0.546    2.547    7.906    1.171
                     Ours (Text Only)       BS (NR)        0.693    2.459    7.498    1.738
                 Ours (Text + Image)        BS (NR)        1.826    3.067    8.652    7.661
             Decoding Ablation
                  Ours (Text + Image)         Greedy       0.587    2.247    7.166    1.450
                  Ours (Text + Image)    Greedy (NR)       0.469    2.168    7.774    1.520
                  Ours (Text + Image)             BS       0.400    2.311    6.275    1.159
                  Ours (Text + Image)        BS (NR)       1.826    3.067    8.652    7.661
              ClipCap (From Scratch)    BS (NR) + RR       0.691    2.899    8.760    1.379
                  Ours (Text + Image)   BS (NR) + RR       1.897    3.257    8.818    6.791

Table 1: Quantitative test results across various metrics (all numbers x100). Our method and Clip-
Cap are decoded using beam search with no repeats. BS indicates Beam Search, NR indicates no
repeats, and RR indicates ROUGE-L reranking.


Viewing ClipCap as a variant of our model that only includes image features in the prefix begs the
question of whether we could similarly include the tweet text, but not the projected image prefix.
We therefore also consider a baseline that includes the tweet text t in the prefix, but not the projected
image prefix p (referred to as Ours (Text Only)). This is effectively a translation model between
the tweet text and alt-text; it can transform the style and filter out irrelevant details, but cannot
inject new information, and thus serves as an indicator of the performance achievable based only on
surrounding context without observing the image itself. We also consider an ablation of our system
that substitutes the retrieved nearest neighbor for a randomly chosen tweet, which we call Ours
(Rand Text). This lets us measure how robust our system is to errors in the retrieval process and
how well it can generalize to cases where a similar neighbor does not exist in train.

5.2   M ETRICS

Most image captioning work has evaluated using quantitative metrics that roughly measure the
string similarity between a model’s generated caption and a reference gold caption. Since we have
user-written alt-text for each image in our dataset, we simply treat these as our gold references
to compare to. Specifically, we measure performance on BLEU@4 (Papineni et al., 2002), ME-
TEOR (Denkowski & Lavie, 2014), ROUGE-L (Lin & Och, 2004), and CIDEr (Vedantam et al.,
2015). It’s worth noting however that because the “gold” alt-text captions on Twitter are written by
untrained users, they can be noisy, inconsistent in form and specificity, and occasionally do not even
describe the image contents (Gleason et al., 2019). As a result, the absolute scores may seem rela-
tively low compared to numbers typically reported on other datasets, although based on qualitative
inspection and human assessments they do nonetheless meaningfully correlate with output quality.
Due to this variability, as well as the broader problems with contextless evaluation for this
task (Kreiss et al., 2022a), we also conduct human evaluation using Amazon Mechanical Turk. For
this experiment, we subsampled 954 examples from our test set (originally 1000 but some tweets
had been deleted over time), and asked a group of sighted human annotators to compare the outputs
of our multimodal system with two variants of ClipCap for those images (all systems using beam
search with no repeats). For more details see Appendix D.

6     R ESULTS
We now present results on our dataset, both using automatic metrics comparing model output to
user-written reference alt-text, and using human evaluation. We also perform qualitative evaluation
to analyze our output more subjectively.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Model     Fluency   Descriptiveness                       Model     Fluency   Descriptiveness
   ClipCap (Frozen)     29.8          26.2             ClipCap (From Scratch)     34.2          37.7
 Ours (Text + Image)    61.4          66.9                 Ours (Text + Image)    37.4          44.4
       Equal Quality     8.8           6.9                       Equal Quality    28.5          17.9

Table 2: Left: Results from human evaluation, showing annotator preference for our model vs.
frozen ClipCap in terms of fluency and descriptiveness. Right: Results showing annotator prefer-
ence for our model vs. finetuned ClipCap in terms of fluency and descriptiveness.


6.1   AUTOMATIC M ETRICS

In Table 1 we show reconstruction performance on our test set across a variety of metrics. Copying
tweet text achieves the lowest performance on all metrics except for METEOR, which is perhaps
expected given that tweets are generally not descriptions of the images they accompany. While
users will occasionally recycle their tweets into the alt-text field, such examples are filtered out by
our preprocessing. Nearest neighbor achieves slightly better performance. This makes sense as there
are certain styles of image, for instance selfies, that may appear frequently and have relatively similar
captions, although this approach likely makes frequent mistakes when it comes to finer details.
Of the neural methods, we see that frozen ClipCap scores lowest, almost certainly due to domain
mismatch in both the distribution of images and text. Finetuning on our dataset does lead to some
improvement, bringing ClipCap ahead of the naive baselines on most metrics. Perhaps supporting
the hypothesis that our Twitter dataset is fundamentally mismatched from Conceptual Captions, we
find that a ClipCap trained from scratch on our dataset performs about on par with the finetuned
one depending on the metric. We see similar performance to frozen ClipCap from BLIP-2, which
despite its extensive pretraining on data not available to other systems, fails to produce alt-text with
sufficient detail and accuracy for this dataset.
However we see by far the strongest results from our approach which combines the mapped image
prefix with the text of the tweet as input to a decoder, achieving more than 2x on BLEU and 4x
on CIDEr. This is also ahead of the ablation which disregards the image entirely and only uses the
tweet text in the prefix, demonstrating that these two sources of information stack with one another.
The competitive performance of the text-only baseline demonstrates the strong amount of necessary
context present in the original post, while the fact that it outperforms merely copying the tweet text
emphasizes that alt-text is nonetheless functionally different in many cases from just another caption.
Randomizing the retrieved tweet does hurt our model’s performance as well. We find qualitatively
that under this setup our model is sometimes still able to produce a reasonable caption presumably
based solely on the signal from the image features, although it will occasionally insert spurious
details from the random tweet, so it’s not completely robust to irrelevant input tweet captions.

6.2   D ECODING A BLATION

Table 1 also shows an ablation of various decoding strategies for our multimodal model. Greedy
decoding does poorly, and trigram blocking helps on some metrics but hurts on others. Beam search
does not do better than greedy if allowed to repeat trigrams, but the specific combination of beam
search without repeats does extremely well. Reranking the top 5 candidates from beam search
with ROUGE-L similarity to the tweet text offers minor improvements on most metrics, but hurts
performance on CIDEr. We also observe similar rankings of these methods for ClipCap.

6.3   H UMAN E VALUATION

Note that while the automatic metrics are informative, the absolute scores are below what these
same systems achieve on datasets such as Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al., 2018). We suspect
this is largely due to the noisiness of gold references. It’s worth emphasizing that Twitter users are
not explicitly trained in how to write alt-text, and as a result the level of quality is extremely vari-
able (Gleason et al., 2019). Furthermore, some users write alt-text that functions more as a “second
caption” than as a literal description of the image’s contents. This means that for an observably large
proportion of our data (although the exact amount is difficult to quantify), the gold reference is either
undesirable to match or idiosyncratic enough that measuring a candidate caption’s similarity to it is


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gold: A photo of the coast with waves crashing Gold: Color photo of the interior of a Roselyn       Gold: Delicious pink margarita sits on   Gold: Pink backgrou nd with the words We're
onto rocks and a pier in the background.       Bakery store. Image credit: Indy Star                a table full of salsa and chips          supporting Carers Week 2022. The Carers Week
                                                                                                                                             logo and dates 6-12 June are at the bottom of the
Ours: A view of the sea from the top of         Ours: A bakery with a rack of donuts on the         Ours: Two margaritas on a table.         image
Ravenscar. The waves are crashing against the   counter.                                            ClipCap: cocktail is the perfect drink
rocks and the sky is blue with white clouds.                                                                                                 Ours: National Carers Week 2022. 6-12 June.
                                                ClipCap: a bakery in the neighborhood               for a party!
ClipCap: stormy seas return after western                                                                                                    ClipCap: we are growing exponentially as a brand
christian holiday



Figure 3: Selected tweets with the user-written alt-text alongside our prediction and ClipCap’s. We
see that by conditioning on the tweet text, our model is able to focus on relevant details in the images,
reference named places, and provide better transcription despite not being trained on OCR.


not truly reflective of how well that caption describes the image. Going through the results manually,
we often find instances where the model’s output is actually more appropriate as alt-text than what
the user wrote, or where they are both functional but phrased differently enough that there is little
string overlap, leading to low scores that do not necessarily reflect output quality. We thus conclude
that these automated metrics, while informative, are not sufficient for assessing model performance.
We therefore also perform two rounds of human evaluation as described above, with results shown
in Table 2. On the left we observe that in roughly two thirds of images the human annotators judged
our model’s output to be both more fluent and descriptive than that of the frozen ClipCap baseline,
and annotators generally agreed on rankings. To the right we see similar rankings albeit with a
tighter margin when we compare our system against the ClipCap trained from scratch on our data.
This matches the findings of our automated metrics, and supports our hypothesis that conditioning
on context from the tweet yields higher quality descriptions.

6.4       Q UALITATIVE I NSPECTION

In order to analyze what specific types of differences lead to these improvements and also what kinds
of errors the model still makes, we now describe some observations from qualitative inspection.
Figure 3 shows some example tweets from our dataset, accompanied by the actual user-written alt-
text as well as our model and a frozen pretrained ClipCap’s predictions. We generally see that our
system is able to focus on contextually relevant details, such as the donuts in the bakery. It’s also able
to leverage text in the tweet to more accurately transcribe digital text in graphics. However it does
at times still struggle with counting, and sometimes omits thorough visual details. ClipCap provides
reasonable albeit simplistic captions for more natural images, but struggles with images that fall
farther outside the Conceptual Captions distribution. It is also unable to incorporate information
from the tweet itself, or use that to influence which parts of the image to focus on.


7       C ONCLUSION

In this work we presented an approach for alt-text generation that conditions both on image features
and the raw text of the corresponding social media post, and collected a new dataset for this task from
Twitter. Despite limitations discussed in the Appendix below, we believe this work is an important
step forward and has potential for various downstream applications. While the most obvious use
case is to simply use the model to produce alt-text for images that do not have any, we could also
see this approach being used in concert with human annotators, perhaps providing a starting point
for captions. Additionally, since our model can form a conditional likelihood on the caption, we
could use it to flag poorly written alt-text and notify users to reread the guidelines and rephrase their
description. In summary, we believe this is an important task and hope that our work encourages
future research that leverages the surrounding social media context in which these images appear.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

Given the limitations of our approach (discussed in more detail in Appendix A) we find it critical to
emphasize that simply applying this method as-is to producing alt-text captions in an actual social
media production setting would be premature and likely harm the user experience for BLV users.
Accessibility technology must demonstrably be of more utility than other alternatives in order to
justifiably be adopted, and while we hope that our work is a step in that direction, we have not
yet conclusively determined that that bar has been passed. The research we perform here has the
potential to be co-opted by social media platforms as a cheaper alternative to hiring manual alt-
text writers, or having users write their own alt-text as is Twitter’s current approach, which would
arguably worsen the online experience for BLV users whose accessibility needs are already to a large
extent unmet in this regard. Furthermore as with any open-ended text generation system trained on
social media, our model does have the capacity to produce toxic language, regurgitate sensitive user
information, and produce insensitive and harmful captions for personal photos.

R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning, 2022.

Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Joshua Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani
  Marathe, Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Jenia Jitsev, Simon Kornblith, Pang Wei Koh, Gabriel
  Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openflamingo, March 2023. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7733589.

Aspen Belle., Vanessa Goh., Akshay Kumar., Richard Pranjatno., Pui Man Yip., Umayangani Wick-
  ramaratne., and Humphrey O. Obie. Alt-texify: A pipeline to generate alt-text from svg visualiza-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to
  Software Engineering - ENASE,, pp. 275–281. INSTICC, SciTePress, 2022. ISBN 978-989-758-
  568-5. doi: 10.5220/0010994600003176.

Raffaella Bernardi, Ruket Cakici, Desmond Elliott, Aykut Erdem, Erkut Erdem, Nazli Ikizler-
  Cinbis, Frank Keller, Adrian Muscat, and Barbara Plank. Automatic description generation from
  images: A survey of models, datasets, and evaluation measures. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 55:409–442, 2016.

Domenico Chiarella, Justin Yarbrough, and Christopher A-L Jackson. Using alt text to make science
  twitter more accessible for people with visual impairments. Nature Communications, 11, 2020.

Sanjana Shivani Chintalapati, Jonathan Bragg, and Lucy Lu Wang. A dataset of alt texts from hci
  publications: Analyses and uses towards producing more descriptive alt texts of data visualiza-
  tions in scientific papers. Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
  Computers and Accessibility, 2022.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. Meteor universal: Language specific translation evaluation for
 any target language. In Proceedings of the ninth workshop on statistical machine translation, pp.
 376–380, 2014.

Ramy Eskander, Peter Martigny, and Shubhanshu Mishra. Multilingual named entity recognition
  in tweets using wikidata. In The fourth annual WeCNLP (West Coast NLP) Summit (WeCNLP),
  virtual. Zenodo, Oct 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7014432.

Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta, Forrest Iandola, Rupesh K Srivastava, Li Deng, Piotr Dollár, Jianfeng
  Gao, Xiaodong He, Margaret Mitchell, John C Platt, et al. From captions to visual concepts and
  back. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  1473–1482, 2015.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cole Gleason, Patrick Carrington, Cameron Cassidy, Meredith Ringel Morris, Kris M. Kitani, and
  Jeffrey P. Bigham. “it’s almost like they’re trying to hide it”: How user-provided image descrip-
  tions have failed to make twitter accessible. The World Wide Web Conference, 2019.

Cole Gleason, Amy Pavel, Emma McCamey, Christina Low, Patrick Carrington, Kris M. Kitani,
  and Jeffrey P. Bigham. Twitter a11y: A browser extension to make twitter images accessible.
  Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2020.

Margot Hanley, Solon Barocas, Karen Levy, Shiri Azenkot, and Helen Nissenbaum. Computer
 vision and conflicting values: Describing people with automated alt text. In Proceedings of the
 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES ’21, pp. 543–554, New York, NY,
 USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450384735. doi: 10.1145/3461
 702.3462620. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462620.

Brienna Herold, James Waller, and Raja Kushalnagar. Applying the stereotype content model to
  assess disability bias in popular pre-trained NLP models underlying AI-based assistive technolo-
  gies. In Ninth Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT-
  2022), pp. 58–65, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.slpat-1.8. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.slpat-1.8.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR, 2015.

Elisa Kreiss, Cynthia Bennett, Shayan Hooshmand, Eric Zelikman, Meredith Ringel Morris, and
  Christopher Potts. Context matters for image descriptions for accessibility: Challenges for ref-
  erenceless evaluation metrics. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4685–4697, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.309.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.309.

Elisa Kreiss, Fei Fang, Noah Goodman, and Christopher Potts. Concadia: Towards image-based
  text generation with a purpose. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4667–4684, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.308.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.308.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.

Yang Li, Gang Li, Luheng He, Jingjie Zheng, Hong Li, and Zhiwei Guan. Widget captioning:
  Generating natural language description for mobile user interface elements. In Proceedings of the
  2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5495–
  5510, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/20
  20.emnlp-main.443. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.443.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. Automatic evaluation of machine translation quality using
  longest common subsequence and skip-bigram statistics. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-04), pp. 605–612, 2004.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.

Meta, Nov 2021. URL https://tech.fb.com/artificial-intelligence/2021/0
 1/how-facebook-is-using-ai-to-improve-photo-descriptions-for-p
 eople-who-are-blind-or-visually-impaired/.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shubhanshu Mishra, Sijun He, and Luca Belli. Assessing demographic bias in named entity
  recognition. In Proceedings of the AKBC Workshop on Bias in Automatic Knowledge Graph
  Construction, 2020. arXiv, 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2008.03415. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2008.03415.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
  summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  2556–2565, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P18-1238. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1238.
Jake Snell, Karl Ridgeway, Renjie Liao, Brett D Roads, Michael C Mozer, and Richard S Zemel.
  Learning to generate images with perceptual similarity metrics. In 2017 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 4277–4281. IEEE, 2017.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
  description evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4566–4575, 2015.
Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru Erhan. Show and tell: A neural
  image caption generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 3156–3164, 2015.
Shaomei Wu, Jeffrey Wieland, Omid Farivar, and Julie Schiller. Automatic alt-text: Computer-
  generated image descriptions for blind users on a social network service. Proceedings of the 2017
  ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, 2017.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     L IMITATIONS

This work still has several limitations which are important to acknowledge. The dataset we collected
and trained our model on is variable in quality as the gold references are user-written, and this
necessarily introduces a gap between the training objective and actual alt-text best practices. It
could also be improved with more sophisticated identification and removal of bots, and using entity
linking instead of just named entity recognition to provide more finegrained descriptions of people
in lieu of their names. The model itself, while it frequently produces reasonable captions, still at
times makes mistakes regarding specific details, is imprecise at transcribing text found in images as
it does not contain an OCR system, and occasionally outputs the tweet text verbatim which despite
at times serving as a reasonably descriptive caption is nonetheless redundant. Since our system
conditions on an accompanying social media post, it is not easily adaptable to settings where images
appear without any textual context, or where the specific section of text meant to correspond to
the image is ambiguous such as in a long form web post or news article. We also rely on having
a pretrained image encoder which means that the visual features extracted cannot be informed by
the context, they instead must feed into the language model as independent information signals.
Finally, it’s worth emphasizing that our human evaluation is performed using sighted reviewers, and
we therefore cannot make any claims about the downstream efficacy of our method without a larger
scale study using BLV users which was unfortunately beyond the scope of this work.


B     DATASET C OLLECTION

B.1   F ILTERING

Reply tweets were included, but retweets were not. We filtered based on tweets containing still im-
ages, as alt-text for GIFs tends to be of very low quality and requires different modeling approaches.
We also restricted our search to only include tweets which Twitter’s language identification model
categorized as English, thereby also ensuring that they all contained at least some amount of tweet
text. Additional preprocessing included stripping all leading phrases such as “Image of” or “Photo
of” (as these are generally considered redundant for alt-text purposes), removing any examples with
alt-text that were identical to the text of the tweet itself or simply contained placeholder text such
as “Image”, and removing any examples with alt-text containing URLs, user handles, and hashtags.
We also only included alt-text that was at least 4 space-separated tokens long, as text shorter than
this is rarely sufficiently descriptive.

B.2   D EDUPLICATION

We only retained the oldest of any images that contained identical alt-text. This largely eliminated
any exact duplicates posted multiple times by spammy users. Next we identified clusters of visual
matches based on their downscaled pixel overlap. To do this, we resized images and center cropped
to a max size of 32 × 32 pixels, computed all pairwise pixel diffs within our data, and agglomera-
tively grouped them into clusters using a < 100 differing pixels threshold to the nearest match as
a cutoff for cluster membership. Within each cluster, we only retained the oldest tweet. It’s also
worth mentioning that while we did consider further deduplication based on SSIM (Snell et al.,
2017) similarity and ngram similarity of the alt-text itself, these approaches proved computationally
infeasible.


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We train our models with a batch size of 100 and an initial learning rate of 1e − 4 using the Adam
optimization algorithm (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Our prefixes are of size k = 10. This allows training
to fit on a single A6000 GPU. Our implementation is written in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and
inherits some code from the ClipCap (Mokady et al., 2021) repository. Experiments train in roughly
6-18 hours depending on the model, the hyperparameter settings, and when early stopping happens
(we perform early stopping based on model likelihood on the held-out validation set).


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    H UMAN E VALUATION S ETUP
For each example, turkers were shown the image, the original tweet the image was from (including
its text and any other images it contained), and the two candidate alt-text captions. They were never
shown the original user-written alt-text. After providing them with a detailed explanation of alt-text
and the list of desirable criteria according to Twitter’s accessibility guide, we asked two questions:
first which candidate alt-text was more fluent, and second which had a better literal description of
the image. The models were also anonymized and their order was shuffled.
In order to ensure high quality labels, we performed a qualification round on our reviewers. Con-
sidering only turkers who had completed over 10, 000 HITs, we showed them three example images
where the two candidate alt-text captions were the gold user-written reference and a manually writ-
ten, intentionally clearly lower quality caption. Only reviewers who successfully picked the real
user-written caption for both fluency and descriptiveness for all three examples were allowed to par-
ticipate in the final larger scale comparisons between our model and frozen ClipCap, and our model
and ClipCap from scratch.


                                                 14
