Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IV K NOW QA: A SSESSING THE R EASONING A BILITY
OF LLM S VIA O PEN -D OMAIN Q UESTION A NSWERING
OVER K NOWLEDGE BASE AND T EXT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited impressive generation capabilities,
         but they suffer from hallucinations when solely relying on their internal knowledge,
         especially when answering questions that require less commonly known informa-
         tion. Retrieval-augmented LLMs have emerged as a potential solution to ground
         LLMs in external knowledge. Nonetheless, recent approaches have primarily em-
         phasized retrieval from unstructured text corpora, owing to its seamless integration
         into prompts. When using structured data such as knowledge graphs, most meth-
         ods simplify it into natural text, neglecting the underlying structures. Moreover,
         a significant gap in the current landscape is the absence of a realistic benchmark
         for evaluating the effectiveness of grounding LLMs on heterogeneous knowledge
         sources (e.g., knowledge base and text). To fill this gap, we have curated a com-
         prehensive dataset that poses two unique challenges: (1) Two-hop multi-source
         questions that require retrieving information from both open-domain structured and
         unstructured knowledge sources; retrieving information from structured knowledge
         sources is a critical component in correctly answering the questions. (2) Genera-
         tion of symbolic queries (e.g., SPARQL for Wikidata) is a key requirement, which
         adds another layer of challenge. Our dataset is created using a combination of
         automatic generation through predefined reasoning chains and human annotation.
         We also introduce a novel approach that leverages multiple retrieval tools, including
         text passage retrieval and symbolic language-assisted retrieval. Our model outper-
         forms previous approaches by a significant margin, demonstrating its effectiveness
         in addressing the above-mentioned reasoning challenges.


1   I NTRODUCTION

LLMs have shown exceptional performance in multi-hop question-answering (QA) tasks over text
(TextQA) (Rajpurkar et al., 2018; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2017; Trivedi et al., 2022a;
Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020), tables (TableQA) (Yu et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2017; Pasupat
and Liang, 2015; Chen et al., 2019), and knowledge-bases (KBQA) (Gu et al., 2021; Yih et al.,
2015; Talmor and Berant, 2018; Bao et al., 2016), where the supporting fact is contained in a single
knowledge source – structured or unstructured. However, in many real-world scenarios, a QA system
may need to retrieve information from both unstructured and structured knowledge sources; failing to
do so results in insufficient information to address user queries.
While existing QA benchmarks provide diverse perspectives for evaluating models (Table 1), they are
limited in assessing the performance of retrieval-augmented language models across heterogeneous
knowledge sources in the following aspects: (1) Closed-book QA: Closed-book questions do not
accurately reflect the real-world setting where individuals generally have access to diverse knowledge
sources on the Internet; (2) Automatically generated data: The lack of human verification results in
erroneous data; (3) Imbalanced emphasis across different knowledge sources: Current benchmarks
feature knowledge sources with varying levels of importance. Answers may be found in multiple
sources, leading models to prioritize textual sources while underutilizing structured knowledge
sources; (4) Suboptimal use of structured knowledge: Structured knowledge sources are typically
treated as textual sources by linearizing triplets from the knowledge base or rows/columns from


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tables, missing the opportunity to fully realize the benefit of highly-precise structured knowledge by
probing them via symbolic queries.
Despite the inherent challenges, being able to generate structured queries effectively can offer a
number of benefits. First, unlike a query to retrieve text passages, the structured query itself can
share the responsibility of reasoning Liu et al. (2022). For example, for the question “How many
awards has Neil Armstrong received?”, to get an answer from a knowledge base such
as Wikidata Vrandečić and Krötzsch (2014), a SPARQL query Pérez et al. (2006) can use an
aggregation function to return the numerical number as the final result as shown in Appendix A.5.
In contrast, a text retriever needs to locate all the relevant passages and rely on a reader module to
get the final result. The commonly used readers often come with an input length constraint. The
number of returned passages could be too many to fit into the reader’s context, causing a wrong
answer. Even when the context length is not an issue, even the best LLMs have difficulties in locating
the answer Liu et al. (2023a). Besides, there is less room for ambiguity in structured queries. For
example, a dense retriever cannot easily distinguish between similar song titles such as “I’ll be
good to you” and “I have been good to you” by different singers. On the other hand,
given the right identifier of the entity, the structured knowledge search engine can return the relevant
information for the exact entity.
In this work, we propose D IV K NOW QA, a novel fact-centric multi-hop QA benchmark that requires
models to utilize heterogeneous knowledge sources equitably in order to answer a question. We
perform the first study to assess the reasoning ability of LLMs, via jointly exploiting open-domain
QA over heterogeneous knowledge sources. In particular, we have chosen Knowledge Base (KB)
as our primary case study for the structured source, and we have created a dataset comprising 940
human-annotated examples. Additionally, each entry in our dataset includes a corresponding symbolic
SPARQL query to facilitate the retrieval of information from the KB. To generate the questions, we
construct a question collection pipeline comprising three key steps: text-based QA sampling, KB
question generation, and question composition, all while minimizing the need for human annotation
efforts.
To set up a baseline, in addition to benchmarking on standard and tool-augmented LLMs, we
propose a Diverse rEtrieval Tool Augmented LLM (D ET LLM) to address the challenges posed by
D IV K NOW QA. D ET LLM decomposes a multi-hop question into multiple single-hop questions, and
adopts two novel strategies: (1) symbolic query generation to retrieve supportive text from a KB by
transforming a single-hop natural question into a SPARQL query, and (2) retrieval tool design, which
includes a textual retriever and a symbolic query generation tool to recall relevant evidence from
heterogeneous knowledge sources. Our method shows improvements of up to 4.2% when compared
to existing methods.


2     T HE D IV K NOW QA DATASET

2.1   DATASET C OLLECTION

Our goal is to create a method for generating complex questions from diverse knowledge sources,
making each source indispensable; and we aim to do so with a minimal human annotation effort.
Additionally, we wish to provide Wikidata entity and relation IDs to support structured query-based
knowledge retrieval. Figure 1 depicts our proposed method. We first sample a single-hop text question
from the Natural Question dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) as an anchor, to which we link to a
relevant Wikidata triplet. Then single-hop KB questions are generated based on the sampled triplets
thereby using the anchor question to automatically compose a heterogeneous multi-hop question.
Human annotators finally verify the quality of the machine-generated question and rewrite the
question that needs revision. In the following, we elaborate on the steps.

Natural Questions as Anchors The Natural Question (NQ) dataset is a question-answering
dataset containing tuples of (question, answer, title, passage), where title and
passage are respectively the title of the Wikipedia page and the passage containing the answer. The
questions in NQ were collected from real-world user queries issued to the Google search engine, and it
contains 307K training examples. We concentrate on constructing a multi-hop dataset linked through
the initial step’s single-hop answer. To achieve this, we extract question-answer pairs where the


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparing benchmarks for heterogeneous question-answering tasks. The column OpenR
stands for open information retrieval, Human for human-written questions, EI for equitable importance
of knowledge sources, and SGT for structured ground truth.

              Dataset                                KB   Text   Table   OpenR   Human   EI   SGT
              HybridQA (Chen et al., 2020)            ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✓     ✗
              OTT-QA (Chen et al., 2021a)             ✗    ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓     ✓     ✗
              NQ-Tables (Herzig et al., 2021)         ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✗     ✗     ✗
              TAT-QA (Zhu et al., 2021)               ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✓     ✗
              MultimodelQA (Talmor et al., 2021)      ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✗     ✗
              Manymodelqa (Hannan et al., 2020)       ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✗     ✗
              FinQA (Chen et al., 2021b)              ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✓     ✗
              HetpQA (Shen et al., 2022)              ✗    ✓      ✓        ✗       ✓     ✗     ✗
              CompMix (Christmann et al., 2023)       ✗    ✓      ✓        ✓       ✓     ✗     ✗
              WikiMovies-10K (Miller et al., 2016)   ✓     ✓       ✗       ✓       ✓     ✗     ✗
              MetaQA (Zhang et al., 2018)            ✓     ✓       ✗       ✓       ✓     ✗     ✗
              D IV K NOW QA (Ours)                   ✓     ✓      ✗       ✓       ✓      ✓    ✓



question contains a succinct answer of up to 5 words to ensure the quality of the resulting composed
question.

Linking Natural Questions to Wikidata We adopt the notion of bridge entity from Yang et al.
(2018) to describe the single-hop answer in the initial step when breaking down a multi-hop question.
We explore two linking options, each involving a unique choice of bridging an entity to connect the nat-
ural question to Wikidata. We explain the options using the example question “Who plays Mary
Poppins in Mary Poppins Returns?” with the answer “Emily Blunt”. (a) Text →
KB Approach: We treat the answer “Emily Blunt” as the bridge entity, and search for a Wiki-
data triplet where “Emily Blunt” is the subject, for example, (Emily Blunt, sibling,
Felicity Blunt). (b) KB → Text Approach: In this alternative method, we recognize the
question entity that exists in Wikidata, in this case, “Mary Poppins Returns”, as the bridge
entity. For simplicity, we only consider the entity mentioned in the Wikipedia title. We then link to
the Wikidata triplet using it as the object, leading to triplets such as “(William Weatherall
Wilkins, present in work, Mary Poppins Returns)”.

Selection of KB Triplets To maintain an equal emphasis on both structured and unstructured
knowledge sources, we implement a meticulous selection process for KB triplets to ensure that the
associated knowledge cannot be easily obtained by merely retrieving information from the textual
source (Wikipedia passages). We retain triplets (sub, relation, obj), where either the subject sub is
not linked to a Wikipedia page or the object obj does not exist within the Wikipedia page associated
with the subject. This ensures that simply retrieving the Wikipedia passage for the sub is unlikely
to yield an answer to a question involving sub and obj, thereby requiring the model to utilize the
KB. Furthermore, when generating questions in the KB → Text linking option, we selectively retain
triplets where only one object is associated with the given relation and subject This approach ensures
the completeness and uniqueness of the reasoning chain. For example, given a composed question,
“Who plays Mary Poppins in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s notable work?”, “Mary Poppins Returns” is
one of the notable works from “Lin-Manuel Miranda”. By querying KB given the subject “Mary
Poppins Returns” and the relation “notable work”, we will locate multiple answers rather than the
single bridge entity “Mary Poppins Returns”, posing a challenge to infer the second sing-hop question
“Who plays Mary Poppins in Mary Poppins Returns?”.

Generating Single-Hop KB Questions We then create single-hop questions from the selected
(sub, relation, obj) triplets. These questions are designed to emphasize the relationship between
sub and obj, with obj being the expected answer. For instance, for the KB triplet “(Emily
Blunt, sibling, Felicity Blunt)”, we expect to generate a question like “Who is
the sibling of Emily Blunt?”. For this, we employ the gpt-turbo-3.5 LLM from
OpenAI; the prompt can be found in Appendix A.1.

Generating Heterogeneous Multi-Hop Questions In this stage, we wish to create a multi-hop
question by composing a textual question and a KB question. We generate such heterogeneous
questions by carefully chaining two single-hop questions together. D IV K NOW QA supports three


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


question types: short entity, yes/no, and aggregate questions, and two question composition orders:
Text → KB and KB → Text. This combination results in a total of five question types, as we
construct aggregate questions following only the Text → KB order. We employ gpt-turbo-3.5
as a question composer to connect two single-hop questions. This is achieved by substituting the
entity mentioned in the outer question with a rephrased version of the first question. The prompt for
generating the multi-hop questions is given in Appendix A.2. Our generation method for different
question types is discussed as follows.

Short Entity Question We use a factoid entity as the final answer. The final answer can be the
object from Wikidata or the factoid answer from NQ.

Yes/No Question In contrast to Short Entity questions, Yes/No questions involve an additional step.
Initially, the original question is reformulated into a verification-style question typically starting with
phrases like “Is/Was/Were/Does/Do/Did”. This new question includes a candidate answer for
verification purposes. For instance, let’s consider the original question “What grade were they
in High School Musical 1?” with a known answer of “juniors”. To create a verification
question, we might rephrase it as “Were they seniors in High School Musical 1?”
and include the verifying answer “seniors” within the question. Generating the candidate answer
for verification can be a complex task as it requires choosing a verifying answer that aligns well
with the context of the question. Sampling incorrect distractors as verifying answers is also a part
of the process. These distractors should be incorrect but closely related to the answer, and they are
generated by prompting gpt-turbo-3.5. This approach ensures that the verification process is
robust and accurate, preventing situations where the verifying answer deviates from the question’s
context and potentially leads to a simplistic answer “no” during evaluation.

Aggregate Question We formulate aggregating questions in the “Text → KB” composition
order, where the outermost question pertains to counting the number of associated triplets based
on the given subject and relation. For instance, the outermost question “How many awards
does Milton Friedman receive?” arises from the KB triplets of the form (Milton
Friedman, award received, award name)” with 10 such award name objects. In
such cases, we leverage the aggregate feature offered by the structural query (i.e., SPARQL).

2.2   H UMAN A NNOTATION

We recruited five individuals, three undergraduate and two graduate students with experience in the
field of NLP for data verification and annotation. Each question underwent a verification and rewriting
process involving two annotators. To mitigate any potential annotation bias, we presented each
question to both annotators, with the order of examples shown to annotators randomized. Annotators
were tasked with assessing the quality of KB question generation, and they had three options to
choose from: “Accept”, “Revise”, or “Reject”. When a question required revision, annotators were
instructed to make modifications while preserving the focus on the subject and relation and keeping
the answer unchanged. Additionally, they were responsible for evaluating the quality of complex
questions and providing necessary revisions. The instruction provided to human annotators is shown
in Appendix A.4. Annotators were duly compensated for their valuable contributions to our study. Out
of 1,000 examples that were annotated, 757 examples received unanimous approval, 183 underwent
revisions, and 60 were rejected. Both unanimously accepted and revised examples were included in
the dataset.

2.3   DATASET S TATISTICS AND A NALYSIS

In this section, we analyze the question types and KB single-hop relation types in D IV K NOW QA.

Question Central Word Taking inspiration from (Yang et al., 2018), we designate the first three
words of a question as the Center Question Words (CQW. We adopt this approach because our
questions typically do not contain comparison queries, and a majority of question words are found
at the beginning of the question. Appendix A.6(a) provides a visual representation of CQW in
D IV K NOW QA.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              1. Selecting anchor
                                          2. Linking TextQA with KB      3. KB triplet selection
              TextQA from NQ

                                                                       (William Weatherall Wilkins,
               Q1: Who plays Mary                                      present in work, Mary
                                                                                               ✔
               Poppins in Mary                                         Poppins Returns)
               Poppins Returns?                                        (Emily Blunt, sibling,
                                                                       Felicity Blunt)         ✔
               A1: Emily Blunt
                                                                       (Emily Blunt, date of birth,
                                                                       23 Feb 1983)            ✗



                                          Compose( In which work is
               1.Who plays Mary                                        1. In which work is William
                                          William Weatherall Wilkins
               Poppins in the work in                                  Weatherall Wilkins present?
                                          present?, Who plays Mary
               which William Weatherall                                2.Who is the sibling of Emily
                                          Poppins in Mary Poppins
               Wilkins is present?                                     Blunt?
                                          Returns?)


                6. Human verification     5. Using LLM to generate     4. Using LLM to generate
                                          multi-hop questions          single-hop KB question

                 Figure 1: An overview of D IV K NOW QA data generation process.

KB Relation Types We also analyze the distribution of relations by counting the frequency of
different relations that appear in the KB triplets used to construct the single-hop KB questions.
Appendix A.6(b) features the distribution of diverse relations.

Anecdotal Examples for Representative Types In A.7, we present illustrative examples drawn
from the D IV K NOW QA benchmark for each of our five question composition types. These examples
serve to showcase how our dataset necessitates information retrieval from diverse sources in varying
orders. Additionally, they highlight that the answer types require models to perform tasks such
as answer span extraction, candidate answer verification, and information aggregation based on
relevance.

3     D ET LLM: D IVERSE R ETRIEVAL T OOL AUGMENTED LLM
We now introduce our diverse retrieval tool augmented LLM (D ET LLM) and show its promising
capability on the proposed D IV K NOW QA benchmark by unifying the retrieval ability from the
structured and unstructured knowledge sources.
To tackle a complex question, we follow the chain-of-thought (CoT) framework Wei et al. (2022)
to decompose a complex question into single-hop questions where each single-hop question is
knowledge-intensive, requiring supportive fact retrieval from a knowledge source.
We design a retrieval tool capable of retrieving from heterogeneous knowledge sources. For un-
structured text knowledge, a dense passage retriever Izacard et al. (2022) is employed to retrieve
relevant passages. For structured knowledge, we consider two modalities of structured knowledge
to maximize the relevant information coverage. First, we transform the structured data into text
passages by linearizing the relation triplets into passages in which case a sparse text retriever can
be used to detect similar sources. Second, we propose a symbolic query generation module to map
a natural language query to a structured query (e.g., SPARQL) to directly query against the KB
(e.g., Wikidata). The benefits are twofold: (1) pinpointing precise knowledge, and (2) leveraging
the compositionality of the query language and reducing the mere reliance on the language model’s
reasoning responsibility. Appendix A.8 shows the D ET LLM flow for querying an LLM.

3.1   Q UESTION D ECOMPOSITION AND P LANNING

Our approach to answering a complex multi-hop question is inspired by the conceptual framework of
DSP (Khattab et al., 2022). When dealing with a question that involves n hops, we query the LLM
n times to generate retrieval queries and retrieve information from a knowledge source. The final
query is used to ultimately arrive at the final answer, utilizing the retrieved passage to answer the
last single-hop question. This process results in a total of n + 1 interactions with the LLM. At the


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table 2: Answer and Sub-Step Retrieval Accuracy on D IV K NOW QA.

                                         EM      F1       Recall     H1-R      H2-R
                  Vanilla Prompt         26.0    28.3     26.8       42.2      -
                  ReAct                  16.1    18.4     19.0       -         -
                  DSP                    27.9    31.0     31.2       57.6      41.2
                  D ET LLM (our)         32.1    35.7     35.6       70.1      47.1


j-th LLM prompting, the LLM’s task is to utilize the previously retrieved information to answer the
j − 1 single-hop question. It then dissects the original question Q into the j-th subsequent single-hop
questions qj , which serve as a retriever query to gather information from a knowledge source.

3.2      M ULTI -S OURCE K NOWLEDGE R ETRIEVAL

In addressing the single-hop questions, our approach entails searching across diverse knowledge
sources to gather supporting facts. To answer the subsequent single-hop question qj , we begin by
having the LLM generate semantically diverse queries, denoted as Queryj = {query1j , . . . , querytj }.
We set the LLM decoding temperature to 0.7 to sample diverse queries.
In our approach, we treat unstructured and structured knowledge separately and retrieve relevant
information from both knowledge sources. As mentioned, for unstructured knowledge, we use a dense
retriever Contriever Izacard et al. (2022) to retrieve relevant passages, while for structured knowledge,
we retrieve relevant information from both textual and structured formats. The preparation of the
textual knowledge base involves linearizing KB triplets (sub, relation, obj) into a string format
“sub relation obj” after which we create a retrieval index for efficient passage retrieval using
a sparse text retriever BM25 Robertson et al. (2009). The Contriever, trained on natural language
corpus, is adaptable to unstructured knowledge but struggles when faced with linearized structured
knowledge because it lacks natural language formatting. In contrast, the sparse retriever BM25
performs better with structured knowledge by using a keyword-based search methodology. We show
the ablation study in Section 4.3.
In addition, we generate SPARQL queries to execute against the Wikidata engine to retrieve further
relevant information. Our retrieval tool thus comprises three components: a sparse retriever, a dense
retriever, and a symbolic query language generation module. These elements collectively enable the
comprehensive retrieval of information from heterogeneous knowledge sources.

3.3      M ULTI -S OURCE K NOWLEDGE R ANKING

To consolidate the retrieved information obtained from the tool, we perform a ranking of information
 from various knowledge sources. The goal is to select the top-k most relevant pieces of information.
This selection is necessary because of the inherent length constraint of the language model, which
 prevents us from incorporating all the retrieved information into the prompt. To achieve this ranking,
 our approach leverages the off-of-shelf cross-encoder model Reimers and Gurevych (2019) to
 assess the relevance of each piece of retrieved information in the context of a single-hop question.
We use the sentence-transformers package implementation with the model checkpoint
 cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-6
-v2.1

4       B ENCHMARKING

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Baselines (1) ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023): We employ OpenAI’s ChatGPT model
(gpt-3.5-turbo) by single-step query inputting the question and retrieved-context and
    1
        sentence-transformers: https://www.sbert.net/


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Table 3: Ablation Study on the Retrieval Strategy.

                                               EM     F1     Recall H1-R H2-R
                 w/o SPARQL
                 Text-KB(Sparse)               27.9   31.0   31.2     57.6     41.2
                 Text-KB(Dense)                22.7   26.1   26.9     54.9     32.0
                 Text(Sparse)-KB(Sparse)       26.4   29.8   30.2     60.0     41.2
                 Text(Dense)-KB(Sparse)        30.7   35.0   35.5     68.9     46.8
                 w/ SPARQL
                 Text-KB(Sparse)               28.8   31.9   32.9     58.0     42.9
                 Text-KB(Dense)                31.2   34.7   35.9     64.3     42.6
                 Text(Sparse)-KB(Sparse)       28.5   31.8   32.0     61.5     42.1
                 D ET LLM (our)                32.1   35.7   35.6     70.1     47.1


obtaining its response as the final answer. (2) DSP (Khattab et al., 2022): We apply the demonstrate-
search-predict framework to iteratively address complex QA tasks with the assistance of retrieved
context. (3) ReAct (Yao et al., 2023): It leverages a synergistic approach, combining reasoning with
tool usage. It involves verbally generating a reasoning trace and issuing the necessary commands
to invoke a tool, which then takes action accordingly. We use gpt-3.5-turbo as the backbone
model.

Evaluation Metrics To assess the accuracy and relevance of various models for factoid questions,
we rely on established metrics. We report the exact match and F1 score for final answer quality, fol-
lowing the methodology of Yang et al. (2018). Besides, we report the Recall score indicating whether
the ground-truth answer is a substring in prediction since LLM may generate extra information. In
addition, we report the retrieval accuracy for each decomposed single-hop question denoted as H1-R
and H1-2 for the two-hop question.

Implementation Details To ensure a comprehensive and equitable comparison, we offer baseline
model access to both structured knowledge and unstructured knowledge as retrieval sources. In the
case of the baseline model, the KB is converted into linearized passages, which are then combined with
the unstructured knowledge, creating a unified source for retrieval. We use BM25 (Robertson et al.,
2009) and Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022) as sparse and dense retrieval tools respectively. Unless
specified otherwise, we experiment with a few-shot prompt that includes three human-annotated
demonstrations along with task instructions to guide the model generation process.

4.2   M AIN R ESULTS

Comparing with State-of-the-Art LLMs Table 2 presents the model performance results on the
D IV K NOW QA. ReAct exhibits lower performance compared to the Vanilla prompt. The retrieval
tool created for ReAct is specialized for querying unstructured knowledge. As the presence of
irrelevant passages distracts the LLM Chen et al. (2023); Mallen et al. (2023), the iterative reasoning
accumulates errors, leading to less accurate answers. Conversely, DSP outperforms both Vanilla
Prompt and ReAct, thanks to its robust search module designed to engage with frozen retrievers.
DSP enhances a single retrieval query into multiple queries, employing a fusion function to rank
candidate passages and identify the most relevant one. However, the search module cannot effectively
retrieve structured knowledge. Our model stands out as the top-performing model, demonstrating its
capability to generate symbolic language for retrieval from structured knowledge.

Retrieval Performance Table 2 also presents the single-step retrieval accuracy. Among the baseline
methods, comparing single-step generation e.g. Vanilla Prompt with the multi-step generation e.g.
ReAct and DSP, the retrieval accuracy increases due to the decomposed query from the multi-step
generation process. On the other hand, the D ET LLM shows stronger retrieval performance compared
to DSP due to the careful retrieval tool design, the unstructured and structured knowledge is treated
separately. This finding underscores the importance of having a robust retrieval strategy to provide
reliable and focused information, grounding the LLM on relevant supportive facts.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 4: Breakdown Analysis on SPARQL generation.

                                                       QID    QID+REL         QID*
                 Text-KB(Sparse)                       26.5     22.4          6.91
                 Text-KB(Dense)                        31.8     27.6          7.87
                 Text(Sparse)-KB(Sparse)               26.3     22.6          7.34
                 Text(Dense)-KB(Sparse)                29.7     26.5          7.66
      Table 5: Experiment results using Oracle knowledge source retrieval in each sub-step.

                                       EM      F1        Recall   H1-R    H2-R
                       Oracle_Text     26.8    31.3      33.4     96.4    51.7
                       Oracle_KB       38.1    40.0      42.2     100.0   62.1
                       Oracle_All      48.7    52.2      52.8     100.0   96.7


4.3   D ISCUSSION

Ablation Study Table 3 presents the results of an ablation study involving three key factors: a) the
integration of heterogeneous knowledge sources, b) the choice between dense and sparse retrievers,
and c) the incorporation of SPARQL. Our findings indicate that optimal performance is achieved
when handling heterogeneous knowledge sources separately, combined with careful retriever tool
selection. The unsupervised dense retriever (i.e., Contriever), trained on natural language corpus,
demonstrates adaptability to unstructured knowledge but loses its advantage when dealing with
linearized structured knowledge due to the absence of natural language formatting. Conversely,
the sparse retriever BM25 performs better on structured knowledge, relying on keyword-based
search methodologies. Furthermore, the SPARQL tool consistently outperforms its counterparts in all
settings, showcasing improvements regardless of the integration of knowledge sources and the choice
of retriever.

SPARQL Generation Analysis Symbolic language generation is an essential tool, which is
executed against the Wikidata engine to assist with structured knowledge retrieval. We provide
a detailed breakdown analysis of SPARQL generation in Table 4. “QID” represents the percentage of
examples with entity IDs correctly linked to Wikidata. Additionally, we present the percentage of
examples linked to the Wikidata in terms of both entity IDs and relation IDs denoted as “QID+REL”.
The last column, labeled “QID*”, showcases the percentage of examples with great potential for
accurate identification through entity disambiguation. In our experimental process, we first identify
the entity name from the decomposed question as a retriever query and then link the entity from the
query to Wikidata. The returned results provide a list of candidate Wikidata entities, from which
we select the most semantically similar one by computing the similarity between the query and the
entity’s description. The displayed number reveals that this heuristic entity disambiguation process
fails to recognize those examples that actually contain the correct entity ID within the candidate list.
This highlights a potential avenue for further improving model performance.

Establishing Oracle Performance In Table 5, we present the experimental results obtained using
Oracle information. In these experiments, we grant the model access to ground-truth passages from the
Oracle Text and linearized KB triplets from the KB Oracle. A notable observation is the comparison
between Text Oracle and KB Oracle. We find that KB Oracle exerts a more significant influence
on the final results. This is because structured knowledge contains long-tail knowledge, showing
the necessity to effectively explore structured knowledge. Furthermore, when both Text and KB
Oracle sources are provided, the model’s performance reaches an Exact Match (EM) rate of 48.7%,
highlighting the necessity of each knowledge source. In comparison to our current established results
from D ET LLM, this benchmark reveals substantial room for the research community to further
explore and improve upon.

Comparing with Closed-book LLM Table 6 presents a comparison between D ET LLM and LLM
performance in the closed-book setting, where no external knowledge is accessible. We demonstrate
that D ET LLM exhibits improvements in scenarios distinct from the closed-book setting. We observe


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table 6: Comparison between the closed book setting and open domain retrieval.

                                       EM      F1      Recall    H1-R     H2-R
                       Closed Book     30.2    33.8    31.2      -        -
                       D ET LLM        32.1    35.7    35.6      70.1     47.1


that only 50.8% of examples answered correctly by our D ET LLM are also present in the closed-book
setting, highlighting the orthogonal performance of D ET LLM compared to the closed-book setting.
The combination of correctly answered examples accounts for 45.4% of the entire dataset. One
plausible hypothesis is that the closed book setting enables the LLM to access knowledge stored in its
memory, reducing the impact of retriever errors. We also suggest a potential research direction, which
involves designing a strategy to switch between the closed book setting and open domain retrieval to
achieve optimal performance.

5     R ELATED W ORK
5.1   A SSESSING THE R EASONING A BILITY OF LLM S

LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Nijkamp et al., 2023) have exhibited notable ad-
vancements in their capabilities, particularly in the domain of reasoning skills. These skills encompass
various categories, including inductive reasoning (Wang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022), deductive
reasoning (Creswell et al., 2023; Han et al., 2022), and abductive reasoning (Wiegreffe et al., 2022;
Lampinen et al., 2022), depending on the type of reasoning involved. Current research efforts have pre-
dominantly focused on evaluating LLMs in the context of open-ended multi-hop deductive reasoning.
These scenarios involve complex question-answering tasks (Yang et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2021; Trivedi
et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2023b) and fact-checking (Jiang et al., 2020). Notably, our work contributes
to this landscape by introducing an additional layer of complexity: the integration of multi-hop and
multi-source reasoning. In our approach, we retrieve supporting facts from heterogeneous knowledge
sources, further enhancing the challenges posed to LLMs in this deductive reasoning context.

5.2   R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED LLM S

Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models (RALLMs) are semi-parametric models that integrate
both model parameters and a non-parametric datastore to make predictions. RALLMs enhance LLMs
by updating their knowledge (Izacard et al., 2023; Khandelwal et al., 2020; Yavuz et al., 2022; Mallen
et al., 2023), providing citations to support trustworthy conclusions (Menick et al., 2022; Gao et al.,
2023). RALLMs can retrieve information in an end-to-end fashion within a latent space (Khandelwal
et al., 2020; 2021; Min et al., 2023), or they can follow the retrieve-then-read paradigm, leveraging an
external retriever to extract information from textual sources (Ram et al., 2023; Khattab et al., 2022).
Our approach adheres to the retrieve-then-read paradigm, with a specific emphasis on multi-source
retrieval, advocating for structured knowledge retrieval through symbolic generation.

6     C ONCLUSION
We introduce the D IV K NOW QA, designed to evaluate the proficiency of question-answering systems,
especially those enhanced by retrieval tools, in addressing knowledge-intensive questions with a strong
emphasis on multi-hop multi-source retrieval. This dataset is constructed through automated data
generation and subsequent human verification, minimizing manual effort. Our evaluation encompasses
both standard LLMs and LLMs augmented with retrieval tools. Notably, we identify that this task
presents a new challenge for state-of-the-art models due to the demand for structured knowledge
retrieval and the inherent lack of prior knowledge in this context. To tackle this challenge, we
propose the D ET LLM, which incorporates diverse retrieval tools including innovative symbolic query
generation for retrieving information from the structured knowledge source. In the future, we are
keen on enhancing LLMs’ capabilities in understanding and generating symbolic language, as well as
exploring methods to improve performance on knowledge-intensive and complex question-answering
tasks.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Junwei Bao, Nan Duan, Zhao Yan, Ming Zhou, and Tiejun Zhao. 2016. Constraint-based question
  answering with knowledge graph. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th international
  conference on computational linguistics: technical papers, pages 2503–2514.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models
  are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901.

Wenhu Chen, Ming-Wei Chang, Eva Schlinger, William Wang, and William W Cohen. 2021a. Open
 question answering over tables and text. Proceedings of ICLR 2021.

Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou,
 and William Yang Wang. 2019. Tabfact: A large-scale dataset for table-based fact verification.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02164.

Wenhu Chen, Hanwen Zha, Zhiyu Chen, Wenhan Xiong, Hong Wang, and William Yang Wang.
 2020. HybridQA: A dataset of multi-hop question answering over tabular and textual data. In
 Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1026–1036,
 Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Zhipeng Chen, Kun Zhou, Beichen Zhang, Zheng Gong, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023.
  Chatcot: Tool-augmented chain-of-thought reasoning on chat-based large language models.

Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema
  Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, and William Yang Wang. 2021b. FinQA:
  A dataset of numerical reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3697–3711, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Christmann, Rishiraj Saha Roy, and Gerhard Weikum. 2023. Compmix: A benchmark for
  heterogeneous question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12235.

Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. 2023. Selection-inference: Exploiting large
  language models for interpretable logical reasoning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.

Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to
  generate text with citations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14627.

Yu Gu, Sue Kase, Michelle Vanni, Brian Sadler, Percy Liang, Xifeng Yan, and Yu Su. 2021. Beyond
  iid: three levels of generalization for question answering on knowledge bases. In Proceedings of
  the Web Conference 2021, pages 3477–3488.

Simon Jerome Han, Keith Ransom, Andrew Perfors, and Charles Kemp. 2022. Human-like property
  induction is a challenge for large language models. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
  Cognitive Science Society.

Darryl Hannan, Akshay Jain, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. Manymodalqa: Modality disambiguation
  and qa over diverse inputs. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pages 7879–7886.

Jonathan Herzig, Thomas Müller, Syrine Krichene, and Julian Eisenschlos. 2021. Open domain
  question answering over tables via dense retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pages 512–519, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a
  multi-hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the
  28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 6609–6625, Barcelona, Spain
  (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
  and Edouard Grave. 2022. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research.

Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot learning
  with retrieval augmented language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(251):1–43.

Yichen Jiang, Shikha Bordia, Zheng Zhong, Charles Dognin, Maneesh Singh, and Mohit Bansal.
  2020. HoVer: A dataset for many-hop fact extraction and claim verification. In Findings of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3441–3460, Online. Association
  for Computational Linguistics.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A large scale
 distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Urvashi Khandelwal, Angela Fan, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2021. Nearest
  neighbor machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2020. General-
  ization through Memorization: Nearest Neighbor Language Models. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and
 Matei Zaharia. 2022. Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for
 knowledge-intensive nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. 2019. Natural questions:
  a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466.

Andrew Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie Chan, Kory Mathewson, Mh Tessler, Antonia Creswell,
  James McClelland, Jane Wang, and Felix Hill. 2022. Can language models learn from explanations
  in context? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pages
  537–563, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. 2023a. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03172.

Ye Liu, Semih Yavuz, Rui Meng, Dragomir Radev, Caiming Xiong, and Yingbo Zhou. 2022. Uni-
  parser: Unified semantic parser for question answering on knowledge base and database. In
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
  8858–8869.

Ye Liu, Semih Yavuz, Rui Meng, Dragomir Radev, Caiming Xiong, and Yingbo Zhou. 2023b.
  Answering complex questions over text by hybrid question parsing and execution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.07789.

Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  2023. When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-
  parametric memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 9802–9822, Toronto, Canada. Association for
  Computational Linguistics.

Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, et al. 2022. Teaching
  language models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11147.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Miller, Adam Fisch, Jesse Dodge, Amir-Hossein Karimi, Antoine Bordes, and Jason
  Weston. 2016. Key-value memory networks for directly reading documents. In Proceedings of
  the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1400–1409,
  Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Weijia Shi, Mike Lewis, Xilun Chen, Wen-tau Yih, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. 2023. Nonparametric masked language modeling. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 2097–2118, Toronto, Canada. Association for
  Computational Linguistics.
Erik Nijkamp, Tian Xie, Hiroaki Hayashi, Bo Pang, Congying Xia, Chen Xing, Jesse Vig, Semih
  Yavuz, Philippe Laban, Ben Krause, et al. 2023. Xgen-7b technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.03450.
OpenAI. 2023. Introducing chatgpt.
Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. 2015. Compositional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.00305.
Jorge Pérez, Marcelo Arenas, and Claudio Gutierrez. 2006. Semantics and complexity of sparql. In
  International semantic web conference, pages 30–43. Springer.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable
  questions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 784–789, Melbourne, Australia. Association for
  Computational Linguistics.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown,
  and Yoav Shoham. 2023. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and
  beyond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389.
Xiaoyu Shen, Gianni Barlacchi, Marco Del Tredici, Weiwei Cheng, Bill Byrne, and Adrià Gispert.
  2022. Product answer generation from heterogeneous sources: A new benchmark and best practices.
  In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on e-Commerce and NLP (ECNLP 5), pages 99–110, Dublin,
  Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. 2018. The web as a knowledge-base for answering complex
  questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.06643.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Multimodal{qa}: complex question answering
  over text, tables and images. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open
  foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022a. Musique:
  Multihop questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:539–554.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022b. MuSiQue:
  Multihop questions via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:539–554.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase.
  Communications of the ACM, 57(10):78–85.
Ruocheng Wang, Eric Zelikman, Gabriel Poesia, Yewen Pu, Nick Haber, and Noah D Goodman. 2023.
  Hypothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05660.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837.
Sarah Wiegreffe, Jack Hessel, Swabha Swayamdipta, Mark Riedl, and Yejin Choi. 2022. Reframing
  human-AI collaboration for generating free-text explanations. In Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, pages 632–658, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zonglin Yang, Li Dong, Xinya Du, Hao Cheng, Erik Cambria, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu
  Wei. 2022. Language models as inductive reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10923.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
  2023. OpenReview.net.
Semih Yavuz, Kazuma Hashimoto, Yingbo Zhou, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Caiming Xiong. 2022.
  Modeling multi-hop question answering as single sequence prediction. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
  Association for Computational Linguistics.
Scott Wen-tau Yih, Ming-Wei Chang, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao. 2015. Semantic parsing
  via staged query graph generation: Question answering with knowledge base. In Proceedings
  of the Joint Conference of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 7th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li,
  Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for
  complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.08887.
Yuyu Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Zornitsa Kozareva, Alexander Smola, and Le Song. 2018. Variational
  reasoning for question answering with knowledge graph. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
  on artificial intelligence, volume 32.
Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2017. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries
  from natural language using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00103.
Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Youcheng Huang, Chao Wang, Shuo Zhang, Jiancheng Lv, Fuli Feng,
  and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. TAT-QA: A question answering benchmark on a hybrid of tabular
  and textual content in finance. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3277–3287, Online. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    S INGLE -H OP K NOWLEDGE BASE Q UESTION G ENERATION P ROMPT

                       Prompt 1: Single-Hop Knowledge Base Question Generation
I n s t r u c t i o n : Question generation given the following information :
1 ) Answer
2 ) S h o r t r e l a t i o n b e t w e e n t h e q u e s t i o n e n t i t y and t h e a n s w e r
3) Question e n t i t y .

IMPORTANT : The a n s w e r must be a v o i d e d i n t h e q u e s t i o n .

Answer : J a c q u e s B o i g e l o t ;
Relation : director ;
Question E n t i t y : Peace in th e F i e l d s ;
Q u e s t i o n : Who d i r e c t s P e a c e i n t h e F i e l d s ?

Answer : Academy Award f o r B e s t Sound Mixing ;
R e l a t i o n : award r e c e i v e d ;
Question E n t i t y : Douglas S h e a r e r ;
Q u e s t i o n : Which award d o e s D o u g l a s S h e a r e r r e c e i v e ?

Answer : Rio de J a n e i r o ;
Relation : place of b i r t h ;
Q u e s t i o n E n t i t y : David R e s n i c k ;
Q u e s t i o n : Where was David R e s n i c k b o r n ?


A.2    M ULTI -H OP C OMPLEX Q UESTION G ENERATION P ROMPT

                            Prompt 2: Multi-Hop Complex Question Generation
I n s t r u c t i o n : Compose 2 s i n g l e −hop q u e s t i o n s i n t o a 2− hop q u e s t i o n g i v e n :
1 ) Hop1 q u e s t i o n
2 ) Hop1 a n s w e r
3 ) Hop2 q u e s t i o n .

Hop1 q u e s t i o n : Who s a i d a r o s e by any o t h e r name would s m e l l j u s t a s
    sweet ?
Hop1 a n s w e r : J u l i e t
Hop2 q u e s t i o n : What i s t h e c a u s e o f d e a t h o f J u l i e t ?
Composed q u e s t i o n : What i s t h e c a u s e o f d e a t h o f t h e p e r s o n who s a i d a
    r o s e by any o t h e r name would s m e l l j u s t a s s w e e t ?

Hop1 q u e s t i o n : Who h o s t e d The P r i c e I s R i g h t b e f o r e Bob B a r k e r ?
Hop1 a n s w e r : B i l l C u l l e n
Hop2 q u e s t i o n : What i s t h e m e d i c a l c o n d i t i o n o f B i l l C u l l e n ?
Composed q u e s t i o n : What i s t h e m e d i c a l c o n d i t i o n o f t h e p e r s o n who
    h o s t e d The P r i c e I s R i g h t b e f o r e Bob B a r k e r ?

Hop1 q u e s t i o n : Who w r o t e I f You Go Away on a Summer ’ s Day ?
Hop1 a n s w e r : Rod McKuen
Hop2 q u e s t i o n : Which r e c o r d company d o e s Rod McKuen own?
Composed q u e s t i o n : Which r e c o r d company d o e s t h e p e r s o n who w r o t e I f You
    Go Away on a Summer ’ s Day own?


A.3    B ENCHMARK P ROMPT

To use the D ET LLM method and generate the final answer, three steps are followed: (1) First-hop
prompting, (2) Second-hop prompting, and (3) Final answer generation. The prompt for each stage is
provided below. For simplicity, we denote the k retrieved passages as “Context: [[1] ... [k]]”.
                                                Prompt 3: First Hop


                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W r i t e a s e a r c h q u e r y , q u e r y e n t i t y , and SPARQL t h a t w i l l h e l p a n s w e r a
       complex q u e s t i o n .
Follow t h e f o l l o w i n g format .
C o n t e x t : $ { s o u r c e s t h a t may c o n t a i n r e l e v a n t c o n t e n t }
Q u e s t i o n : $ { t h e q u e s t i o n t o be a n s w e r e d }
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . $ { i n f o r m a t i o n from t h e c o n t e x t t h a t p r o v i d e s
        useful clues }
S e a r c h Query : $ { a s i m p l e q u e s t i o n f o r s e e k i n g t h e m i s s i n g i n f o r m a t i o n }
Query E n t i t y : $ { q u e r y e n t i t y name from s e a r c h q u e r y }
SPARQL : $ {SPARQL q u e r y u s e d t o q u e r y a g a i n s t W i k i d a t a }

Example 1
Context :
Q u e s t i o n : What a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f t h e p e r s o n who h o l d s t h e most
       women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . Decompose t h e q u e s t i o n t o a n s w e r t h e
        f o l l o w i n g s i n g l e −hop q u e s t i o n s . 1 . Who h o l d s t h e most women ’ s
       Wimbledon t i t l e s ? 2 . What a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f t h i s p e r s o n
S e a r c h Query : Who h o l d s t h e most women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s ?
Query E n t i t y : women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s
SPARQL : None

Example 2
Context :
Q u e s t i o n : Which bay i s t h e name o f David R e s n i c k ’ s p l a c e o f b i r t h ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . Decompose t h e q u e s t i o n t o a n s w e r t h e
        f o l l o w i n g s i n g l e −hop q u e s t i o n s . 1 . Where was David R e s n i c k b o r n ? 2 .
       Which bay i s t h e name o f t h i s p l a c e
S e a r c h Query : Where was David R e s n i c k b o r n ?
Query E n t i t y : David R e s n i c k
SPARQL : SELECT ? p l a c e WHERE {wd : Q962183 wdt : P19 ? p l a c e . }

Example 3
Context :
Q u e s t i o n : I s t h e p e r s o n who d i r e c t e d t h e f i l m The Shape o f Water a
       member o f t h e W r i t e r s G u i l d o f America , West ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . Decompose t h e q u e s t i o n t o a n s w e r t h e
        f o l l o w i n g s i n g l e −hop q u e s t i o n s . 1 . Who d i r e c t e d t h e f i l m t h e s h a p e
        o f w a t e r ? 2 . I s t h e p e r s o n t h e p e r s o n a member o f t h e W r i t e r s G u i l d
        o f America , West ?
S e a r c h Query : The d i r e c t o r o f t h e f i l m The Shape o f Water
Query E n t i t y : The Shape o f Water
SPARQL : SELECT ? name WHERE {wd : Q26698156 wdt : P57 ? name . }

Target Question
Context :
Q u e s t i o n : How many o r g a n i z a t i o n s i s t h e 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d
        S t a t e s a member o f ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . Decompose t h e q u e s t i o n t o a n s w e r t h e
        f o l l o w i n g s i n g l e −hop q u e s t i o n s . 1 . who i s t h e 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e
        U n i t e d S t a t e s ? 2 . How many o r g a n i z a t i o n s i s t h i s p e r s o n a member o f ?
S e a r c h Query : 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d S t a t e s
Query E n t i t y : None
SPARQL : None

                                                 Prompt 4: Second Hop

W r i t e a s e a r c h q u e r y , q u e r y e n t i t y , and SPARQL t h a t w i l l h e l p a n s w e r a
       complex q u e s t i o n .


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Follow t h e f o l l o w i n g format .
C o n t e x t : $ { s o u r c e s t h a t may c o n t a i n r e l e v a n t c o n t e n t }
Q u e s t i o n : $ { t h e q u e s t i o n t o be a n s w e r e d }
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . $ { i n f o r m a t i o n from t h e c o n t e x t t h a t p r o v i d e s
        useful clues }
S e a r c h Query : $ { a s i m p l e q u e s t i o n f o r s e e k i n g t h e m i s s i n g i n f o r m a t i o n }
Query E n t i t y : $ { q u e r y e n t i t y name from s e a r c h q u e r y }
SPARQL : $ {SPARQL q u e r y u s e d t o q u e r y a g a i n s t W i k i d a t a }

Example 1
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : What a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f t h e p e r s o n who h o l d s t h e most
       women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . Wimbledon i s a t e n n i s t o u r n a m e n t , and t e n n i s
        p l a y e r M a r t i n a N a v r a t i l o v a h o l d s t h e most women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s .
       The s e c o n d s t e p i s t o a n s w e r what a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f t h i s p e r s o n .
S e a r c h Query : What a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f M a r t i n a N a v r a t i l o v a ?
Query E n t i t y : M a r t i n a N a v r a t i l o v a
SPARQL : SELECT ? name WHERE {wd : Q54545 wdt : P106 ? name . }

Example 2
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : Which bay i s t h e name o f David R e s n i c k ’ s p l a c e o f b i r t h ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . David R e s n i c k was b o r n i n Rio de J a n e i r o . The
       s e c o n d s t e p i s t o a n s w e r which bay i s t h e name o f Rio de J a n e i r o ?
S e a r c h Query : which bay i s t h e name o f Rio de J a n e i r o ?
Query E n t i t y : Rio de J a n e i r o
SPARQL : None

Example 3
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : I s t h e p e r s o n who d i r e c t e d t h e f i l m The Shape o f Water a
       member o f t h e W r i t e r s G u i l d o f America , West ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . The Shape o f Water i s d i r e c t e d by G u i l l e r m o
        d e l Toro . The s e c o n d s t e p i s t o a n s w e r i s t h e p e r s o n a member o f t h e
        W r i t e r s G u i l d o f America , West
S e a r c h Query : t h e o r g a n i z a t i o n G u i l l e r m o d e l Toro i s i n
Query E n t i t y : G u i l l e r m o d e l Toro
SPARQL : SELECT ? name WHERE {wd : Q219124 wdt : P463 ? name . }

Target Question
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : How many o r g a n i z a t i o n s i s t h e 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d
        S t a t e s a member o f ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . Based on t h e c o n t e x t , we h a v e
        l e a r n e d t h e f o l l o w i n g . The 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d S t a t e s i s
       T h e o d o r e R o o s e v e l t . The s e c o n d s t e p i s t o a n s w e r how many
        o r g a n i z a t i o n s he i s a member o f .
S e a r c h Query : How many o r g a n i z a t i o n s i s T h e o d o r e R o o s e v e l t a member o f ?
Query E n t i t y : T h e o d o r e R o o s e v e l t
SPARQL : SELECT (COUNT( ? o r g a n i z a t i o n ) a s ? c o u n t ) WHERE { wd : Q33866
       wdt : P463 ? o r g a n i z a t i o n . }



                                                Prompt 5: Final QA Step

Answer q u e s t i o n s w i t h s h o r t f a c t o i d a n s w e r s .
Follow t h e f o l l o w i n g format .
C o n t e x t : $ { s o u r c e s t h a t may c o n t a i n r e l e v a n t c o n t e n t }
Q u e s t i o n : $ { t h e q u e s t i o n t o be a n s w e r e d }


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . $ { a s t e p −by − s t e p d e d u c t i o n t h a t
        i d e n t i f i e s t h e c o r r e c t r e s p o n s e , which w i l l be p r o v i d e d below }
Answer : $ { a s h o r t f a c t o i d answer , o f t e n b e t w e e n 1 and 5 words }

Example 1
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : What a r e t h e o c c u p a t i o n s o f t h e p e r s o n who h o l d s t h e most
       women ’ s Wimbledon t i t l e s ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . M a r t i n a N a v r a t i l o v a i s a t e n n i s
       p l a y e r , w r i t e r , n o v e l i s t , and a u t o b i o g r a p h e r .
Answer : t e n n i s p l a y e r , w r i t e r , n o v e l i s t , and a u t o b i o g r a p h e r

Example 2
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : Which bay i s t h e name o f David R e s n i c k ’ s p l a c e o f b i r t h ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . David R e s n i c k was b o r n i n Rio de
       J a n e i r o , and " Rio de J a n e i r o " was t h e name o f G u a n a b a r a Bay .
Answer : G u a n a b a r a Bay

Example 3
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : I s t h e p e r s o n who d i r e c t e d t h e f i l m The Shape o f Water a
       member o f t h e W r i t e r s G u i l d o f America , West ?
R a t i o n a l e : Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p by s t e p . G u i l l e r m o d e l Toro Gomez i s a
       f i l m m a k e r , he i s a member o f t h e W r i t e r s G u i l d o f America , West .
Answer : y e s

Target
Context : [ [ 1 ] . . . [ k ] ]
Q u e s t i o n : How many o r g a n i z a t i o n s i s t h e 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d
        S t a t e s a member o f ?
R a t i o n a l e : The 26 t h p r e s i d e n t o f t h e U n i t e d S t a t e s was T h e o d o r e
       R o o s e v e l t . He i s a member o f 5 o r g a n i z a t i o n s .
Answer : 5


A.4    H UMAN A NNOTATION I NSTRUCTION

We show the instructions and annotating examples provided to human annotators to annotate the
dataset as below.

Overall Instruction The goal of the annotation is to judge and revise the complex question chained
by two single-hop questions. To complete this goal, you need to do the following two tasks:

        • Judge and revise the single-hop question generated from the knowledge base triplet.
        • Judge and revise the composed complex question.

Task 1 Given a triplet (subject, relation, object) and a machine-generated question as shown below,
you need to judge the quality of the generated question and whether it is acceptable, needs revision,
or is rejected. If the question can be revised, please revise the question rather than reject it. If the
question is too poor to revise, reject the question.
T r i p l e t : ( LeBron James ; c h i l d ; [ B r y c e James , Z h u r i James , Bronny James ] )
Q u e s t i o n : How many c h i l d r e n d o e s LeBron James h a v e ?

An accepted triplet question should satisfy the following criteria:

        • The question focuses on the subject w.r.t relation.
        • The question should sound natural and fluent.
        • The answer to the generated question should be the object, thus the object cannot be shown
          in the question.


                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Task 2 Judge and revise the composed complex question given the following information. If the
question can be revised, please revise the question rather than reject it. If the question is too poor to
revise, reject the question and choose the reason for rejection.
Below is a list of provided information:

       • Two single-hop question-answer pairs: “(Question 1, Answer 1)” and “(Question 2, Answer
         2)”.
       • The bridging entity “Bridge Entity” that chains two single-hop questions together.
       • Machine generated composed question “Composed Question”.
Q u e s t i o n 1 : Who i s t h e h i g h e s t − p a i d a t h l e t e i n t h e NBA
Answer 1 : LeBron James
Q u e s t i o n 2 : How many c h i l d r e n d o e s LeBron James h a v e ?
Answer 2 : [ 3 , t h r e e ]
B r i d g e E n t i t y : LeBron James
Composed Q u e s t i o n : How many c h i l d r e n d o e s t h e h i g h e s t − p a i d a t h l e t e i n
        t h e NBA h a v e ?

An accepted question should meet the following criteria:

       • The composed question must be constructed using two single-hop questions, with the answer
         to the first question becoming the subject of the second question.
       • Ensure that the composed question does not reveal the answer itself.
       • Use ‘Answer 2’ as the answer to the composed question.

If you choose to reject the question, please select one of the following reasons. If your reason is not
listed, choose ’Other’ and include a comment.

       • Circular question: Two single-hop questions are the same question.
       • Bridge entity answer leaking.
       • Final answer leaking.
       • Change in the original meaning of single-hop questions.
       • Other.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   A N EXAMPLE OF THE TWO - HOP MULTI - SOURCE QUESTIONS IN D IV K NOW QA



   Q: How many awards has the first person to walk on the moon
   received?
   A: 26
   Multi-Hop Multi-Source Reasoning
   Q1: Who was the first person to walk on the moon?
   A1: Neil Armstrong (Supporting facts: [1], [2])
   Q2: How many awards has Neil Armstrong received?
   A2: 26 (Supporting fact: [3])

   Unstructured Knowledge
   Paragraph A, Moon landing
   [1] This was accomplished with two US pilot-astronauts flying
   a Lunar Module on each of six NASA missions across a
   41-month period starting on 20 July 1969 UTC, with Neil
   Armstrong and…
   Paragraph B, Purdue University
   [2] Neil Armstrong (the first person to walk on the moon)

   Structured Knowledge
   [3] ["Presidential Medal of Freedom","Order of the White
   Elephant", "Cullum Geographical Medal", "National
   Aviation Hall of Fame", …] (In total 26 items)
   SPARQL Query:
   SELECT (COUNT(?item) AS ?count)
   WHERE {wd:Q1615 wdt:P166 ?item.}

           Figure 2: An example of the two-hop multi-source questions in our dataset.


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6     A NALYSIS OF D IV K NOW QA

                                                                                                             occupation


                                                 pati
                                             ons
                                                                                                             educated at


                                           o ccu
                                                                                                             present in work

                                                                                                             named after


                                                   ny
                                                 ma
                                                                                                             part of the series


                                               w
  the                                                               the


                                           ho
                                                                                                             child

                                                                                                             manner of death
                     where                                                                                   member of
                                                   wha         is    the
        did                                              t
 the                                                                                                         award received
                        is
                                                                                                             father
              th e
                                         who
                               did


                                                                                                             copyright status as a creator
                                                is
                             th e


                                                                                                             sibling

                                                                                                             spouse
                                                        th e
                                person


                                                                                                             performer


              (a) Types of questions.                                           (b) Types of KB relations.

              Figure 3: Types of (a) questions, and (b) KB relations, covered in D IV K NOW QA.


                                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   A NECDOTAL E XAMPLES FOR D IV K NOW QA

Table 7: Types of multi-hop reasoning required to answer questions in D IV K NOW QA. Two single-
hop questions are shown: TextQA is sampled from NQ, and KBQA is generated using the sampled
KB-Triplet. The question from D IV K NOW QA is based on those two single-hop questions.

   Order        Type        %      Example
                                   TextQA: Who is Rafael Nadal married to?
                                   Answer: María Francisca Perelló
                                   KB-Triplet: (Rafael Nadal, spouse, María Francisca Perelló)
             short entity   20.3   KBQA: Who won the Men’s US Open 2017?
                                   Answer: Rafael Nadal
                                   D IV K NOW QA: Who is the person married to the winner of the Men’s US Open 2017?
                                   Answer: María Francisca Perelló
                                   TextQA: Who sang When the Lights Went Out in Georgia?
                                   Answer: Vicki Lawrence
                                   KB-Triplet: (Vicki Lawrence, hair color, red hair)
 Text → KB     yes/no       17.9   KBQA: What is Vicki Lawrence’s hair color?
                                   Answer: red hair
                                   D IV K NOW QA: Is the hair color of the singer of "When the Lights Went Out in Georgia" gray?
                                   Answer: no
                                   TextQA: who does Meg ’s voice on Family Guy?
                                   Answer: Vicki Lawrence
                                   KB-Triplet: (Mila Kunis, child, [Wyatt Kutcher, Dimitri Kutcher])
             aggregate      21.1   KBQA: How many children does Mila Kunis have?
                                   Answer: Two
                                   D IV K NOW QA: How many children does the person who does Meg’s voice on Family Guy have?
                                   Answer: Two
                                   KB-Triplet: (William Weatherall Wilkins, present in work, Mary Poppins Returns)
                                   KBQA: In which work is William Weatherall Wilkins present?
                                   Answer: Mary Poppins Returns
             short entity   20.7   TextQA: Who play Mary Poppins in Mary Poppins Returns?
                                   Answer: Emily Blunt
                                   D IV K NOW QA: Who plays Mary Poppins in the work in which William Weatherall Wilkins is present?
                                   Answer: Emily Blunt
 KB → Text
                                   KB-Triplet: (Girl #2, present in work, High School Musical)
                                   KBQA: In which work is Girl #2 present?
                                   Answer: High School Musical
               yes/no       20.0   TextQA: What grade were they in in high school musical 1?
                                   Answer: juniors
                                   D IV K NOW QA: Were they seniors in the work in which Girl #2 is present?
                                   Answer: no


                                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   T HE ILLUSTRATION OF D ET LLM

                 How many awards has the first person                                Answer: 26
                 to walk on the moon received?

                                                                LLM
             1                                                      2
           Rationale: Decompose the question to answer the          Rationale: The first person to walk on the moon is
           following single-hop questions. 1. who was the first     Neil Armstrong.
           person to walk on the moon? 2. how many awards has       The second step is to answer how many awards he
           this person received?                                    has received.

           Query: Who was the first person to walk on the             Query: How many awards has Neil Armstrong
           moon?                                                      received?



            Paragraphs                                                Paragraph
            [1] This was accomplished with two US pilot-              [1] She was the first female newscaster on
            astronauts flying a Lunar Module on each of six           television in Los Angeles and the West Coast
            NASA missions across a 41-month period                    She has received many awards and honors...
            starting on 20 July 1969 UTC, with Neil                   [2] Apollo 11 was the spaceflight that landed
            Armstrong and…                                            the first two people on the Moon. Commander
            [2]Neil Armstrong(the first person to walk on             Neil Armstrong and Lunar Module ...
            the moon) ...
                                                                      Linearized Triplets
            Linearized Triplets                                       [3] Neil Armstrong; Award Received Silver
            [3] Neil Armstrong; Description; Armstrong was            Buffalo Award. Neil Armstrong; Award
            an American astronaut and the first person to             Received; Livingstone Medal. ....
            walk on the Moon. ...                                     [4] Neil Armstrong; Award Received; Air Medal
            [4] John Young; Spaceflight Astronaut Missions;           . Neil Armstrong; Award Received; Collier
            Apollo 16. ...                                            Trophy. ...

            SPARQL                                                    SPARQL
            None                                                      SELECT (COUNT(?award) as ?count)
                                                                      WHERE { wd:Q1615 wdt:P166 ?award. }

             Rationale: Neil Armstrong was the first person to
             walk on the moon and he has received 26 awards.          Answer: 26                                   3


Figure 4: The illustration of D ET LLM to instruct LLMs for addressing multi-source multi-hop
questions.


                                                                 22
