Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G UIDED E VOLUTION WITH B INARY D ISCRIMINATORS
FOR ML P ROGRAM S EARCH

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         How to automatically design better machine learning programs is an open problem
         within AutoML. While evolution has been a popular tool to search for better ML
         programs, using learning itself to guide the search has been less successful and
         less understood on harder problems but has the promise to dramatically increase
         the speed and final performance of the optimization process. We propose guiding
         evolution with a binary discriminator, trained online to distinguish which program
         is better given a pair of programs. The discriminator selects better programs with-
         out having to perform a costly evaluation and thus speed up the convergence of
         evolution. Our method can encode a wide variety of ML components including
         symbolic optimizers, neural architectures, RL loss functions, and symbolic regres-
         sion equations with the same directed acyclic graph representation. By combining
         this representation with modern GNNs and an adaptive mutation strategy, we
         demonstrate our method can speed up evolution across a set of diverse problems
         including a 3.7x speedup on the symbolic search for ML optimizers and a 4x
         speedup for RL loss functions.


1   I NTRODUCTION

While neural architecture search (NAS Elsken et al. (2019)) is a major area in AutoML (He et al.,
2021), there is a growing body of work that searches for general ML program components beyond
architectures, such as the entire learning program, RL loss functions, and ML optimizers (Real
et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023b). The underlying search spaces commonly
use fine-grained primitive operators such as tensor arithmetic and have few human imposed priors,
resulting in long programs or computation graphs with many nodes. While expressive enough to allow
discoveries of novel ML components that achieve state-of-the-art results compared to human designed
ones, such search spaces have near infinite size. The extremely sparse distribution of good candidates
in the space (since small changes usually lead to dramatic performance degradation) poses great
challenges for efficient search of performant programs. Unlike NAS where several successful search
paradigms exist (Bayesian optimization (Kandasamy et al., 2018; White et al., 2021a), reinforcement
learning (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham et al., 2018), differentiable search (Liu et al., 2018b)), regularized
evolution (Real et al., 2019) remains a dominant search method on these primitive search spaces due
to its simplicity and effectiveness. The main technique for speeding up search on these spaces so
far is functional equivalent caching (FEC Gillard et al. (2023)), which skips repeated evaluation of
duplicated candidates. While effective, FEC does not exploit any learned structure in the evaluated
candidates. Can we devise learning-based methods that capture global knowledge of all programs
seen so far to improve search efficiency?
Performance predictors (White et al., 2021b) have shown successes in speeding up search in many
NAS search spaces but have not yet been tried on these larger primitive-based search spaces. Prior
work uses regression models, trained to predict architecture performance, to rank top candidates
before computationally expensive evaluation. An alternative is to train binary relation predictors
(Dudziak et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2020), which predict which candidate from a pair is better. Previous
work usually trains performance predictors on NAS search spaces using only a few hundred (or fewer)
randomly sampled candidates (Dudziak et al., 2020). Prediction on unseen candidates relies on strong
generalization performance and we argue that this is relatively easy for many NAS search spaces,
but much harder for these primitive search spaces. Ying et al. (2019) showed the NAS-Bench-101


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


fitness landscape is very smooth with most candidates having similar fitness and the global optimum
is at most 6 mutation steps away from more than 30% of the search space. Li & Talwalkar (2019)
further showed that random search is a strong baseline on NAS-Bench-101 which suggests that a
predictor trained on a fixed offline dataset collected from random sampling will generalize well. In
contrast, in Real et al. (2020) and Chen et al. (2023b), random search fails completely on these larger
search spaces which have sparse reward distribution. So random search alone will struggle to capture
enough representative data for generalization.
In this paper, we propose training a binary relation predictor online to guide mutations and speed up
evolution. This predictor is trained continuously with pairs of candidates discovered by evolution
to predict which candidate is better. We introduce a novel mutation algorithm for combining these
predictors with evolution to continually score mutations until we find a candidate with a higher
predicted fitness than its parent, bypassing wasteful computation on (likely) lower fitness candidates.
Our method provides large benefits to evolution in terms of converging more quickly and to a higher
fitness over a range of problems including a 3.7x speedup on ML optimizers and 4x speedup on
RL loss functions. We show that obtaining generalization with this binary predictor is much easier
than with a fitness regression model and that using state-of-the-art graph neural networks (GNNs)
gives better results. Our unified representation and training architecture can be applied to generic ML
components search.



2    R ELATED W ORK

NAS with performance predictors. Many performance predictor methods (White et al., 2021b)
have been proposed to speed up NAS. Once trained, these models are used for selecting the most
promising architecture candidates for full training, reducing the resources (compute and walltime)
wasted on unpromising ones. One popular category of these methods is to train a regression model
(Liu et al., 2018a; Wen et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2022) to predict
performance of an architecture solely based on its encoding. Some regression models, such as
ReNAS (Xu et al., 2021), are trained directly with a ranking loss instead of MSE. An alternative
is to train pairwise binary relation models (Dudziak et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2021). Such model takes a pair of candidates as input and predicts which candidate is better. This is
motivated by the observation that predicting relative performance of a pair of candidates is sufficient
for ranking. BRP-NAS (Dudziak et al., 2020) shows that binary predictor models are more effective
than regression models for candidate selection. BRP-NAS alternates between two phases: i) use
the predictor to rank candidates and ii) select the top candidates for full training and the results are
used to improve the predictor. In Dudziak et al. (2020), these two phases alternate very few times to
collect no more than a few hundred fully trained candidates. Fewer works explore the integration
of binary predictor with evolution. To our best knowledge, Hao et al. (2020) is the closest to our
work, which uses the predictor to rank a list of offspring candidates by doing pairwise comparisons
between candidates. In contrast, our work uses the binary predictor to compare the child candidate
with the parent (the tournament selection winner) which explicitly encourages hill climbing (Russell
& Norvig, 2010). In addition, problems studied in this work are of much larger scale compared to
those in Hao et al. (2020). We note that hill climbing strategy has been tried for NAS in Elsken et al.
(2017), however this does not make use of performance predictors and evolutionary algorithms.
General ML program component search. Recent work (Real et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2023b) searches for ML program components beyond neural network architectures. These
search spaces use primitive operators as building blocks and few human priors are imposed on how
they should be combined. This is in stark contrast with many NAS search spaces where non-trivial
human priors are included in the design. For example, it is a common choice to bundle ReLU,
Convolution, and Batch Normalizaton as one atomic operator (in a fixed order), as in NAS-Bench-101
and DARTS Liu et al. (2018b). Due to the use of primitive operators and few constraints, these
general ML program search spaces are much larger and have sparse rewards. This makes them more
challenging than typical NAS search spaces. Previously, hashing based techniques (Gillard et al.,
2023) are the main method for speeding up search on these large primitive search spaces, while
predictive models have not been tried. We show that predictive models can provide extra speedup on
top of FEC techniques in the ML optimizer search space.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning and program synthesis. There are many works that learn a generative model or policy
over discrete objects. Work such as Zoph & Le (2017); Ramachandran et al. (2018); Bello et al.
(2017); Abolafia et al. (2018); Petersen et al. (2021) use reinforcement learning to optimize this
model. Other works combine a generative model with evolution such as using an LLM as a mutator
(Chen et al., 2023a) or training a generator to seed the population (Mundhenk et al., 2021). Training
a generative model in this large combinatorial space is generally more difficult than training a binary
discriminator and requires more complicated algorithms such as RL whereas our method is a simple
modification to evolution.


3     M ETHOD

In this section we describe the search representation, how the binary predictor can work over a variety
of ML components, and how to combine the model with evolution.

3.1   S EARCH R EPRESENTATION


Figure 1: We encode a variety of ML components (learning optimizers input as Python code,
NN architectures, RL loss functions, and symbolic equations) into the same computation graph
representation and learn a GNN-based binary predictor over pairs of individuals to predict which
graph has better performance.

We build a general framework to encode a wide variety of ML components with the same GNN
architecture. We first convert each task (as described below) into a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
where a DAG consists of input nodes, intermediate operation nodes, and output nodes. A directed
edge from node a to node b would indicate that a is an input for operation b. The number of possible
identities for each node will depend on the possible operations for that task.
Neural Network Architectures: A neural network architecture cell is readily represented as a DAG
where nodes are operations such as 3x3 convolution and edges define data flow between ops (Ying
et al., 2019).
Symbolic Regression: The objective is to recover a range of target equations such as log(1 + x) + x2 .
While equations are normally represented as trees, the DAG formulation allows variables to be reused
since children can have multiple parents. Node ops are basic math operators Uy et al. (2011).
ML Optimizer Algorithms: The optimizer for updating a neural network such as AdamW
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) is parsed as Python code Chen et al. (2023b). Each line is an as-
signment that becomes a node in the DAG similar to Koza (1993). Node ops can be math operators
or high level function calls.
RL Loss Functions: The loss function to train an RL agent such as DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) is
converted into a DAG as in Co-Reyes et al. (2021). Nodes are operations such as apply a Q network
on an environment observation and the output node is the final loss to minimize.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   A RCHITECTURE + T RAINING

We describe the general architecture and how to train the binary predictor. Once a problem can
be converted into a DAG, we compute embeddings for each node and edge based on its identity.
Between domains, node operations will differ so we use different embedding layers between tasks
where the number of possible embeddings depends on the maximum number of operations. Edge
embeddings will similarly depend on the max number of possible connections for that task. Given
these embeddings, we can then apply a GNN or graph Transformer to compute the DAG encoding
g(x) of any graph x.
Given a dataset of individuals, we want to train a predictor f , that can take in any pair of individuals
(x1 , x2 ) and predict whether the fitness of x1 is greater than the fitness of x2 . Our predictor is a 2
layer binary MLP which takes in the concatenated graph encodings concat(g(x1 ), g(x2 )) and outputs
a logistic score. The predictor and GNN are trained end-to-end to minimize the binary cross entropy
loss over randomly sampled pairs from the current dataset. During evolution, this predictor is trained
online and so will improve as the dataset size increases with more individuals. The dataset is a fixed
size queue and training happens at set intervals during evolution. More details on the architecture and
training algorithm are in Appendix 6.1.


3.3   C OMBINING B INARY M ODELS WITH E VOLUTION

A binary predictor f (·, ·) can be combined with a vanilla mutator (e.g. modifying a few nodes
and edges in a DAG) to form what we call a mutation strategy. There are many possible mutation
strategies and we propose a particular design which achieves good performance.
We briefly recap how regularized evolution           Algorithm 1 Binary Predictor-based Adaptive Mu-
works and introduce a few terms. Regularized         tation with Re-Tournament (PAM-RT)
Evolution (RegEvo) has two phases: In the first
phase, we initialize a population queue of size P    Input: Population buffer P , trained predictor f ,
with randomly generated candidates, each can-            max attempts K.
didates is assigned a fitness score. In the second    1: accept ← F alse
phase, we repeat the following loop until we          2: attempts ← 0
have swept over a desired number of candidates:       3: while accept == F alse and attempts < K
i) Randomly sample T candidates from P and               do
select the one with the highest fitness. This step    4:     parent ← tournament_selection(P )
is known as tournament selection (Goldberg &          5:     child ← mutate(parent)
Deb, 1990) of size T ; ii) A mutator randomly         6:     accept ← f (child, parent) > 0.5
mutates the selected candidate p to a child c,        7:     attempts ← attempts + 1
and c’s fitness score is computed; iii) Add c to      8: end while
the end of the queue and remove the oldest item      Output: child
from the head of the queue.
In prior work combining predictors with evolution, it is common to generate a list of candidates and
use the predictor to rank these candidates. For example, in Hao et al. (2020) a parent is mutated to
a list of child candidates, and the model is used to score each candidate (against other candidates)
and take the argmax
               P         as the final candidate. More precisely, if we have a list of candidates ci , then
score(ci ) =      j6=i f (ci , cj ) and f takes discrete values in {−1, 1}. We call this approach max
pairwise (Max-Pairwise).
In this work, we explore a different family of strategies based on the heuristic of hill climbing (Russell
& Norvig, 2010) which performs iterative local search to find incrementally better solutions. We use
the binary model to compare the child against the parent (instead of against each other), and this
explicitly encourages selecting a child that is likely better than the parent. In its most basic form,
we run tournament selection once to obtain a parent p, mutate it to obtain a child candidate c, and
check if the child is likely better than the parent by evaluating f (c, p); if not, we retry the mutation
from p and otherwise accept c. We refer this method as predictor-based adaptive mutation (PAM).
A variant is to retry the tournament if the mutated child is rejected by the model which we refer to
as predictor-based adaptive mutation with re-tournament (PAM-RT). We summarize PAM-RT in
Algorithm 1. PAM can be obtained by a one line change by moving the tournament-selection before
the while-loop.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hill climbing properties of PAM and PAM-RT. We provide some motivation for PAM-RT. Given
a standard evolution mutator m, the natural hill climbing rate q at a point p is the probability that the
random child m(p) is better than p. We define the modified hill climbing rate as the same probability
but for a child produced from our proposed method. PAM-RT has an extra re-tournament mechanism
compared to PAM which gives PAM-RT a bias towards selecting parents that are more likely leading
to a hill climbing child – if the model is better than random. At each iteration in PAM-RT, the
probability of accepting a child is paccept = (2a − 1)q + (1 − a) (using Eq. 1 in Appendix 6.2),
which increases with the hill climbing rate q if the model accuracy a > 0.5. Therefore PAM-RT will
accept children of parents with higher hill climbing probability more quickly on average.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In our experiments we show that PAM-RT can provide a meaningful speedup to evolution. We
perform ablations showing the importance of several design choices and provide analysis on how to
combine our predictor with evolution.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We describe the search spaces, their fitness definitions, and the random generators and mutators we
use in regularized evolution.
NAS-Bench-101 Ying et al. (2019) is a NAS benchmark for image classification on CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky, 2009). The search space consists of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) with up to 7
vertexes and up to 9 edges. Two special vertexes are IN and OUT, representing the input and
output tensors of the architecture. Remaining vertexes can choose from one of three operations:
3x3 convolution, 1x1 convolution, and 3x3 max-pool. This search space contains 510M distinct
architectures (of which 423K are unique after deduping by graph isomorphisms). Every candidate
in the search space has been pre-evaluated with metrics including validation accuracy and test
accuracy. Evaluation of a single candidate is a fast in-memory table lookup which enables noisy
oracle experiments in Section 4.2.2. In this work, we use the validation accuracy (after 108 epochs of
training) as the fitness. We use the same random generator and mutator as published in Ying et al.
(2019). Although NAS-Bench-101 does not use a primitive search space, we include it here because
it is a well-accepted benchmark supporting extensive ablation studies. It is also a test to see if our
proposed method works on more traditional NAS spaces.
Nguyen Uy et al. (2011) is a benchmark for symbolic regression tasks. The goal is to recover
ground truth single-variable or two-variable functions. Candidate functions are constructed from
{+, −, ∗, /, sin, cos, exp, log, x} (and additionally with {y} for two-variable functions). We choose
the Ngyuen benchmark because it shares features with primitive-based AutoML search spaces, such
as having sparsely distributed high performing candidates. We choose a few Nguyen tasks (Nguyen-2,
Nguyen-3, Nguyen-5, Nguyen-7, Nguyen-12) to represent varied search space sizes and difficulties.
Given a candidate, we first compute the root mean square error (RMSE) between the candidate and
target function over a set of uniformly sampled points from the specified domain of each task (e.g.
20 points in (0, 1) for Nguyen-12). The fitness is obtained by applying a “flip-and-squash” function
(2/π) arctan(xπ/2) so that fitness is within [0, 1] and lower RMSE maps to higher fitness. If any
candidate function generates NAN, its fitness is defined as 0. The DAG has a maximum of 15 vertices
with 8 possible ops.
AutoRL Loss Functions introduced in Co-Reyes et al. (2021) are represented as DAGs and the
goal is to find RL loss functions that enable efficient RL training. The DAG has a maximum of 20
vertexes excluding the input and parameters vertexes. Remaining vertexes can choose from a list
of 26 possible ops as detailed in Co-Reyes et al. (2021). We use three environments (CartPole-v0,
MountainCar-v0, Acrobot-v1) from the OpenAI Gym suite Brockman et al. (2016) with the CartPole
environment used as a “hurdle” environment. Fitness is defined as the average normalized return
from all three environments if the performance is greater than 0.6 on Cartpole, otherwise only the
normalized return from Cartpole is used (and the rest two environments are skipped to save compute).
Random generators and mutators are the same as in Co-Reyes et al. (2021).
ML optimizers (Hero) Chen et al. (2023b) defines a search space for ML optimizers and uses
evolution to discover a novel optimizer that achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


machine learning tasks. The search space consists of a sequence of python assignment statements
which can use common math functions or high level functions such as linear interpolation (example
in Figure 1 top left). We convert the sequence of statements to an equivalent DAG. Evolution is warm
started from AdamW and fitness is the validation log likelihood loss of the trained model. Chen et al.
(2023b) uses up to 100 TPUs v4 per experiment so to reduce compute, we focus on a smaller training
configuration that can train an optimizer on a language modelling task in less than 10 minutes on a
GPU (Nvidia Tesla V100).
Evolution and trainer setup
For population and tournament sizes, (P, T), we use (100, 20) for NAS-Bench-101, (100, 25) for
Nguyen, (300, 25) for AutoRL, and (100, 25) for Hero. We swept over tournament size for the
baseline. For all tasks we use the GPS graph Transformer (Rampásek et al., 2022) except for ML
optimizers where we use SAT Chen et al. (2022) for the graph encoder. Samples from evolution are
added to a fixed size replay buffer that is used to train the model online (Algorithm 2). We use Adam
with a learning rate of 1e−4 and train the model over the replay buffer at a fixed frequency as new
samples are added. More details on architecture and training are in Appendix 6.1. For evolution
curves, we plot 95% confidence intervals (±2 standard errors) over at least 5 seeds.

4.2     R ESULTS


Figure 2: On all symbolic regression tasks, our method PAM-RT can provide faster convergence
compared to regularized evolution. PAM-RT also outperforms other mutation strategies, Max-
Pairwise and PAM.


4.2.1    T RAINED PREDICTORS SPEED UP EVOLUTION

We perform experiments on larger primitive-based search spaces to see if our method can speed
up evolution. Nguyen, AutoRL, and Hero have much larger and sparser search spaces than NAS-
Bench-101. Search space size can approximately be measured by number of vertices and possible
ops for each vertex. These 3 task for (# nodes, # ops) are (15, 8), (20, 26), and (30, 43) whereas
NAS-Bench-101 is (7, 3). In Figure 2 and 3, we show that our method (PAM-RT) increases the
convergence speed of evolution and reaches a higher maximum fitness with fewer samples compared
to regularized evolution. Across all 5 Nguyen tasks, our method significantly speeds up evolution and
for example achieves the maximum fitness on Nguyen-3 in 20k samples while RegEvo fails to reach
the maximum fitness in 100k samples. On Hero, our method achieves the same average maximum
fitness in 10k samples as RegEvo does in 37k samples (both the baseline and PAM-RT use FEC). On
AutoRL, our method achieves the same fitness as RegEvo in 4x less compute.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparing mutation strategies, we see that PAM-RT generally outperforms PAM and Max-Pairwise.
While Max-Pairwise can sometimes obtain good early performance, it converges to a lower maximum
fitness later on. Max-Pairwise chooses the highest scoring candidate so it could be exploiting the
model too heavily, leading to less exploration.


Figure 3: PAM-RT has better sample efficiency and higher maximum performance compared to
regularized evolution on harder search spaces, Hero and AutoRL.


4.2.2   E FFECT OF MODEL ACCURACY ON FINAL PERFORMANCE

Although a good predictor can improve local search, it is not guaranteed that it improves long term
performance even if the model is perfect. In addition, training an accurate predictor online confounds
with the predictor’s effect on evolution. For example, an inaccurate model may lead to the collection
of more sub-optimal data for training, creating a negative feedback loop. We measure the effect of a
model’s simulated accuracy on evolution by assuming access to an oracle model and adjusting its
accuracy. We conduct (noisy) oracle experiments using NAS-Bench-101 and Nguyen tasks because
oracle models are available for them (pre-computed for NAS-Bench-101 and fast to compute for
Nguyen tasks). Given an oracle g(·) that assigns a fitness for any candidate, we can simulate a
binary prediction model f (·, ·) of any accuracy a by randomly flipping the ground truth ordering
with probability 1 − a. We use the noisy oracle models in the PAM-RT setting. Figure 4 (left)


Figure 4: Noisy oracle experiments on NAS-Bench-101 and Nguyen-12 show the benefit of a using a
predictor with evolution. Dashed curves show regularized evolution baseline.


shows that on NAS-Bench-101 evolution performance correlates well with model’s accuracy where a
perfect model (100% accuracy) converges the fastest and the least accurate model (60%) converges
the slowest. These experiments highlight the importance of the predictor’s accuracy for end-to-end
performance, motivating us doing design ablations in Section 4.2.3 to identify models that work best.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2.3    D ESIGN A BLATIONS
Here we show what design choices matter for PAM-RT. For ablations, we use a set of Nguyen tasks
as they have varying difficulty and search space sizes while still having cheap evaluation for easier
analysis.
Binary vs Regression: Most prior work uses a regression predictor so we study the effect of using
a regression vs a binary predictor. We collect 10, 000 samples from regularized evolution, train
for 1000 epochs on a training set, and measure accuracy on a held out test set. The accuracy for
the regression predictor is measured by comparing which of the two predicted scores is higher for
a pair of graphs. In Figure 5, we show that the binary predictor achieves significantly higher test
accuracy across all symbolic regression tasks. This further motivates the use of binary predictors
since accuracy can have a large impact on evolution convergence as shown in Figure 4 (left). As
Dudziak et al. (2020) pointed out, a binary predictor can leverage O(N 2 ) training samples with N
evaluations, but a regression can only use O(N ) training samples. A regression predictor must also
generalize to unseen higher fitnesses while a binary predictor just has to predict comparisons. This
partly explains why they are more effective and generalize better.


Figure 5: Left: Test accuracy for regression vs binary predictor on random pairs from a fixed
10k dataset collected with regularized evolution for a range of symbolic regression tasks. Binary
predictors have consistently higher test accuracy. Right: Task performance on Nguyen-12 task using
different GNN architecture with GPS being the most performant architecture.

Does the choice of GNN matter? We perform an ablation experiment comparing different popular
GNNs and graph Transformers including GPS Rampásek et al. (2022), SAT Chen et al. (2022), GCN
Kipf & Welling (2017), and GIN Xu et al. (2019). We observe that the choice of GNN architecture
has an effect on the convergence of evolution. For the hardest symbolic regression task, Nguyen-12,
GPS performs the best in terms of converging quickly to the highest max fitness. Older networks
such as GCN and GIN take longer to converge and reach a lower max fitness.

4.3     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS

To better understand how the model helps and where it fails, we perform a counterfactual experiment
where we run regularized evolution as usual and train the PAM-RT model online but do not use it for
mutations.
This gives insight into the performance of the model given the ground truth. We run this experiment
on Nguyen-5 for easier analysis. At each mutation step, we sample 64 candidates, use the model to
score these candidates, and save the score and actual fitness of each candidate. We run this for 100k
steps to get 6.4e6 scores. We define a positive individual to be the case where its fitness is higher than
the parent, and a negative individual is defined as the complement. In Figure 6, we plot the accuracy
curve and the precision-recall curve of these candidates over a range of classifier thresholds. As
expected, accuracy is relatively high (> 0.95 for a classifier threshold of 0.5). During evolution most
individuals are negatives and the model correctly scores most of these individuals with low scores.
We observe this in Figure 7 where most of the negative scores are less than 0.5. However, in Figure 6,
we see that precision is quite low (around 0.01) and drops quickly to close to 0 for higher levels of
recall. Positive individuals are quite rare during evolution and while the model can correctly score
some of them (0.43 true positive rate for 0.5 threshold) as seen in Figure 7, there are a good portion
of positives with less than 0.5 score. From this analysis, we see that the model is good at ruling


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Left: Accuracy of our model for various classifier thresholds. Evaluated on data collected
during RegEvo with a model trained online on Nguyen5. Right: Precision recall curve of our model.


Figure 7: Left: Histogram of scores for negative individuals. Right: Histogram of scores for positive
individuals.


out many negative individuals and this would logically make evolution more efficient. However the
model could be better at letting more positives individuals through and reducing the number of false
negatives. Further analysis of why there is a high number of false negatives with almost 0 score could
provide insight for how to improve the model.

5   D ISCUSSION
We have presented a method for speeding up evolution with learned binary discriminators to more
efficiently search for a wide range of ML components. The same graph representation and GNN-
based predictor can be used over diverse domains and provide faster evolutionary search for symbolic
reqression equations, ML optimizers, and RL loss functions, as well as traditional NAS spaces.
Through ablations, we showed the importance of the mutation strategy, the use of a binary predictor
instead of a regression model, and state-of-the-art GNN architectures.
Predictor’s accuracy and generalization capability are important for this method to provide large
benefits. Immediate future work could focus on representation learning for better generalization
over graphs such as better graph architecture priors, unsupervised objectives, or even sharing data
across tasks. Longer term, one could consider alternative optimization methods for searching over
ML programs, but that still use learned representations over computation graphs such as an RL
policy. One potential avenue could be using generative models such as LLMs to propose promising
candidates. Speeding up the search for ML components with learning is a promising direction because
it could eventually create a virtuous cycle of continuous self improvement.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Daniel A. Abolafia, Mohammad Norouzi, and Quoc V. Le. Neural program synthesis with priority
  queue training. ArXiv, abs/1801.03526, 2018.
Irwan Bello, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le. Neural optimizer search with reinforce-
  ment learning. In ICML, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 459–468.
  PMLR, 2017.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Angelica Chen, David Dohan, and David R. So. Evoprompting: Language models for code-level
  neural architecture search. ArXiv, abs/2302.14838, 2023a.
Dexiong Chen, Leslie O’Bray, and Karsten M. Borgwardt. Structure-aware transformer for graph
  representation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham,
  Xuanyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. Symbolic discovery of
  optimization algorithms, 2023b.
Yaofo Chen, Yong Guo, Qi Chen, Minli Li, Wei Zeng, Yaowei Wang, and Mingkui Tan. Con-
  trastive neural architecture search with neural architecture comparators. In CVPR, 2021. doi:
  10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00938. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/
  CVPR2021/html/Chen_Contrastive_Neural_Architecture_Search_With_
  Neural_Architecture_Comparators_CVPR_2021_paper.html.
John D. Co-Reyes, Yingjie Miao, Daiyi Peng, Esteban Real, Quoc V. Le, Sergey Levine, Honglak
  Lee, and Aleksandra Faust. Evolving reinforcement learning algorithms. In ICLR, 2021.
Lukasz Dudziak, Thomas Chau, Mohamed S. Abdelfattah, Royson Lee, Hyeji Kim,
  and Nicholas D. Lane.   BRP-NAS: prediction-based NAS using gcns. In NeurIPS,
  2020.         URL     https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  768e78024aa8fdb9b8fe87be86f64745-Abstract.html.
Thomas Elsken, Jan-Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Simple and efficient architecture search for
  convolutional neural networks, 2017.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey, 2019.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Ryan Gillard, Stephen Jonany, Yingjie Miao, Michael Munn, Connal de Souza, Jonathan Dungay,
  Chen Liang, David R. So, Quoc V. Le, and Esteban Real. Unified functional hashing in automatic
  machine learning, 2023.
David E. Goldberg and Kalyanmoy Deb. A comparative analysis of selection schemes used in genetic
  algorithms. In Foundations of Genetic Algorithms, 1990.
Hao Hao, Jinyuan Zhang, Xiaofen Lu, and Aimin Zhou. Binary relation learning and classify-
  ing for preselection in evolutionary algorithms. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 24(6):1125–1139,
  2020. doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2020.2986348. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2020.
  2986348.
Xin He, Kaiyong Zhao, and Xiaowen Chu. Automl: A survey of the state-of-the-art. Knowl. Based
  Syst., 212:106622, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106622. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1016/j.knosys.2020.106622.
Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik, Percy Liang, Vijay S. Pande, and Jure
 Leskovec. Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks. arXiv: Learning, 2019.
Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabás Póczos, and Eric P. Xing.
  Neural architecture search with bayesian optimisation and optimal transport. In NeurIPS, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In ICLR (Poster), 2017.

John R. Koza. Genetic programming - on the programming of computers by means of natural
  selection. In Complex Adaptive Systems, 1993.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. In
  Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI, 2019.
  URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v115/li20c.html.

Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei,
  Alan L. Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural architecture search. In
  ECCV, 2018a. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5\_2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-030-01246-5_2.

Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: differentiable architecture search. CoRR,
  abs/1806.09055, 2018b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09055.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.

Shun Lu, Jixiang Li, Jianchao Tan, Sen Yang, and Ji Liu. TNASP: A transformer-based NAS predictor
  with a self-evolution framework. In NeurIPS, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2021/hash/7fa1575cbd7027c9a799983a485c3c2f-Abstract.
  html.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv,
  abs/1312.5602, 2013.

Terrell Nathan Mundhenk, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Cláudio P. Santiago, Daniel M. Faissol,
  and Brenden K. Petersen. Symbolic regression via neural-guided genetic programming population
  seeding. ArXiv, abs/2111.00053, 2021.

Yameng Peng, Andy Song, Vic Ciesielski, Haytham M. Fayek, and Xiaojun Chang. PRE-NAS:
  predictor-assisted evolutionary neural architecture search. In GECCO, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3512290.
  3528727. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3512290.3528727.

Brenden K. Petersen, Mikel Landajuela, T. Nathan Mundhenk, Cláudio Prata Santiago, Sookyung
  Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical expressions
  from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In ICLR, 2021.

Hieu Pham, Melody Y. Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture
  search via parameter sharing. In ICML, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v80/pham18a.html.

Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching for activation functions. ArXiv,
  abs/1710.05941, 2018.

Ladislav Rampásek, Michael Galkin, Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Anh Tuan Luu, Guy Wolf, and Do-
  minique Beaini. Recipe for a general, powerful, scalable graph transformer. In NeurIPS, 2022.

Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search. In AAAI, 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33014780. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33014780.

Esteban Real, Chen Liang, David R. So, and Quoc V. Le. Automl-zero: Evolving machine learning
  algorithms from scratch. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Prentice Hall, 3 edition,
  2010.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yanan Sun, Handing Wang, Bing Xue, Yaochu Jin, Gary G. Yen, and Mengjie Zhang. Surrogate-
  assisted evolutionary deep learning using an end-to-end random forest-based performance predictor.
  IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 24(2):350–364, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2019.
  2924461.
Nguyen Quang Uy, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, Michael O’Neill, Robert I. McKay, and Edgar Galván
  López. Semantically-based crossover in genetic programming: application to real-valued symbolic
  regression. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines, 12:91–119, 2011.
Wei Wen, Hanxiao Liu, Yiran Chen, Hai Helen Li, Gabriel Bender, and Pieter-Jan Kindermans. Neural
 predictor for neural architecture search. In ECCV, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6\_39.
 URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_39.
Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, and Yash Savani. BANANAS: bayesian optimization with neural
  architectures for neural architecture search. In AAAI, 2021a. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/
  index.php/AAAI/article/view/17233.
Colin White, Arber Zela, Robin Ru, Yang Liu, and Frank Hutter.      How pow-
  erful are performance predictors in neural architecture search? In NeurIPS,
  2021b.         URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  ef575e8837d065a1683c022d2077d342-Abstract.html.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Yixing Xu, Yunhe Wang, Kai Han, Yehui Tang, Shangling Jui, Chunjing Xu, and Chang
  Xu.   Renas: Relativistic evaluation of neural architecture search. In CVPR, 2021.
  doi:   10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00439.        URL https://openaccess.thecvf.
  com/content/CVPR2021/html/Xu_ReNAS_Relativistic_Evaluation_of_
  Neural_Architecture_Search_CVPR_2021_paper.html.
Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. Nas-
  bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture search. In ICML, 2019. URL http:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ying19a.html.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2017.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ue8Hcxg.


                                                12
