Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ED-N E RF: E FFICIENT T EXT-G UIDED E DITING OF 3D
S CENE W ITH L ATENT S PACE N E RF
 Jangho Park2∗, Gihyun Kwon3∗ , Jong Chul Ye1,2,3
 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI1 , Robotics Program2 ,
 Department of Bio and Brain Engineering3 , KAIST
 {jhq1234,cyclomon,jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr



                                            A BSTRACT

           Recently, there has been a significant advancement in text-to-image diffusion
           models, leading to groundbreaking performance in 2D image generation. These
           advancements have been extended to 3D models, enabling the generation of novel
           3D objects from textual descriptions. This has evolved into NeRF editing meth-
           ods, which allow the manipulation of existing 3D objects through textual con-
           ditioning. However, existing NeRF editing techniques have faced limitations in
           their performance due to slow training speeds and the use of loss functions that
           do not adequately consider editing. To address this, here we present a novel 3D
           NeRF editing approach dubbed ED-NeRF by successfully embedding real-world
           scenes into the latent space of the latent diffusion model (LDM) through a unique
           refinement layer. This approach enables us to obtain a NeRF backbone that is
           not only faster but also more amenable to editing compared to traditional image
           space NeRF editing. Furthermore, we propose an improved loss function tailored
           for editing by migrating the delta denoising score (DDS) distillation loss, origi-
           nally used in 2D image editing to the three-dimensional domain. This novel loss
           function surpasses the well-known score distillation sampling (SDS) loss in terms
           of suitability for editing purposes. Our experimental results demonstrate that ED-
           NeRF achieves faster editing speed while producing improved output quality com-
           pared to state-of-the-art 3D editing models. Code and rendering results are avail-
           able at our project page1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, the development of neural implicit representation for embedding three-dimensional
images in neural networks has seen remarkable progress. This advancement has made it possible
to render images from all angles using only a limited set of training viewpoints. Starting with the
seminar work known as the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021), which trained
radiance fields using a simple MLP network, various improved techniques (Barron et al., 2021;
Reiser et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2022) based on advanced network architectures or modified en-
coding have been proposed. Alternatively, several methods (Sun et al., 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al.,
2022; Karnewar et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) proposed to directly optimize voxel points serving
as sources for rendering, bypassing the traditional approach of encapsulating all information within
implicit networks. These methods have gained prominence for their ability to train radiance fields in
a remarkably short time. In addition to representing existing 2D image data in the 3D space, recent
research has explored expanded approaches for generating entirely novel 3D objects. With the emer-
gence of text-to-image embedding models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), various methods have
been proposed to train implicit networks that can generate new objects solely from text prompts (Jain
et al., 2022). This trend has been accelerated with the advent of text-to-image diffusion generation
models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), particularly through the score distillation
sampling (SDS) (Poole et al., 2022) which conveys the representation of the text-to-image model to
NeRF model.
    ∗
        equally contributed
    1
        https://jhq1234.github.io/ed-nerf.github.io/


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Qualitative results of our method. ED-NeRF successfully edited 3D scenes with given
target text prompts while preserving the original object structure and background regions.

However, the challenge of editing pre-trained 3D implicit networks according to specific conditions
still remains as an open problem due to the constraints of tasks: maintaining the integrity of the orig-
inal 3D images while making desired modifications. As an initial work, several approaches (Wang
et al., 2022; 2023a) tried to edit the pre-trained NeRF models based on text conditions, utilizing the
pre-trained CLIP model to fine-tune the parameters of NeRF models. Nevertheless, these methods
exhibit notable weaknesses, including the performance limitations of the CLIP model itself and the
need for rendering high-resolution images during training, which results in significant time con-
sumption.
Recently, several editing methods proposed to leverage the enhanced expressiveness of text-to-image
diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion. Some methods (Sella et al., 2023) proposed to directly
employ the score distillation sampling method, with additional regularizations. However, these
methods suffer from significant time consumption and instability in generation performance due to
the requirement of full-resolution rendering in the training stage and limitations of the score distilla-
tion loss itself. Other alternative approaches (Haque et al., 2023) proposed to directly manipulate the
training images of NeRF using text-guided image translation models. This method aims to enable
the generation of 3D images corresponding to text conditions. However, it suffers from a significant
drawback in terms of training time, as it requires periodic translation of training images during the
training process.
To address these challenges, we are interested in developing a novel NeRF editing method to effi-
ciently and effectively edit 3D scenes using only text prompts. To achieve this, we enable NeRF to
operate directly in the NeRF latent space, similar to Latent-NeRF (Metzer et al., 2023), which helps
reduce time and computational costs. However, naively rendering the latent feature of real-world
scenes directly with NeRF may lead to a significant drop in view synthesis performance due to the
lack of geometric consistency in the latent space. To tackle this issue, we conduct an analysis of
the latent generation process and propose a novel refinement layer to enhance performance based on
the analysis. Furthermore, to solve the drawback of the existing SDS-based method in editing, we
propose a new sampling strategy by extending Delta Denoising Score (DDS) (Hertz et al., 2023), a
2D image editing technique based on score distillation sampling, into the 3D domain. This exten-
sion allows us to achieve high-performance editing capabilities while keeping computational costs
affordable, even with large Diffusion Models such as Stable Diffusion. Given the superior editing
proficiency of our approach, we’ve named it ED-NeRF (EDiting NeRF).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK

Starting from the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021), there have been ap-
proaches to represent three-dimensional scenes in neural fields. However, due to the slow training
speed, several approaches tried to improve the performance by modifying the network architecture
or training strategy (Barron et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2022; Reiser et al., 2021). Several meth-
ods without relying on neural networks showed great performance in accelerating. These include
a method for optimizing the voxel fields (Sun et al., 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022; Karnewar et al., 2022), or decomposing the components of field representation. Based on the
success of these techniques, methods for generating ‘novel’ 3D scenes have been proposed. Espe-
cially with the emergence of the text-to-image embedding model of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
DreamField (Jain et al., 2022) leveraged CLIP to train the NeRF model for novel 3D object synthe-
sis. Recently, the performance of the text-to-image diffusion model enabled remarkable improve-
ment in 3D generation. Starting from DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022), several methods (Metzer
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Xu et al., 2023) showed impactful results using the diffusion-based
prior. However, these methods are limited to generating ‘novel’ 3D objects and, therefore cannot be
applied to our case of NeRF-editing which tries to modify the existing 3D scenes according to the
given conditions.
Compared to the novel object generation, NeRF editing is still not an explored field, due to the com-
plexity of the task. As a basic work, several methods focused on color or geometric editing (Yuan
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021; Kuang et al., 2023). Other works tried style transfer or appearance
transfer on 3D neural fields (Zhang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Bao et al., 2023) and showed
promising results. With incorporating the CLIP model, several approaches (Wang et al., 2022;
2023a; Song et al., 2023) tried to modify the pre-trained NeRF towards the given text conditions.
Although the results show pleasing results, the method still has limitations in detailed expression
due to the limitation of CLIP model itself.
Similar to the novel scene generation case, the development of text-to-image diffusion models
brought significant improvement in the editing field. Starting from Score Distillation Sampling
method proposed in DreamFusion, Vox-e tried to edit the pre-trained voxel fields with regulariza-
tion (Sella et al., 2023). As an alternative method, InstructNerf2Nerf (Haque et al., 2023) proposed
to directly leverage 2D image translation models for changing the attribute of 2D images for NeRF
training. However, these methods still have limitations due to excessive training time or unstable
editing from loss functions. To address the above problems, we propose an efficient method of
editing with novel latent space NeRF training and improved edit-friendly loss functions.


3     M ETHODS

Figure 2 provides an overview of training ED-NeRF. First, we optimize NeRF in the latent space
of Stable Diffusion. To do this, we encode all images using a pre-trained Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) to obtain the feature vectors and guide NeRF to predict these feature vectors directly. Also,
we introduce an additional refinement layer, which enhances the novel view synthesis performance
of NeRF (Fig. 2(a)). At the inference stage, we can render a natural image by latent NeRF via
decoding rendered latent map (Fig. 2(b)). At the editing phase, by utilizing DDS, we adjust the
parameters of both NeRF and the refinement process to align the 3D scene with the provided target
text (Figure 3). The detailed pipeline for this approach is outlined in the following sections.

3.1   ED-N E RF FOR 3D S CENE E DITING

NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2021) uses MLPs to predict density σ and color c for a given 3D point
coordinate x = (x, y, z) and view direction d. Through positional encoding γ(·), x and d are
mapped into high-frequency vectors, and then fed into the neural network of NeRF, resulting in two
outputs: density σ ∈ R and color c ∈ R3 .
                                      (c, σ) = Fθc (γ(x), γ(d))                                    (1)
Through volume rendering Eq. (2), NeRF predicts the pixel color along the camera ray r(t) = o +
td, with t representing the depth within the range [tnear , tf ar ] , o stands for the camera position,


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overall pipeline of training and inference stage. (a) We optimize ED-NeRF in the
latent space, supervised by source latent. Naively matching NeRF to a latent feature map during
optimization can degrade view synthesis quality. (b) Inspired by the embedding process of Stable
Diffusion, we integrated additional ResNet blocks and self-attention layers as a refinement layer. (c)
All 3D scenes are decoded from the Decoder when ED-NeRF renders a novel view feature map.

and d represents the view direction:
                  Z tf                                               Z t
         Ĉ(r) =        T (t)σ(r(t))c(r(t), d)dt, where T (t) = exp −    σ(r(s))ds .                 (2)
                    tn                                                       tn

Optimizing NeRF to render the latent feature value of the latent diffusion model offers several ad-
vantages in text-guided 3D generation. These advantages include a reduced training burden due
to the decreased dimensionality of the space, and enhanced editability for the NeRF model, as the
rendered outputs can be directly employed as input for the latent diffusion models. The concept of
migrating NeRF to the latent space is first proposed by Latent-NeRF (Metzer et al., 2023), in which
the NeRF is directly trained with the latent feature rather than RGB color. Therefore it can render
a 3D scene without the encoding process during optimization when using the latent diffusion model
as semantic knowledge prior. However, this work exclusively focuses on generating ‘virtual’ 3D
assets without supervision, making it unsuitable for real-world scenes.
Thus, ED-NeRF is realized based on a novel latent NeRF training pipeline for synthesizing real-
world scenes in the latent space. As depicted in Figure 2, when a real-world image dataset I contains
multi-view images I = {I i }N i=1 , we can encode all images to the latent space of Stable Diffusion
via encoder to obtain the feature: z i = E(I i ) ∈ R64×64×4 . After embedding all images, we can use
the latent feature maps z := {z i }N
                                   i=1 as label data set for ED-NeRF training using the loss function:
                                             X                        2
                                    Lrec =         Z i (r) − Ẑ i (r)                              (3)
                                            r∈R

where Z denotes the pixel latent value of the latent z i and Ẑ i (r) is rendered by the volume rendering
        i

equation:
                  Z tf                                                        Z t
           i
         Ẑ (r) =      T (t)σ(γ(t))fz (r(t), d)dt, where T (t) = exp −             σ(r(s))ds .        (4)
                    tn                                                        tn
              4
where fz ∈ R denotes the predicted feature value by the neural network, taking γ(x) and γ(d) as
input:
                                     (fz , σ) = Fθ (γ(x), γ(d))                                  (5)
By minimizing the loss Eq. (3) to update the parameters of the neural network Fθ , we obtain a novel
ED-NeRF model optimized in the latent space of the Stable Diffusion.

3.2   R EFINEMENT L AYER BASED ON L ATENT F EATURE A NALYSIS

When naively matching the latent generated by Eq. (3), we observed that the reconstruction perfor-
mance significantly deteriorated. In addressing this issue, we analyzed the Encoder E and Decoder
D of Stable Diffusion and discovered the following insight in the process:


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Expanding DDS into 3D for ED-NeRF editing. Pretrained ED-NeRF renders the target
latent feature map, and a scheduler of the denoising model perturbs it to the sampled time step.
Concurrently, the scheduler adds noise to the source latent using the same time step. Each of them
is fed into the denoising model, and the DDS is determined by subtracting two different SDS scores.
In combination with a binary mask, masked DDS guides NeRF in the intended direction of the target
prompt without causing unintended deformations.

1) The encoder and decoder consist of ResNet blocks and self-attention layers. Therefore during the
process of mapping the image to the latent space and forming a feature map, pixel values exhibit
interference between each other, primarily due to ResNet and self-attention layers. Thus the latent
and image pixels are not directly aligned.
2) When NeRF renders a single pixel value from the latent feature map, each ray independently
passes through an MLP to determine the pixel value of the feature map. Therefore, the feature value
rendered by NeRF for a single pixel is determined without interactions with other pixels.
Based on this analysis, we find that the reason for the deformed reconstruction performance of the
latent NeRF lies in the inconsideration of the interactions mentioned above. Therefore, we aim to
incorporate the interactions among pixels introduced by the ResNet and self-attention layers into
the ED-NeRF rendering stage. Fortunately, in the Encoder and Decoder of Stable Diffusion, the
embedded feature maps pass through self-attention layers at the same dimension, allowing us to
concatenate two attention layers straightly. Taking advantage of this, we can design a refinement
layer Fϕ (·) as shown in Figure 2, without dimension change of input and output vector. Let Z̃ i as
the pixel latent vector of the refined feature map z̃ i , where formed from z̃ i = Fϕ (ẑ i ). Therefore, we
can design a refined reconstruction loss function as follows :
                                   X                       2
                         Lref =         Z i (r) − Z̃ i (r) , where z̃ i = Fϕ (ẑ i )                      (6)
                                  r∈R
Ultimately, we can formulate total training loss as the sum of the refinement loss Lref and recon-
struction loss Lrec , as follows.
                                     Lrtot = λrec Lrec + λref Lref                                   (7)
We update NeRF and refinement layer concurrently denoted as Fθ and Fϕ by minimizing total loss
Lrtot to reconstruct latent vectors in various views. To ensure stable learning, training with λrec set
to 1.0 and λref set to 0.1 during the initial stages of training. Beyond a specific iteration threshold,
we set it to 0 to encourage the refinement layer to focus more on matching the latent representations.

3.3   E DITING ED-N E RF VIA D ELTA D ENOISING S CORE

After optimizing ED-NeRF in the latent space, it is possible to directly employ the latent diffu-
sion model to update ED-NeRF parameter via rendered latent map z in the direction of the target
text prompt ytrg . The most well-known method for text-guided NeRF update is Score Distillation
Sampling (SDS), which directly transfers the score estimation output as a gradient of NeRF training:
                                                                               ∂zt
                       ∇θ LSDS (z, ytrg , ϵ, t) = ω(t)(ϵψ (zt , ytrg , t) − ϵ)                   (8)
                                                                               ∂θ

                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, in our NeRF editing case, the updating rule for SDS often shows several problems in-
cluding color saturation and mode-seeking (Wang et al., 2023b). We conjecture that the problem
originated from the properties of score estimation itself. Since the target noise ϵ is pure Gaussian,
the score difference is not aware of any prior knowledge of source images. Therefore the generated
outputs are just the replacement of hallucinated objects without consideration of source NeRF.
To solve the problem of SDS, we focus on the recently proposed 2D editing method of Delta De-
noising Score (DDS) (Hertz et al., 2023). The major difference between SDS and DDS is that the
distilled score is the difference between the denoising scores from target and source. As shown in
Eq. (9), DDS can be formed as a difference between two SDS scores conditioned on two different
text prompts:
                           ∇θ LDDS = ∇θ LSDS (ẑ, ytrg ) − ∇θ LSDS (z, ysrc ),                      (9)
where z is source latent, ẑ is rendered target latent, ytrg represents the target text embedding, ysrc
represents the reference text embedding. DDS guides the optimized latent towards the target prompt
from the source prompt without the influence of the pure noise component, therefore it can easily
edit 2D images.
We aim to extend this manipulation capability of DDS to 3D space as shown in Fig. 3. As we
already have embedded source latent z i for the i-th camera pose, we can directly use them as source
components of DDS. To fine-tune the model, we render the edited output z̃ i which is also rendered
from the i-th camera pose. With the paired latents, we add the same sampled noise ϵt with the noise
scale of timestep t to both source and edited latents so that we obtain noisy latent z̃ti , zti . Then we
apply the diffusion model to obtain estimated score outputs from noisy latents using different text
conditions for source and edited images. As in Eq. (9), we can use the difference between the two
outputs as a gradient for updating the NeRF parameters. In this step, we simultaneously train the
NeRF parameters θ with refinement parameters ϕ as it showed better editing quality. Therefore with
the random i-th camera pose, our 3D DDS is formulated as:
                      ∇θ,ϕ LDDS = ∇θ,ϕ LSDS (z̃i , ytrg ) − ∇θ,ϕ LSDS (zi , ysrc ).                 (10)
Although the DDS formulation improves the performance, using vanilla DDS leads to excessive
changes in unwanted areas and inconsistency between two different scenes. Therefore, we propose
an additional binary mask for utilizing DDS in 3D images. The objective function that combines the
binary mask M and DDS is as follows:
                                   ∇θ,ϕ LMDDS = M · (∇θ,ϕ LDDS ),                                   (11)
where · denotes the pixel-wise multiplication and M is the conditional binary mask of the specific
region of the target prompt to change. This mask is generated by utilizing off-the-shelf text prompt
segmentation models such as CLIPSeg (Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022) and SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)
to segment the target region by a text prompt.
Despite the use of a binary mask, masked DDS loss ∇LM DDS update all parameters of NeRF po-
tentially affecting even undesired areas. As a result, solely depending on the masked DDS loss may
inadvertently result in alterations beyond the mask boundaries. Hence, we introduce an additional
reconstruction loss as follows to mitigate undesired deformations beyond the mask.
                          LMrec = λim · M · Lrtot + λom · (1 − M) · Lrtot .                         (12)
Finally, the total editing loss is as follows:
                                        Ltot = LMDDS + LMrec                                        (13)
By suppressing undesired alterations through the use of the masked reconstruction loss LM rec ,
our total editing objective function updates NeRF and refinement layer Fθ and Fϕ , ensuring NeRF
renders novel views in accordance with the desired text conditions.

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
4.1   BASELINE METHODS

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our method, we perform comparative experiments
comparing it to state-of-the-art methods. As CLIP-based text guidance editing methods, we used


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Comparison with baseline models. ED-NeRF demonstrates outstanding performance
in effectively altering specific objects compared to other models. Baseline methods often failed to
maintain the region beyond the target objects and failed to guide the model towards the target text.


CLIP-NeRF (Wang et al., 2022) and NeRF-ART (Wang et al., 2023a). CLIP-NeRF encodes the im-
ages rendered by NeRF to the CLIP embedding space, allowing it to transform the images according
to the text condition. As an improved method, NeRF-ART trains NeRF with various regulariza-
tion functions to ensure that CLIP-edited NeRF can preserve the structure of the original NeRF.
For fair experiments, we re-implemented the methods to TensoRF backbone, referencing the official
source codes. For the diffusion-based editing, we chose Masked SDS (Poole et al., 2022) and In-
structNeRF2NeRF (Haque et al., 2023) as the methods that target local editing. In the masked SDS
setting, we fine-tuned the pre-trained NeRF with applying basic SDS loss only to the masked re-
gions so that the NeRF model is locally edited. InstructNeRF2NeRF (Haque et al., 2023) leverages
the powerful generation capabilities of diffusion models to sequentially modify the entire dataset to
align with text conditions and use the modified dataset as a new source for NeRF training. We uti-
lized a database comprising real-world images, including LLFF (Mildenhall et al., 2019) and IBRNet
(Wang et al., 2021) datasets, as well as the human face dataset employed in Instruction-NeRF2NeRF
(Haque et al., 2023).

4.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Text-guided editing of 3D scenes. As shown in Figure 1, our method shows its capability to edit
various image types with different textual contexts. Specifically, it is possible to achieve the effec-
tive transformation of specific objects without affecting other parts. Our baseline method Instruct-
NeRF2NeRF (Haque et al., 2023) shows decent results with high consistency between images and


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Ablation studies. (a) If we only use DDS loss, the model fails to maintain the attribute
of untargeted regions and often fails to reflect text conditions. (b) If we do not use masked recon-
struction regularization, again the regions beyond the target objects are excessively changed. (c) If
we remove the mask from DDS, unwanted artifacts occur in untargeted regions. (d) With removing
the proposed refinement layer, the results become blurry as the backbone NeRF cannot fully embed
real-world scenes. Our proposed setting can modify a specific region in a 3D scene and follow the
target word without causing unwanted deformations.


text conditions, as well as view consistency across scenes. However, it faces limitations in accu-
rately transforming the specific objects to match text conditions and may introduce undesired image
alterations beyond the specific objects. In Masked SDS, the edited output fails to reflect the structure
of the original NeRF scene and shows unwanted artifacts. In the case of NeRF-ART, the entire im-
age is embedded into the CLIP space, and it does not inherently recognize and modify only specific
objects. Therefore, it exhibits limitations in recognizing and altering specific objects. CLIP-NeRF
also encodes the images rendered by NeRF to the CLIP embedding space, allowing it to transform
the images according to the text condition. However, its performance falls short when it comes to
altering specific parts in a similar manner. On the other hand, our ED-NeRF exhibited powerful
abilities in editing 3D scenes by specifying certain parts through text, surpassing other models. It
not only excelled in changing objects but also demonstrated the capability to faithfully follow and
modify areas that are not objects, such as the ground, in accordance with the text condition.

4.3   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

CLIP Directional Score. In order to quantitatively measure the editing performance, we show
the comparison results using CLIP Directional scores(Gal et al., 2021). The CLIP Directional score
quantifies the alignment between textual caption modifications and corresponding image alterations.
We rendered multiple view images from NeRF and measured the average score over images. When
compared to baseline methods, our model obtained the best similarity scores. The result indicates
that our edited NeRF accurately reflects the target text conditions.
User Study. In order to further measure the perceptual preference of human subjects, we conducted
an additional user study. For the study, we rendered images from edited NeRF using 5 different
scenes from LLFF and IBRnet. We gathered feedback from 20 subjects aged between their 20s and
40s. Each participant was presented with randomly selected multi-view renderings from our model
and baselines and provided feedback through a preference scoring survey. We set the minimum
score as 1 and the maximum score is 5, and users can choose the score among 5 options: 1-very
low, 2-low, 3-middle, 4-high, 5-very high. To measure the performance of editing, we asked two
questions for each sample: 1) Does the image reflect the target text condition?(Text score) 2) Does
the model accurately edit the target object?(Preservation). 3) Does the 3D scenes preserve view
consistency?(view consistency). In Table 1, we show the user study results. Compared with baseline
methods, our method showed the best score in text score and preservation, and second best in view
consistency. Overall, ours outperformed the baseline models in perceptual quality.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Metrics                 CLIP-NeRF       NeRF-Art       Instruct N2N      Mask SDS         Ours
CLIP Direction Score ↑          0.1648         0.1947           0.2053          0.1409         0.2265
     Text score↑                 2.56           3.20              3.29           3.14           3.88
   Preservation ↑                2.30           2.97              3.08           2.76           4.09
 view consistency ↑              3.21           3.79              3.28           3.56           3.64

Table 1: Quantitative Comparison. We compared the text-image similarity between the target text
and rendered output from edited NeRF (CLIP Directional Score). Also, we show the user study
results in three categories text-guidance score, source preservation score, and view consistency. The
results show that ours shows improved perceptual score among baseline models.

               Metrics           CLIP-NeRF*        NeRF-Art*       Instruct N2N        Ours
          Fine-tuning time↓         6min             15min            90min           14min
           GPU Memory↓              17GB             18GB              15GB            8GB

Table 2: Efficiency Comparison. We compared the efficiency of ours and baseline methods in
terms of training time and Memory usage. Our method can enable faster editing with lower memory
usage. For CLIP-NeRF and NeRF-Art, the models are fine-tuned in lower resolution (252×189),
due to excessive memory consumption. Instruct N2N and ours are fine-tuned in 512x512 resolution.


Efficiency comparison. To compare the editing efficiency, we check the fine-tuning time and mem-
ory usage in Table 2. Among baselines, our method uses the lowest memory for training, with a
much lower time compared to Instruct Nerf2Nerf. GPU memory usage and training time are mea-
sured based on the RTX 3090. In the baselines of CLIP-Nerf and Nerf-art, we experiment with
using downsized images as higher resolution editing causes GPU memory overflow. For Instruct
Nerf2Nerf, the fine-tuning process requires excessive time as it periodically translates the training
images. Considering that our method shows outperforming quality in text-guided editing, our pro-
posed scheme is efficient in both memory and time aspects. When comparing the time for the pre-
training NeRF backbone model, we did not include a comparison since all baselines and ours take
almost the same amount of time (about 10 minutes). More Details and comparisons on pre-training
time are in our Appendix.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDIES

To evaluate our proposed components, we conducted an ablations study in Figure 6. (a) If we
only use DDS, the method fails to maintain the untargeted regions with artifacts, even failing in
training (e.g. fossil). (b) If we do not use regularization LM rec , the edited results show the target
text attribute, but again the regions beyond the target objects are severely degraded. (c) When we
remove mask guidance on DDS, (w/o LM DDS ), unwanted minor deformations occur due to the
gradient of DDS affecting the regions outside the mask. (d) When we remove our refinement layer,
the results show blurry outputs, which indicate that latent NeRF is not accurately trained. When
we utilize all the components we proposed, we can reliably transform the 3D scene into the desired
target object while preserving the original structure source NeRF. In the Appendix, we included an
ablation study on our proposed refinement layer for novel-view reconstruction tasks.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced a novel ED-NeRF method optimized in the latent space. By enabling
NeRF to directly predict latent features, it efficiently harnesses the text-guided score function of
latent diffusion models without the need for an encoder. By doing so, our approach is able to effec-
tively reduce computation costs and address the burden of previous models that required rendering at
full resolution to utilize the diffusion model. We extended the strong 2D image editing performance
of DDS to the 3D scene and also introduced a new loss function based on the mask. As a result, it
showed high performance in object-specific editing, a task that previous models struggled with. We
experimented with our proposed approach across various datasets, and as a result, it demonstrated
strong adherence to text prompts in diverse scenes without undesired deformation.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   E THICS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENTS

Ethics statement. ED-NeRF enables efficient and accurate text-guided NeRF editing, which can be
applied to various applications. However, our ED-NeRF can be used for creating obscene objects
which may cause the users to feel offended. In order to prevent the possible side effects, we can use
a filtered diffusion model that does not contain malicious text conditions.
Reproducibility statement. We detailed our experimental process and parameter settings in our
Appendix. We will upload our source code to an anonymous repository for reproduction.

7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research was supported by National Research foundation of Korea(NRF) (**RS-2023-
00262527**), Field-oriented Technology Development Project for Customs Administration through
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT and Korea
Customs Service(**NRF-2021M3I1A1097938**), the Korea Medical Device Development Fund
grant funded by the Korea government (the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Energy, the Ministry of Health & Welfare, the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety)
(Project Number: 1711137899, KMDF PR 20200901 0015) and Culture, Sports and Tourism R&D
Program through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports
and Tourism in 2023

R EFERENCES
Chong Bao, Yinda Zhang, Bangbang Yang, Tianxing Fan, Zesong Yang, Hujun Bao, Guofeng
  Zhang, and Zhaopeng Cui. Sine: Semantic-driven image-based nerf editing with prior-guided
  editing field. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 20919–20929, 2023.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5855–5864,
  2021.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance
  fields. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 333–350. Springer, 2022.
Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5501–5510, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-
  guided domain adaptation of image generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00946, 2021.
Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei A Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Instruct-nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12789, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, and Daniel Cohen-Or.             Delta denoising score.     arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.07090, 2023.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 867–876, 2022.
Animesh Karnewar, Tobias Ritschel, Oliver Wang, and Niloy Mitra. Relu fields: The little non-
  linearity that could. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–9, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengfei Kuang, Fujun Luan, Sai Bi, Zhixin Shu, Gordon Wetzstein, and Kalyan Sunkavalli.
  Palettenerf: Palette-based appearance editing of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20691–20700, 2023.

Kunhao Liu, Fangneng Zhan, Yiwen Chen, Jiahui Zhang, Yingchen Yu, Abdulmotaleb El Sad-
  dik, Shijian Lu, and Eric P Xing. Stylerf: Zero-shot 3d style transfer of neural radiance fields.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8338–8348, 2023a.

Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11328, 2023b.

Steven Liu, Xiuming Zhang, Zhoutong Zhang, Richard Zhang, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Bryan Russell.
  Editing conditional radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 5773–5783, 2021.

Timo Lüddecke and Alexander Ecker. Image segmentation using text and image prompts. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7086–
  7096, 2022.

Luca Medeiros.   lang-segment-anything, 2023.                  URL https://github.com/
  luca-medeiros/lang-segment-anything.

Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12663–12673, 2023.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Rodrigo Ortiz-Cayon, Nima Khademi Kalantari, Ravi Ra-
  mamoorthi, Ren Ng, and Abhishek Kar. Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with
  prescriptive sampling guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2019.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.

Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 41(4):1–15,
  2022.

Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Christian Reiser, Songyou Peng, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. Kilonerf: Speeding up neural
  radiance fields with thousands of tiny mlps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, pp. 14335–14345, 2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Peter Hedman, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. Vox-e: Text-guided voxel
  editing of 3d objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12048, 2023.

Hyeonseop Song, Seokhun Choi, Hoseok Do, Chul Lee, and Taehyeong Kim. Blending-nerf: Text-
  driven localized editing in neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14383–14393, October 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast con-
  vergence for radiance fields reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5459–5469, 2022.
Kevin Turner. Decoding latents to rgb without upscale, 2022. URL https://discuss.
  huggingface.co/t/decoding-latents-to-rgb-without-upscaling/
  23204.
Can Wang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao. Clip-nerf: Text-and-
  image driven manipulation of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3835–3844, 2022.
Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao. Nerf-art:
  Text-driven neural radiance fields stylization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
  Graphics, 2023a.
Qianqian Wang, Zhicheng Wang, Kyle Genova, Pratul Srinivasan, Howard Zhou, Jonathan T. Bar-
  ron, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noah Snavely, and Thomas Funkhouser. Ibrnet: Learning multi-
  view image-based rendering. In CVPR, 2021.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023b.
Jiale Xu, Xintao Wang, Weihao Cheng, Yan-Pei Cao, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Shenghua Gao.
   Dream3d: Zero-shot text-to-3d synthesis using 3d shape prior and text-to-image diffusion models.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
   20908–20918, 2023.
Yu-Jie Yuan, Yang-Tian Sun, Yu-Kun Lai, Yuewen Ma, Rongfei Jia, and Lin Gao. Nerf-editing:
  geometry editing of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18353–18364, 2022.
Kai Zhang, Nick Kolkin, Sai Bi, Fujun Luan, Zexiang Xu, Eli Shechtman, and Noah Snavely. Arf:
  Artistic radiance fields. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 717–733. Springer,
  2022.
Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul Debevec, William T. Freeman, and
  Jonathan T. Barron. Nerfactor: neural factorization of shape and reflectance under an unknown il-
  lumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40(6):1–18, December 2021. ISSN 1557-7368. doi:
  10.1145/3478513.3480496. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3478513.3480496.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Training ED-NeRF details. For optimizing NeRF in Latent space, we use TensoRF as the backbone
for fast and efficient rendering with up to 64 resolution by supervision. As stated in the original
TensoRF, we use Adam optimizer. For RGB NeRF, the color values to predict are constrained
within the range of 0 to 1. In the case of NeRF trained in the latent space, the range of latent values
is at least between -3 and 3, which leads to faster convergence than density. Therefore, we set the
learning rate for trainable density voxels, which form the sigma in the original TensoRF, to 0.04,
while keeping the learning rates for other components the same as TensoRF at 0.02 during training.
During the training process, ED-NeRF needed to form a feature map of size 64 resolution, therefore
we configured the batch size to be 4096-pixel rays. We train ED-NeRF in latent space with source
latent feature map supervision for 100k steps on the single NVIDIA RTX 3090. When fine-tuning
ED-NeRF for editing purposes, we train ED-NeRF for 5k steps. We set λom as 100 and λim as 0.01
to strongly preserve the regions outside the mask while editing and reflecting the objects within the
mask.
Generate source image and latent feature map. Datasets such as LLFF and IBRNet typically con-
tain categories with a limited quantity of images. As mentioned earlier, due to the lack of guaranteed
geometric consistency within the latent space, synthesizing views using NeRF with a limited dataset
is an exceptionally challenging task. To address this issue from an editing perspective, we leveraged
a pre-trained NeRF model trained on RGB images. We employed publicly available NeRF models
for novel view synthesis, and when required, we trained our own RGB NeRF. Using this pre-trained
NeRF, we generated novel view images by capturing over 100 views along a spiral camera path.
Subsequently, these generated images were utilized as part of the source image dataset, denoted as
I. The required number of iterations for convergence to the target scene can vary depending on the
dataset, influenced by the provided images and text prompts.


B    R EFINEMENT L AYER D ETAILS

Architecture of Refinement layer. We used an additional layer to correct the rendered latent. The
front layer of the decoder embeds the 4-channel latent to a 512-channel vector before performing
self-attention. The rear layer of the encoder calculates self-attention on a 512-channel vector and
then samples a 4-channel latent through ResNet. Taking inspiration from this, in designing the
refinement layer, we use the combined architecture of the decoder front layer and the encoder rear
layer as shown in 2. We use 4 ResNet blocks and 2 self-attention blocks in our Refinement layer.
Ablation study of Refinement layer. To further show the effect of our proposed refinement layer,
we show the comparison on different network architectures such as MLP and ResNet. For a fair
comparison, both are designed to have the same depth as our Refinement layer. For the reconstruc-
tion results in Figure 6, we can observe that the reconstruction output from our refinement layer
shows fine details when compared to the basic setting. As already shown in our previous ablation
study in Figure 6, the refinement layer improves the latent space NeRF training which is crucial in
the final edited output.


C    E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON D ETAILS

To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed ED-NeRF, we compared the overall fine-tuning time
of text-guided editing. In the baseline methods, as the models apply editing on full-resolution NeRF
backbones, they require a much longer time to obtain reasonable edited outputs. Especially for the
Instruct-NeRF2NeRF, the overall editing time is over 30 minutes, up to 90 minutes based on text
conditions, as there should be periodic replacement of edited 2D images. Therefore the training
time is much longer than other baselines. In the case of CLIP-NeRF, the editing time is relatively
short (about 6 min) compared to other baselines, but the overall quality is degraded as shown in
our main script. Although NeRF art uses a similar training scheme to CLIP-NeRF, the model takes
longer time over 15 minutes as the method uses additional regularizations for editing. In the case
of NeRF-Art and CLIP-NeRF, we could not fine-tune the model with the original resolution due to
memory overflow, therefore we downsampled the images to 252x189 resolution. In Masked SDS
the average editing time is about 8 minutes, but again the output quality is not better than other


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Ablation study on refinement layer. Novel view synthesis results with different archi-
tectures on additional refinement layers. Without refinement layer, MLP and ResNet make saturated
or blurry images, but our refinement layer can represent high-frequency details.


Figure 7: Additional Comparison. We show comparison results between our proposed ED-NeRF
and mask-guided Instruct NeRF2NeRF. Instruct NeRF2NeRF often fails to capture the correct tex-
tual information.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Failure case. The diffusion model is a 2D-based image generation model, so it may not
consistently perform well in 3D image editing tasks. In this example, we aimed to change ‘statue’
to ‘black hole under a statue’ and ‘a hat’ to ‘a burning hat.’


methods. In our case, when it comes to easy cases such as color change the fine-tuning time takes
less than 3 minutes. In more complex cases, the training time is up to 14 minutes. In the case of
CLIP-Nerf and mask-SDS, the longer training could not get improvement. Compared with other
state-of-the-art baselines such as Instruct NeRF2NeRF and Nerf-Art, our method shows better time
efficiency in training. Unlike other methods, ED-NeRF is able to achieve a shorter fine-tuning time
because, for the synthesis of a 512x512 image, our method only needed to render a latent of size
64x64.
Furthermore, we compare the time it takes for the existing RGB NeRF model and ED-NeRF to
generate 512x512 RGB images. Based on the LLFF dataset, TensoRF takes an average of 2.7143
seconds to render a single 512-resolution image. In contrast, our ED-NeRF, which renders the latent
feature map and decodes it into an RGB image, takes an average of 1.1240 seconds per image. As
a result of training in the latent space and reducing the resolution, ED-NeRF shortens the inference
time by 2.4 times.
In terms of comparing the pre-training time, there is no absolute criteria for comparison since there
are multiple choices of state-of-the-art NeRF backbones. In our baseline methods of CLIP-NeRF
and NeRF-Art, we used the backbone model of TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022) which requires about
10 minutes for training. In the case of Instruct N2N, the method uses the Nerfacto (Zhang et al.,
2021) model which also requires about 9 minutes for pretraining the original NeRF backbone. In
our case, we need another step to extract novel view RGB images for training latent feature maps.
For novel view extraction, we used the fastest public models such as Plenoxels (Fridovich-Keil et al.,
2022), which takes less than 2 minutes for training and rendering. For encoding the RGB images to
latent features, we can obtain the features using a single feedforward process with Stable Diffusion
VAE encoder. This process takes less than 10 seconds. With the calculated latent features maps, we
trained the Latent-embedded NeRF model which takes about 9 minutes with TensoRF framework.
Therefore, the total pre-training time for our case is about 12 minutes. Overall, there is no large
difference in pre-training time between ours and baseline methods. Considering there are other
state-of-the-art NeRF backbones that show faster training, we can improve the time consumption
for the pre-training stage in future work.

D    A DDITIONAL C OMPARISON R ESULTS
Comparison with IN2N incorporating an additional mask. For further comparison, we con-
ducted experiments between ours and mask-guided Instruct NeRF2NeRF (IN2N). As IN2N uses
edited 2D images for training images, we can directly apply the binary mask on the training image


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Editing results using different segmentation models. To evaluate the validation of
our method, we experimented with editing using masks obtained from segmentation models with
varying accuracies. We observed stable editing performance even when using different off-the-shelf
models that allow the use of a text prompt as a condition.


so that only the target object area is edited. In Fig. 7, we show the comparison results. With the mask
guidance, IN2N shows improved performance in local editing, as it does not change the unrelated
regions. If the text prompt is relatively simple (e.g. gold car), the output quality of both models
is high. However, as IN2N heavily relies on the performance of Instruct Pix2Pix (InP2P) model,
the method cannot properly change the semantics of the objects if the editing prompt is difficult for
InP2P (e.g. snowy car, burning table, etc.). The results show that our proposed method is more
robust on text conditions when compared to baseline IN2N.

E    B INARY M ASK D ETAILS

Binary mask pipeline. To create a binary mask, we consider an off-the-shelf segmentation model.
Specifically, we consider models that can perform segmentation using text prompts. From well-
performing models such as LanguageSAM (Kirillov et al., 2023; Medeiros, 2023) and CLIPSeg
(Lüddecke & Ecker, 2022), we can extract binary masks from images. The mask generation process
begins by using the segmentation model to obtain a binary mask from entire source images. At
this point, a text prompt corresponding to the part of the image we want to modify is given as a
condition, extracting a mask for the specific object. Since the mask needs to be applied alongside a
64×64-sized latent vector, it undergoes resizing to fit the dimensions of 64×64.
The ablation study of segmentation models. To explore the sensitivity of ED-NeRF in relation
to the segmentation model, we utilized distinct binary masks extracted from different segmentation
models. As illustrated in Figure 9, despite employing binary masks with differing performance from
distinct mask models, we consistently obtain nearly identical NeRF editing results. In the figure,
the left mask, derived through the LanguageSAM model, and the right mask, obtained through the
CLIPSeg model, represent different masks extracted with ’man’ and ’car’ text prompts as conditions


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Latent Space Visualization. To verify the relationship between the RGB image and
its corresponding latent feature map, we show the visualization outputs. Latents in the figure are
linearly decoded results through matrix multiplication with a 3×4 matrix and a 4×64×64 latent
vector. For visualization purposes, we resize RGB images to 512×512 and upscale the 64×64 size
decoded latent to 512×512 resolution. For all the cases, we can clearly see that both the images and
latents have the same spatial information.


F    L ATENT F EATURE M AP A NALYSIS

In order to show whether the encoded latent representation actually has geometrical similarity to cor-
responding RGB images, we show the visualization results of latent in Fig.10. As our latent variable
has a dimension of 4×64×64, we cannot directly visualize them into an RGB image. Therefore, we
used a linear decoding matrix that can calculate the corresponding RGB images from latent repre-
sentations (Metzer et al., 2023; Turner, 2022). The results show strong evidence of a high correlation
between RGB images and the corresponding latent representations.


G    L IMITATIONS

Since we leverage a pre-trained Stable Diffusion model, there should be limitations in the generative
performance of the diffusion model itself. For example, as shown in Figure 8 if we try to apply text
conditions that are very far from the source object (e.g., ‘a statue’ to ‘black hole under a statue’),
sometimes the output quality is degraded. This may be solved when we use an improved version of
the latent diffusion model.


H    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Qualitative additional editing results. To further show the edited results, we show multi-view
rendered outputs from our edited NeRF in Fig. 13. The top scenes are altered from a reference to
‘statue’ to ‘gold statue’ and the scene just below it is changed from ‘ground under the statue’ to
‘water pond ground under the statue.’ In the case of the car images, ‘SUV’ is modified to ‘gold
SUV,’ followed by ‘shallow water pond under the SUV.’ Lastly, in the picture of the man, it changes
from ‘a man in the gray sweater’ to ‘a man in the batman suit,’ and subsequently to ‘Einstein in the
gray sweater.’ Through our unique method, we were able to achieve a very high-quality edited 3D


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Style transfer results. By adding style text conditions to the target prompt, we can
obtain high-quality stylized 3D scenes. The results show that the overall textures are changed to
target text prompts while preserving the original scene structures.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Editing results of using DDS with SDS We additionally explore the editing of NeRF by
incorporating DDS and SDS into our proposed method. As depicted in the figure, when using SDS
to guide editing NeRF, the drawbacks of SDS continue to impact NeRF editing.


scene. In particular, our model could even depict objects in the original scene being reflected in the
water when we changed the target region to a ‘water pond’.
NeRF Style transfer. To verify the versatility of our proposed method, we experimented with 3D
style transfer in Fig. 11. With the artistic style text prompts, our method can change the overall
texture of objects while preserving the structure of original source images. Just adding a style
condition text to the target prompt, we can obtain high-quality results as shown in the figure. (e.g.
‘a car’ → ‘a car, Modigliani style’) During the style base editing, we set λom as 100 to preserve the
overall structure of the edited object.
Editing with DDS + SDS. For further evaluation, we conduct experiments to examine the results
of using DDS and SDS together in NeRF editing. Incorporating the target prompt-guided score
obtained during the DDS process as an additional gradient, we used added gradient from DDS and
SDS for fine-tuning. As shown in Figure 12, when DDS and SDS are combined, the image adheres
to the text condition but undergoes a blurry transformation. This underscores the lingering issue
with SDS mentioned earlier, deteriorating image editing outcomes.
Visualized results of latent embedded NeRF in a natural scene. In Figure 14, we present the
rendering results of the ED-NeRF trained in the latent space. These results represent the state before
changing the image with the target text, demonstrating that ED-NeRF can effectively represent real-
world 3D scenes with a 64-resolution latent feature map and depth map. As depicted in Figure 2 (c),
the RGB image is obtained by rendering the 64-resolution feature map with ED-NeRF, followed by
decoding to generate a 512-resolution image, which is then resized to 504 × 378. The depth map,
on the other hand, is directly resized from 64 resolution to 504 × 378.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Edited scene in various views. We conduct an experiment where we manipulate differ-
ent objects with text prompts in various views. It demonstrates the ability to edit various elements
within 3D scenes and verify their accurate transformation in response to the provided text prompts.
ED-NeRF has a depth map for the training scene in the latent space, with a resolution of 64. For
visualization purposes, we resize it to 504×378 resolution in the above image.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Visualized latent feature and depth map. As illustrated in the figure, the ED-NeRF
trained in the latent space is capable of generating a high-quality depth map. We show visualizations
of the features rendered by ED-NeRF from various scenes and angles before the editing phase. RGB
images are the result of decoding latent feature maps rendered by our NeRF using Stable Diffusion,
and they are resized from 512 × 512 resolution to 504 × 378 resolution for visualization purposes.
Similarly, the depth maps are formed alongside the latent feature map at a resolution of 64 × 64, and
it has also been resized to 504 × 378 resolution for visualization.


                                                 21
