Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G AITOR : L EARNING A U NIFIED R EPRESENTATION
FOR C ONTINUOUS G AIT T RANSITION AND T ERRAIN
T RAVERSAL FOR Q UADRUPED ROBOTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The current state-of-the-art in quadruped locomotion is able to produce robust mo-
         tion for terrain traversal but requires the segmentation of a desired trajectory into
         a discrete set of skills such as trot, crawl and pace. This misses the opportunity
         to leverage commonalities between individual gait types for efficient learning and
         are unable to smoothly transition between them. Here, we present Gaitor, which
         creates a learnt representation capturing correlations across multiple distinct gait
         types resulting in the discovery of smooth transitions between motions. In partic-
         ular, this representation is compact meaning that information common to all gait
         types is shared. The emerging structure is interpretable in that it encodes phase
         correlations between the different gait types which can be leveraged to produce
         smooth gait transitions. In addition, foot swing characteristics are disentangled
         and directly addressable. Together with a rudimentary terrain encoding and a
         learned planner operating in this structured latent representation, Gaitor is able to
         take motion commands including gait type and characteristics from a user while
         reacting to uneven terrain. We evaluate Gaitor in both simulated and real-world
         settings, such as climbing over raised platforms, on the ANYmal C platform. To
         the best of our knowledge, this is the first work learning an interpretable unified-
         latent representation for multiple gaits, resulting in smooth and natural looking
         gait transitions between trot and crawl on a real quadruped robot.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the advances in optimal control (Mastalli et al., 2020; 2022a) and reinforcement learning
(RL) (Hoeller et al., 2023; Rudin et al., 2022a) methodologies in recent years, quadruped robots
are realising robust and efficient locomotion over uneven terrain. This has made quadrupeds an ex-
cellent choice for the execution of inspection and monitoring tasks, search and rescue, and delivery
tasks. Despite the effectiveness of modern controllers, the resulting methodologies utilise a distinct
set of discrete skills (gaits) to generate locomotion trajectories. These skills are independently learnt
and smooth transitions between these motions is impossible. Thus, commonalities between specific
gaits are ignored leading to inefficient representations. In some cases, core traits common to mul-
tiple skills are relearned. For example, the trot and pace gaits are both defined by the coordinated
movement of pairs of legs in phase with each other. This correlation could be leveraged to represent
both gaits in an efficient manner.
Inspired by recent advances in planning in structured latent-spaces for quadruped locomotion, we
posit that continuous transition between gaits is achievable by learning a single latent representa-
tion for multiple robot skills. This is realised by utilising a generative model exposed to discrete
examples of each gait type, specifically trot, crawl, pace and bound. A variational auto-encoder
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) captures correlations between each gait
creating a two-dimensional space in which information from each skill is shared across the repre-
sentation of each gait. For example, trot, crawl and pace are captured in a two-dimensional plane,
and a smooth transition from trot to crawl to pace and back again is achievable. The VAE is trained
purely with expert demonstrations from simulation in a self-supervised manner using the β-VAE
loss. Crucially, this loss is the evidence lower-bound (ELBO), which means that there is no interac-
tion with the environment during training.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: This approach, Gaitor, solves for a variety of locomotion tasks by learning a unified
representation over robot motions. We learn a single representation zr for multiple gaits (trot, pace
and crawl), which is conditioned on terrain features zg . These are inferred using the encoders
in panel (a). The latent-representation zr forms a compact solution-space to a continuous set of
different locomotion-problems meaning that new intermediate gaits are automatically discovered by
traversing the space. To select a particular locomotion trajectory, we traverse the trajectory using
oscillatory signals injected into two latent-space dimensions z0 and z1 , see panel (b). A learnt model
parameterises the radius Rk of the oscillatory signals to adjust the robot’s swing characteristics to
react to uneven terrain. The latent-space paths are decoded to create joint-space trajectories to
control the robot as shown in panel (c).

The VAE is able to infer this transition leading to novel intermediate gaits not seen during training.
This is achieved since the latent space captures the coordination between front and rear pairs of legs
and infers the phase between them. For example, consider just the front legs for any of the gaits
apart from bound. For these gaits, the right and left legs are out of phase: if the left leg is in swing
the right is in support. The rear pair of legs are similarly out of phase with each other for all the gaits
apart from bound. To generate a specific gait such as pace, the front right leg must be in phase with
the rear right leg. For trot the legs on the same side of the robot are out of phase, and for crawl, they
are half way out of phase. Crucially, the VAE is able to infer the phase between the front and rear
leg pairs during training and captures the correlations between these gaits. The result is a compact
representation in which seamless transitions between these three gaits can be found. The structure
of the latent space physically transforms as the gait transitions meaning that the same trajectory in
latent space decodes to any of the following gaits and their intermediaries: trot, crawl or pace.
The latent-space representation not only encodes multiple gaits, but also is conditioned on perceptive
information for terrain traversal. The evolution of the terrain in front of the robot is encoded and
conditions the latent state to inform the future trajectories. However, the nominal swing heights
and lengths may not be sufficient for traversing uneven terrain. For example, as one is walking it is
necessary to increase the footswing height or length to clear a particular obstacle such as a slightly
high pavement or step. This is an intuitive behaviour which we experience often. Similarly, the
latent-space representation for the entire gait is also intuitively understandable and as discovered
in VAE-Loco (Mitchell et al., 2023) locomotion trajectories encoded into the space are oscillatory.
Indeed, a large vertical amplitude leads to longer footswings and a displacement in the horizontal
decodes to a higher swing apex. This structure is leveraged via a learnt planner in latent space, which
continuously adjusts the amplitudes of the two oscillatory signals as the robot walks and encounters
terrain. These adjustments react to terrain resulting in larger and longer steps to clear an obstacle
and shorter more considered footfalls whilst the robot is climbing terrain.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this paper, we present Gaitor a unified representation for quadruped locomotion. This space
efficiently captures the trot and crawl gaits as well as facilitating smooth transitions between each
despite being trained without transitions. Furthermore, the resulting locomotion is conditioned on
the terrain ahead of the robot via an encoder, whilst a planner in latent space makes fine adjustments
to the robot’s swing heights and lengths. The VAE and the planner are packaged together to form
a trajectory optimiser in an MPC-style control loop. This is used to demonstrate terrain traversal
as well as continuous gait transitions and are deployed on the real ANYmal C robot (Hutter et al.,
2016). The resulting locomotion and the mutation of the latent-space trajectory and structure are
analysed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work showing smooth and continuous
transitions between distinct gaits.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Recent advances in quadruped locomotion literature is driving the utility of these platforms. Re-
inforcement learning (RL) methods (Gangapurwala et al., 2020; 2022; Rudin et al., 2022b) in par-
ticular are growing increasingly popular methods for locomotion due to advances in simulation
capabilities. A recent trend for RL is to solve locomoton by learning a set of discrete skills with a
high-level governor. An example of this is in Hoeller et al. (2023), which learns a set of distinct skills
designed to tackle a set of sub-tasks such as traverse a gap before learning a selector which chooses
a distinct option for the task at hand. This produces impressive behaviour, but no information is
shared across tasks meaning that each skill learns information from scratch without leveraging prior
knowledge. Another impressive work Locomotion-Transformer (Caluwaerts et al., 2023) learns a
generalist policy for multiple locomotion skills. This approach uses a transformer model to learn
a multi-modal policy conditioned on terrain. In contrast, Gaitor learns an explicit and compact 2D
representation for the dynamics of multiple locomotion gaits. The representation captures the phase
relationships between each leg and embeds these into the latent-space structure. As a result and
uniquely to Gaitor, unseen intermediate gaits are automatically discovered by traversing this space.

Work by Yang et al. (2021) tackles gait switching by learning to predict the phases between each leg.
The gait phase and the relative phases of each leg form this RL method’s action space. The predicted
phases create a contact schedule for a model predictive controller (MPC), which solves for the
locomotion trajectory. In Yang et al. (2021), the gait phase is an inductive bias designed to explicitly
determine the swing and stance properties of the gait. The utilisation of the gait phase as an inductive
bias for locomotion contact scheduling is common in literature. For example, work by Wu et al.
(2023) conducted contemporaneously to Gaitor utilises a latent-space in which different gaits/skills
are embedded. A gait generator operates from this space and selects a particular gait to solve part
of the locomotion problem. This utilises a series of low-level skills prior to learning the latent
representation and skills are trained using pre-determined contact schedules. In contrast, Gaitor
learns to infer the relationships between gait types and automatically discovers the intermediate
skills required for continuous gait transition purely from examples of the discrete gaits.
The utilisation of a learnt latent-representations for locomotion is a growing field of interest. These
methods are particularly efficient at learning compact representations, which form solution spaces
for locomotion generation. For example, (Li et al., 2020) learns high-level latent-action space and
a low-level policy from expert demonstrations using imitation learning. Locomotion results via an
MPC formulation, which is solved via random shooting using a learnt dynamics model. In a similar
vein, VAE-Loco (Mitchell et al., 2023) creates structured latent-space where the characteristics of the
trot gait are disentangled in the space. This structure is exploited leading to locomotion where the
cadence, footstep height and length can be varied continuously during the swing phase. VAE-Loco
is constrained to a single gait and operation on flat ground only. Nevertheless, this work forms the
inspiration for Gaitor which tackles multiple gaits and perceptive locomotion on uneven terrain.


3    A PPROACH

This approach, Gaitor, solves for a variety of locomotion tasks including continuous gait transitions
between trot and crawl via unseen intermediate gait types as well as perceptive terrain-traversal.
To do this, we create a single learnt-representation for all the gaits we wish to use. The learnt


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                𝑧#                                                      𝑧#
                                                                                                     Increasing Swing
            𝑧' 𝑘 : robot encoding               𝑧̃ (𝑘): updated robot                                Height
                                                encoding
                               𝑧" !                                                                         𝑅!                                                      𝑅!
 𝑿' (𝑘) 𝜓$%&                   𝑧# !                          )+
                                                        𝜓)$& 𝑿' (𝑘)                                                   Increasing Swing
 Robot                                                                                                 𝜙!             Length                                   𝜙!
 states                                                                                                                 𝑧"                                               𝑧"
                    𝑧( 𝑘 : terrain
                    encoding
 𝑿( (𝑘)                                                 𝜓** 𝑺+ (𝑘)
             𝜓,$'                                                                                                                    𝑅! : Planner radius
Processed                                                                                                                            𝜙! : Gait phase
terrain
      𝒂! : action                     Terrain Decoder
                                      (for training only)                                                                           𝑧( 𝑘
                                                                                                                                                           𝜓-./%         𝑅!
   Trot:          Pace:                                     )( (𝑘)
                                                            𝑿
   1.0            -1.0                                                                                                                   𝜙!
      𝑔! : desired
      gait slider                                                                             Swing          Swing                       Planner in Latent Space
                                                                                              Length         Height
 (a) Learn the representation for locomotion                            (b) Analyse the structure of the learnt                  (c) Train the planner in latent-space
                                                                        representation



Figure 2: The training process is divided into three stages. The first stage in panel (a) creates the
learnt representations for the robot’s dynamics zr and for the terrain zg . Next, this representation is
inspected to find useful structure. The latent dimensions z0 and z1 are plotted and in panel (b). We
see that the magnitude of oscillations in z0 and z1 control footswing height and length respectfully.
In panel (c), we learn a model to control these magnitudes using a planner in polar coordinates. The
user-commanded gait phase ϕk is the planner’s input and the radius Rk is its output.

latent-representation can be thought of as a continuous set of solutions to the dynamics equation
for robot locomotion. To control the robot, we must select a single solution. We traverse the latent
representation to create a trajectory which we decode to generate the joint-space solution. In this
paper, we use another learnt model to traverse the latent space and create locomotion trajectories.
There is a three stage training process for this approach followed by deployment. The first stage as
shown in Fig. 2 (a) creates a representation for the dynamics for the multiple gaits and is conditioned
using a terrain encoding, base-velocity action, and gait label. The second stage of the training
process inspects the structure of the learnt representation. This structure is depicted in Fig. 2 (b)
and informs the design of latent-space planner shown in Fig. 2 (c). The third stage is a behavioural
cloning training regime to learn a planner designed to traverse the latent representation. Finally,
once the latent space and its planner are trained, we deploy the approach in a model predictive
control (MPC) framework. All components are trained using expert trajectories generated using
RLOC (Gangapurwala et al., 2022) and exclude transitions between gaits.


3.1        C REATING THE L EARNT R EPRESENTATION FOR L OCOMOTION

The robot latent-space is created using a variational autoencoder (VAE) and an autoencoder (AE)
for the robot states and the terrain encoding.
Robot Encoding: The inputs to the VAE are the robot states. The state at time step k is constructed
as xk = [qk , eek , τk , λk , ċk , ∆ck ] and represent the joint angles, end-effector positions in the base
frame, joint torques, contact forces, base velocity, gravity vector, roll and pitch of the base respect-
fully. The VAE’s encoder ψenc takes a history of these states as input. The frequency of these
samples is fenc and is in general four to eight times lower than the decoder frequency fdec . The
input to the VAE is Xk and is constructed using N past samples stacked together into a matrix.
Similarly the output X̂+  k is made from M predictions into the future from time step k. The robot’s
base is floating in space and must be tracked so that the decoded trajectories can be represented in
the world frame. The encoder tracks the evolution of the base pose from a fixed coordinate: this
coordinate is the earliest time point in the encoder input and all input poses are relative to this frame.
All pose orientations are represented in tangent space. This is a common representation for the Lie-
Algebra of 3D rotations since the non-linear composition of transformations is vector algebra in the
this space, see Solà et al. (2021); Mastalli et al. (2022b) as examples. The output of the encoder
parameterises a Gaussian distribution to create an estimate for the robot latent zr (k).


                                                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The decoder predicts the future states X̂+k at the control frequency fdec = fctrl . This includes the
base-pose evolutions, which are expressed relative to the base pose at the previous time-step. The
inputs to the decoder are zr (k) the desired action ak , gait gk , and terrain encoding zg (k). The gait
slider gk ∈ R is a continuous value used to select the gait or intermediate gait type. Distinct gaits
such as trot, crawl, and pace are selected when gk = [1, 0, −1] respectfully.
The performance predictor (PP) predicts the contact states of the feet Sk and takes the robot en-
coding, and the desired action and gait as input. The PP has two functions: firstly during training
the binary cross-entropy loss (BCE) is backpropagted through the VAE’s encoder to structure the
space (see VAE-Loco (Mitchell et al., 2023) for complete details). Secondly, the contact states are
predicted during operation and sent to the tracking controller to enforce the contact dynamics.
Terrain Encoding: The terrain encoding is required
so that the decoder and planner can react to ter-
rain height variations. The heights h(k) of the ter-
rains are processed before being encoding and this
pipeline is depicted in Fig. 3. The robot provides a
2.5 dimensional height map of the terrain around the
robot constructed from depth images from four cam-
eras around the robot. This raw map is filtered and
in-painted in a similar fashion to Mattamala et al.
(2022). The future footholds are estimated using for-
ward kinematics and previous joint-states. We de-
fine the control pitch θc as the relative heights of ter-
rain between the front feet and the rears across the
body, see Fig. 3 (c). The control pitch is discontin-
uous and varies only when the robot takes a step.           Figure 3: Terrain processing pipeline. The
To convert this discontinuous variable to a continu-        robot produces a 2.5D height map of the ter-
ous one, we filter it using a second-order linear time-     rain around the robot. We process this map
invariant (LTI) filter. This converts the step-like con-    by sampling the heights at the footfall posi-
trol pitch sequence into a continuous time varying          tions, see panels (a) and (b). The control-
signal Xg (k) of the type shown in Fig. 3 (d). This         pitch angle θc is defined as the heights be-
is achieved by parameterising the resonant peak to          tween the front and rear heights of the foot-
occur at the peak of the foot swing and a damping           falls, see panel (c). These values are input
factor of 0.5. The input to the terrain encoder ψTER        to a second order resonant filter to create the
is a matrix of N stacked values Xg (k) sampled at           input to the terrain encoder xg (panel (d)).
the control frequency fc .
Training the VAE and Terrain AE: The VAE and the terrain autoencoder are trained concurrently
to create the learned representation. The VAE is optimised using gradients from the ELBO loss
                       LELBO = MSE(X+            +
                                           k , X̂k ) + βDKL [q(z|Xk )||p(z)],                          (1)
and the binary cross-entropy loss creating
                            LVAE = LELBO + γBCE(Sk , Ŝk ).                                            (2)
The VAE is optimised using GECO (Rezende & Viola, 2018) to tune the β during training.
Simultaneously, the terrain encoder’s weights are updated using the MSEVAE loss from the VAE
and a mean-squared error between predicted X̂g (k) and the ground truth from the data Xg (k). This
creates the terrain autoencoder loss
                      LTER = MSE(X+              +
                                        r (k), X̂r (k)) + MSE(Xg (k), X̂g (k)).                (3)
The terrain decoder is only used for training purposes and is not required for deployment.

3.2   I NSPECTING T HE L ATENT S PACE

We analyse Gaitor’s latent space to discover the useful structure within. To achieve this we use the
analysis tools described in VAE-Loco Sec. V. A. In summary, this finds that the two latent dimensions
with lowest variance z0 and z1 controls the robot’s swing heights and lengths independently and that
oscillatory trajectories injected into these dimensions decode to continuous locomotion. Points in
these dimensions are plotted and colour coded by predicted stance S+ in Fig. 2 (b). The latent-space
structure is explored fully in Sec. 4.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   L ATENT-S PACE P LANNER

The planner is designed to adjust the robot’s swing length and height to help the robot traverse
terrain. As shown in Fig. 2 (b), the planner design exploits the disentangled latent-space, and only
controls z0 and z1 which affect the swing heights and lengths. The planner is parameterised in polar
coordinates and take the gait phase ϕ(k) and terrain latent zg (k) as input to predict the radius of the
elliptical trajectory R(k), see Fig. 2 (c). This trajectory updates the values of the two latents with
lowest variance such that

                 z0 (k) ← R(k)sin(ϕ(k)),         and z1 (k) ← R(k)sin(ϕ(k) + π/2).                        (4)

Training the Planner: The planner in latent space is trained via behavioural cloning. Expert trajec-
tories are encoded into the VAE producing latent trajectories, z∗0 , ..., z∗D , where D is the number of
time steps in the encoded episode. Only the dimensions z0 and z1 are retained to create the dataset
for the planner and are converted to polar coordinates. Thus, z0∗ (0), ..., z0∗ (D) and z1∗ (0), ..., z1∗ (D)
are converted to radii R∗ (0), ..., R∗ (D), and phase ϕ(0), ..., ϕ(D). The latter and the terrain en-
coding zk are inputs to the planner whilst the former is the desired output. To reproduce the large
variations in the radius as the robot climbs steps, we utilise an architecture inspired by Ruiz et al.
(2018) as seen in Fig. 2 (c). The planner predicts a probability distribution rc for the radius over C
discrete values via a softmax. This distribution is multiplied by the weight of each corresponding
bin to estimate R(k). The total loss is the sum between the MSE and the cross-entropy loss between
the prediction rc and the label r∗ :
                                                     C−1
                                                                                      !
                                             ∗
                                                     X              exp(rc )        ∗
                   LPLAN = MSE(R(k), R (k)) −            log PI−1                 r .                      (5)
                                                     c=0           i=0 exp(rc )


3.4   D EPLOYMENT OF Gaitor

The VAE, AE and its planner form a trajectory optimiser in a closed-loop control loop. Fig. 1
doubles as a deployment diagram. Starting with panel (a), we encode the history of robot states
Xr (k) and the processed terrain input Xg (k) to estimate the latent states for the robot and terrain.
Next, the planner overwrites the two most significant latent dimensions z0 and z1 as shown in panel
(b). The operator has control over the robot’s heading using the action ak , the desired gait gk and
the gait phase ϕk . The concatenation of zr , zg , ak , and gk are decoded to find the next joint states
from X̂+                                 +
        k and the future contact states Sk . The next joint and contact states are sent to a whole-body
controller (WBC) (Bellicoso et al., 2018). In practice, there is lag between the desired pitch and the
robot’s pitch. Therefore, we set the robot’s base pitch to the average of the control pitch.
The entire approach operates on the CPU of the ANYmal C in a real-time control loop. As such
there are strict time budget and the inference time is limited to the duration of one time tick, which
for a control frequency of 400 Hz is 2.5 ms. Therefore, we deploy Gaitor using a bespoke C++
implementation and vectorised code.

                                    RL vs Representa-        Discovers Interme-      Inferred Phase vs
 Approach
                                    tion Learning            diate Skills            Phase as a Bias
 (Caluwaerts et al., 2023)          RL                       No                      Inferred
 (Hoeller et al., 2023)             RL                       No                      Inferred
 (Yang et al., 2021)                RL + MPC                 No                      Inductive Bias
 Gaitor                             Rep. Learn               Yes                     Inferred

Table 1: The capabilities and formulations of a range locomotion policies are compared. All methods
are capable of multiple gaits in order to traverse terrain. However, not all methods perceive their
surrounds to achieve to tackle terrain. Inferred phase corresponds to whether the approach utilises
the phase of the gait cycle in order to generate the motion types and is this inferred during training.
In the first two methods, the gait-phase is either not implicitly inferred or an inductive bias. In (Yang
et al., 2021), the phase of each and the offsets are an explicit actions rather than an inferred quantity.



                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Trot: g ! = 1.0        Trot/Crawl: g ! = 0.5   Crawl: g " = 0.0   Crawl/Pace: g ! = −0.5 Pace: 𝑔" = −1.0
     Key:
            Closed contact
            Open contact


Figure 4: The contact state of each point in latent space changes as the gait slider moves from trot
to crawl to pace. The contact schedule as the gait slider gk moves is depicted below the images of
the latent spaces. The phase between the front and rear legs shifts from out-of-phase for trot to 90◦
for crawl and finally to in-phase for pace.


4      R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Once Gaitor has been trained and deployed on the robot, its performance as a trajectory optimiser
is evaluated and contextualised. Table 1 compares Gaitor’s formulation to current art. To the best of
our knowledge, there are few approaches which are capable of automatically discovering continuous
transitions between locomotion gaits as the majority operate over discrete independent skills or use a
suitably large model to learn a generalist policy conditioned on terrain as in Caluwaerts et al. (2023).
The closest work Yang et al. (2021) utilises the gait phase as an inductive bias rather than inferring
this from the data and is not perceptive, which limits its similarity to Gaitor. As such, we analyse
Gaitor by posing the following guiding questions: 1) how do the latent spaces for each gait and the
intermediate gaits look? 2) How does the Gaitor respond to uneven terrain? 3) How does the planner
exploit the latent-space structure to help the robot traverse complex terrain? 4) Are the locomotion
gaits and the intermediates feasible?
Gait Switching: The structure of the latent space is analysed as described in Sec. 3.2. As a result,
we discover that trajectories in a 2D slice in latent space is sufficient to reconstruct high-fidelity
locomotion trajectories. Each point in the space is colour coded to denote which feet are in contact
with the terrain. Next, the gait labels are toggled such that each distinct gait (trot, crawl and pace)
are selected. This produces three distinct 2D latent-spaces with sets of contact states.
We discover that it is possible to smoothly transition between all three gaits. The top row of Fig. 4
shows snapshots of the robot in each gait. For trot and crawl, these are images of the real robot as it
transitions between gaits. However, we do not deploy the pace gait as the planner which produced
the dataset trajectories are only stable when the robot is walking extremely slowly. Underneath
the robot images are snapshots of the latent space. These images are synchronised with a contact
schedule on the bottom row. Here, we see how the contact schedule shifts between each gait and
the distinct sequences which make up each gait are highlighted. The latent-space trajectory is a
symmetrical circle for all the gaits and it is only the latent-space morphology which changes.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: The robot walking onto a 12.5 cm platform. The VAE and planner in combination alters
the locomotion trajectories in response to the terrain. The first phase is flat ground where the planner
demands an expansive ellipse. When the robot steps onto the platform, the planner radius increases
dramatically along the vertical axis, but is reduced along horizontal when compared to flat ground
operation. This results in shorter footstep heights, but longer swing distances. Once both front feet
are on the terrain, the latent-space trajectory returns to a circular path.

The gait transition must involve a single and specific sequence. For example, it is possible to tran-
sition from trot to crawl to pace and the reverse only. The resulting latent-space slices and the
intermediary gait sequences are visible in Fig. 4. This is a result of the interpretable mechanism by
which the gaits are represented. The VAE infers the relative phase between the front and rear pairs
of legs. For example, if the left front and rear feet move phase, the gait is a pace. If they are out
of phase, the gait is trot. As the gait label linearly increase from trot to crawl to pace, the relative
phase between the front and rear legs shifts from out-of-phase (trot) to 90 degrees in-phase (crawl)
and finally to in-phase (pace). Therefore, it is only possible to transition between gaits in this order
and this explains how the intermediary gaits emerge. These emerge from the shifting in relative
phase. This interpretation is similar to analytical analysis found in Tiseo et al. (2019), which views
quadruped kinematics as a pair of bipeds linked by a rigid body. In that paper, gaits are generated
by varying the phases between the front and rear bipeds similarly to what is inferred automatically
by Gaitor.
Terrain Traversal: We demonstrate perceptive terrain-traversal using the highly dynamic trot gait
successfully climb a 12.5 cm step. Fig. 5 shows the robot stepping up onto this step and is synchro-
nised with the footstep heights of the front feet, the contact schedule and the planner output in latent
space. The planner adjusts the locomotion in three distinct phases. The first is nominal locomotion
on flat ground (phase I), the second is a short transient (phase II), where the front feet step up onto
the palette and the final is a new steady state (phase III), where the robot has its front feet on the
terrain and its rear feet on the ground.
In the flat-ground operation (phase I), the latent-space trajectory is broadly symmetrical. However,
in phase II, the planner elongates the step-length placing the front feet over the lip of the step. The
trajectory in phase II only lasts the duration required to swing the both front feet over terrain. For


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Trot        Trot (Climb Phase)          Crawl        Dynamic Crawl

      RMSE [rad/s]            0.031                0.069               0.101              0.131
    Swing Height [cm]      8.3 ± 0.58           9.68 ± 4.15         5.42 ± 0.65        6.22 ± 0.31
    Swing Length [cm]      10.4 ± 0.53          13.9 ± 1.65              -                  -

Table 2: The feasibility and gait characteristics during four distinct modes of operation: trot on
flat ground, trot whilst climbing the terrain, crawl gait, and the dynamic crawl gait. The root mean
squared values (RMSE) are the average in joint space over a 5 s window of operation. All measure-
ments are generated from experimental logs from real-robot experiments. The swing lengths are not
measured for crawl and dynamic crawl as the robot is operated on the spot during these runs. Both
trot data come from the terrain climb experiment.


the experiments in Fig. 5, the swing duration is set to 356 ms. In phase III, the latent trajectory
returns to a more symmetrical shape similar to the nominal flat ground trajectory seen in phase I, but
is noticeably smoother.
Exploiting Latent-Space Structure: The planner in latent space modulates the robot’s swing char-
acteristics by exploiting the representation’s structure. As mentioned, the structure is interpretable
and disentangled meaning that footswing heights and lengths are independently modifiable as shown
in Fig. 2 (b). We see this in action in Fig. 5, where the horizontal displacement of the planner’s
trajectory significantly increases as the robot initially climbs the step. On flat ground, the horizon-
tal displacement in latent space is nominally 1.98 arbitrary units (au) and increases to 4.38 (au).
We use arbitrary units in latent space, since the latent space has no units. This means that when
Gaitor operates on flat ground, the swing length and heights are on average (8.30 ± 0.58) cm and
(10.40 ± 0.53) cm respectfully. During the climb, the planner extends the footswing height to
(9.68 ± 4.15) cm relative to the palette height and swing length to (13.90 ± 1.65) cm. Though there
is a small increase in the mean swing height during the climb using the planner, this is statistically
insignificant.
The planner in latent-space is designed to reproduce the encoded expert-trajectories in the latent
space. As a result, it is the structure of the space which requires the additional planner to successfully
traverse terrain. In essence, we see that circular latent-space trajectories with constant radii, as seen
in right panel of Fig. 5, have constant swing heights and lengths irrespective of the terrain encoding.
Thus in order to have a longer footswing as the robot climbs the step, the planner in latent-space is
required to vary swing characteristics to traverse the terrain.
Feasibility of the Trajectories: All the terrain traversal, trot to crawl experiments are run success-
fully on the real ANYmal C robot. The true pace gait is not run on the real platform as the training
data is only stable in a narrow window of operation. To measure the feasibility of the VAE’s trajecto-
ries, we measure to what extent if any the WBC alters the trajectories. This is achieved by measuring
the root mean-squared error (RMSE) between the Gaitor’s trajectories and the commanded on the
real robot in joint space. The RMSE is measured over a period of 2000 time steps equivalent to 5 s
of operation during four distinct operation modes. The first mode is trot on flat ground; the second
is during the climb up the terrain; the third is during a crawl; and the last is during a dynamic crawl
where the rear foot makes contact as the front begins to swing. The results are summarised in the
top row of Table 2. Here, we see that the WBC’s commanded joint-space trajectories are extremely
close to the VAE’s predicted in all cases. We include a plot the WBC’s commanded and VAE’s out-
put joint trajectories in the Appendix, see Sec. A.3. Hence, we conclude that the VAE’s trajectories
are dynamically feasible.

5    C ONCLUSIONS
Inspired by the locomotion and the gaits seen in nature, we created a single latent-representation for
gait transition and terrain traversal. This representation shares information across all the different
gaits resulting in the generation of smooth and transitions between the skills via unseen intermediate
gaits. In particular, the VAE infers the phase relationships between the front and rear pairs of legs
for trot, crawl and pace. These gait representations are conditioned upon perceptive information to
produce terrain-aware trajectories. However, this alone is insufficient for terrain traversal. A learnt
planner in latent space adjusts the footstep heights and lengths in order to clear obstacles.



                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
C Dario Bellicoso, Fabian Jenelten, Christian Gehring, and Marco Hutter. Dynamic locomotion
  through online nonlinear motion optimization for quadrupedal robots. IEEE Robot. Automat.
  Lett. (RA-L), 3(3):2261–2268, 2018.
Ken Caluwaerts, Atil Iscen, J. Chase Kew, Wenhao Yu, Tingnan Zhang, Daniel Freeman, Kuang-
  Huei Lee, Lisa Lee, Stefano Saliceti, Vincent Zhuang, Nathan Batchelor, Steven Bohez, Fed-
  erico Casarini, Jose Enrique Chen, Omar Cortes, Erwin Coumans, Adil Dostmohamed, Gabriel
  Dulac-Arnold, Alejandro Escontrela, Erik Frey, Roland Hafner, Deepali Jain, Bauyrjan Jyenis,
  Yuheng Kuang, Edward Lee, Linda Luu, Ofir Nachum, Ken Oslund, Jason Powell, Diego Reyes,
  Francesco Romano, Feresteh Sadeghi, Ron Sloat, Baruch Tabanpour, Daniel Zheng, Michael Ne-
  unert, Raia Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, Francesco Nori, Jeff Seto, Carolina Parada, Vikas Sindhwani,
  Vincent Vanhoucke, and Jie Tan. Barkour: Benchmarking animal-level agility with quadruped
  robots, 2023.
Siddhant Gangapurwala, Alexander Mitchell, and Ioannis Havoutis. Guided constrained policy
  optimization for dynamic quadrupedal robot locomotion. IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett. (RA-L), 5
  (2):3642–3649, 2020.
Siddhant Gangapurwala, Mathieu Geisert, Romeo Orsolino, Maurice Fallon, and Ioannis Havoutis.
  Rloc: Terrain-aware legged locomotion using reinforcement learning and optimal control. IEEE
  Transactions on Robotics, 38(5):2908–2927, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2022.3172469.
David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Dhionis Sako, and Marco Hutter. Anymal parkour: Learning agile
  navigation for quadrupedal robots, 2023.
M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie,
 P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, A. Melzer, and M. Hoepflinger. ANYmal
 - a highly mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot. In IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Sys. (IROS),
 2016.
Diederik Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Int. Conf. on Learn. Repr.
  (ICLR), 2014.
Tianyu Li, Roberto Calandra, Deepak Pathak, Yuandong Tian, Franziska Meier, and Akshara
  Rai. Planning in learned latent action spaces for generalizable legged locomotion. CoRR,
  abs/2008.11867, 2020.
C. Mastalli, R. Budhiraja, W. Merkt, G. Saurel, B. Hammoud, M. Naveau, J. Carpentier, L. Righetti,
  S. Vijayakumar, and N. Mansard. Crocoddyl: An efficient and versatile framework for multi-
  contact optimal control. In IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. Autom. (ICRA), 2020.
Carlos Mastalli, Wolfgang Merkt, Josep Marti-Saumell, Henrique Ferrolho, Joan Sola, Nicolas
  Mansard, and Sethu Vijayakumar. A feasibility-driven approach to control-limited ddp. Au-
  tonomous Robots, 2022a. doi: 10.1007/s10514-022-10061-w.
Carlos Mastalli, Wolfgang Merkt, Guiyang Xin, Jaehyun Shim, Michael Mistry, Ioannis Havoutis,
  and Sethu Vijayakumar. Agile maneuvers in legged robots: a predictive control approach, 2022b.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.07554.
Matias Mattamala, Nived Chebrolu, and Maurice Fallon. An efficient locally reactive controller for
 safe navigation in visual teach and repeat missions. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):
 2353–2360, apr 2022. doi: 10.1109/lra.2022.3143196.
Alexander Luis Mitchell, Wolfgang Xaver Merkt, Mathieu Geisert, Siddhant Gangapurwala, Mar-
  tin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, Ioannis Havoutis, and Ingmar Posner. Vae-loco: Versatile
  quadruped locomotion by learning a disentangled gait representation. IEEE Transactions on
  Robotics, pp. 1–16, 2023.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Fabio Viola. Taming VAEs, 2018.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. In Int. Conf. on Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2014.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Marko Bjelonic, and Marco Hutter. Advanced skills by learning loco-
  motion and local navigation end-to-end. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
  gent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2497–2503, 2022a.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning, 2022b.
Nataniel Ruiz, Eunji Chong, and James M. Rehg. Fine-grained head pose estimation without key-
  points. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
  (CVPRW), pp. 2155–215509, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW.2018.00281.
Joan Solà, Jeremie Deray, and Dinesh Atchuthan. A micro lie theory for state estimation in robotics,
  2021.
Carlo Tiseo, Sethu Vijayakumar, and Michael Mistry. Analytic model for quadruped locomotion
  task-space planning. In 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
  Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 5301–5304, 2019.
Jinze Wu, Yufei Xue, and Chenkun Qi. Learning multiple gaits within latent space for quadruped
   robots, 2023.
Yuxiang Yang, Tingnan Zhang, Erwin Coumans, Jie Tan, and Byron Boots. Fast and efficient loco-
  motion via learned gait transitions. In Conf. on Rob. Learn. (CoRL), 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX
A.1 DATASET C REATION
As mentioned the dataset is created using RLOC (Gangapurwala et al., 2022). This learns a policy to
estimate the swing characteristics to traverse uneven terrain which form constraints for the Dynamic
Gaits (Bellicoso et al., 2018) trajectory optimiser. The inputs to the policy are the desired base
heading ak and the raw depth map provided by the robot.
We generate roughly 30 min of data of the robot traversing palettes of varying heights up to 12.5 cm
in both trot and crawl. The pace gait is unable to traverse uneven terrain so is gathered on flat and is
unable to pace stably at speeds greater than 0.1 m/s.
A.2 F ILTER D ESIGN FOR T ERRAIN P ROCESSING
The terrain inputs are processed as discussed in Sec. 3.1. As mentioned the terrain heights at loca-
tions of the future footfalls is queried from the terrain map and used to calculate the control pitch
values. These are discontinuous and only update when the robot takes a step. To make these values
continuous, we filter them using a second order resonant filter. As mentioned, we design the filter
to have a resonant peak tp occurring when the in-swing foot is at its peak and to have a damping
factor equal to ζ = 0.5. As such, we express the continuous-time transfer function for the filter in
the s-domain as:
                       Y (s)             w0                            π
                              = 2                   , where w0 = p            .                   (6)
                       U (s)      s + 2ζsw0 + w02                 tp 1 − ζ 2
The input to the transfer function is U (s) and the output is Y (s). The natural frequency w0 defines
the rise-time tp and is set to equal to the swing time ts /2. The input to the function is scaled
step-function where the scaling is equal to the control-pitch value θc . This filter is deployed using
a discrete-time state-space function in C++. The state-space parameters are found using python’s
control toolbox.
A.3 T RACKING R ESULTS V ISUALISED
In the Results section, we report the tracking results in Table 2. We plot the tracking results for the
right front leg as the robot climbs the terrain which we can see in centre panel of Fig. 5. We plot the
joint-angle output of the VAE and the actual commanded values from the WBC in Fig. 6. We see
excellent tracking results even when the robot climbs the terrain initially where we see a negligible
divergence between the two recordings.


Figure 6: The joint-space trajectory in radians for the right front leg as it climbs terrain. The VAE
output has key VAE and the WBC’s commanded values use key commanded. We plot the leg next
to the figure with annotations for the joint names.


                                                  12
