Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Z ERO - SHOT I NVERSION P ROCESS FOR I MAGE AT-
TRIBUTE E DITING WITH D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Denoising diffusion models have shown outstanding performance in image editing.
         Existing works tend to use either image-guided methods, which provide a visual
         reference but lack control over semantic coherence, or text-guided methods, which
         ensure faithfulness to text guidance but lack visual quality. To address the problem,
         we propose the Zero-shot Inversion Process (ZIP), a framework that injects a fusion
         of generated visual reference and text guidance into the semantic latent space
         of a frozen pre-trained diffusion model. Only using a tiny neural network, the
         proposed ZIP produces diverse content and attributes under the intuitive control of
         the text prompt. Moreover, ZIP shows remarkable robustness for both in-domain
         and out-of-domain attribute manipulation on real images. We perform detailed
         experiments on various benchmark datasets. Compared to state-of-the-art methods,
         ZIP produces images of equivalent quality while providing a realistic editing effect.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Manipulating real-world images with natural language has long been a challenge in image processing.
Recently, denoising diffusion models (DDMs) have shown substantial success in text-to-image tasks,
such as Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), Dall-E (Ramesh et al., 2021), and Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022). These text-to-image models produce diverse, highly coherent, and realistic images that
align well with text prompts. However, attribute manipulation on real images is still a challenging
problem. In this paper, we aim to utilize these novel foundational models to manipulate real images
in a controllable and semantically coherent manner.
Figure 1 briefly illustrate currently popular methodologies. On the one hand, much effort has been
put into text-guided image editing. Along with the development of the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) technique, e.g., Generative Pre-Training (GPT) (OpenAI, 2023; Brown et al., 2020), many
previous works (Bao et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2022) develop image-editing teniques with the guidance
of textual prompts. However, the importance of the visual reference is ignored in these methods.
Though text-guided methods maintain faithfulness to the target semantic, it is difficult to learn fine-
grained visual patterns from textual features in the absence of a visual prior. Using textual semantics
alone lacks visual reference, resulting in sketchy semantic manipulation. Especially if the desired
semantic is out of the domain, text-guided editing fails.
On the other hand, image-guided methods attract a large amount of attention. Image-guided editing
can easily make style transfer (Choi et al., 2021) and item replacement (Jia et al., 2023). With
visual reference, generators can directly insert ready-made visual patterns into images. However,
image-guided approaches lack intuitive control over semantic coherence, and it is ambiguous to
specify which attribute to refer from the reference image.
In recent times, there has been a growing interest in the field of real image editing.
Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) has shed light on the potential of cross-attention layers for
semantic editing in image generation. Following this, InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) and
Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) employed the same principle for semantic editing of real
images. However, one limitation of these approaches is their inability to precisely control specific
attributes during the editing process. For instance, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a), the glasses added
by Null-text Inversion lacks a predefined style, making it challenging to confirm the exact appearance
of the added glasses in advance. The visual prompt can serve to accurately delineate the desired
attributes. Jia et al. (2023) embeds specified items into the target image by encoding a reference


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         ‘’A person with glasses‘’


                                Diffusion                                           Diffusion
                                 Model                                               Model



                       (a) Text-guided methods                       (b) Image-guided methods


                                                                                                CLIP
                                                                                   Optimize


                                                       ‘’A person with glasses‘’


                                                     (c) Ours
Figure 1: Editing methods for denoising diffusion models. (a) Text-guided methods lacks a
predefined style of the attribute, where the glasses are generated by models. (b) Image-guided
methods suffer ambiguity and distorted results. (c) Our method achieves specific, controllable and
high-quality manipulation, where the style of glasses is in accordance with the reference image.

image. VISII (Nguyen et al., 2023) amalgamates both textual and visual prompts to learn a style
transfer from example pairs, representing the “before” and “after” images of an edit. Nevertheless, as
shown in Figure 1(b), when a reference image is employed for attribute editing of real images, the
final rendition is effected by the reference image, which causes image distortion.
In this paper, we propose Zero-shot Inversion Process (ZIP) that injects a fusion of visual reference
and text guidance into the semantic latent space of a frozen pre-trained diffusion model. As illustrated
in Figure 1(c), our method takes advantage of the text guidance to provide intuitive control over the
semantic coherence. Meanwhile, our methods refine the alignment of the text feature and the semantic
latent space of the diffusion model by incorporating a visual reference. The incorporated reference
image can be generated with a foundational text-to-image model. Thus, our method is zero-shot and
avoids the bias of manual selection. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first attempt to integrate
text guidance and image guidance in zero-shot image editing. Our method only needs to train an
attribute encoder, a tiny neural network, without fine-tuning the pre-trained model. For both in-
domain and out-of-domain attribute editing tasks, our method preserves faithfulness to text guidance
while maintaining visual quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method is generally
applicable to various benchmark datasets (CelebA-HQ, LSUN-church, and LSUN-bedroom).

2    R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Synthesis: Since the success of large language models, text prompts are widely used
in image editing. Benefiting from the semantic information of text, Stabe Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022) makes a powerful and flexible generator with the condition of the text. Diffusionclip (Kim
et al., 2022) shows that a textual prompt allows DDMs to edit the images in a semantic latent space.
Asyrp (Kwon et al., 2022) reveals that diffusion models already have a semantic latent space. Imagen
Editor (Wang et al., 2022) uses the masks as input to point out the area of edit in the image, which can
gather up the semantic information into the target. Though these works show a significant process in
the editing of some attributes, only by text prompt, they just can generate ordinary attributes such as
colors or common shapes in the image. To generate new visual features, such as glasses and other
decorations in the images, the visual information should be taken into account.

Image-to-Image Synthesis: In contrast, image-guided approaches use the reference image as a
condition to generate corresponding images. On the one hand, the features from the reference image
are used to adjust the target image. There are many typical tasks such as style transfer (Choi et al.,
2021; Meng et al., 2021) and inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022), where the reference image is viewed
as an auxiliary feature. SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) uses the stroke-based images to generate faithful
images with the original images. On the other hand, the reference image is directly inserted into
the target image. Jia et al. (2023) makes remarkable performance by using the reference image for
personalized syntheses, such as the replacement of the items. Mystyle (Nitzan et al., 2022) adopts a
pre-trained StyleGAN for personalized face generation by using the images of the generic face prior.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, due to the ambiguity of the attribute choice in one image, image-guided approaches often
make distorted images or incorrect manipulation. By using the text prompt, our ZIP circumvents this
drawback with the alignment of visual features and semantic information from text.

Attribute Editing Many previous works (Kwon et al., 2022; Wallace et al., 2022; Daras and
Dimakis, 2022) have focused on image editing based on large-scale generative models. On the
one hand, these models mainly focus on editing DDM-generated images rather than real images.
By adding, replacing, or modifying corresponding features, Prompt2prompt (Hertz et al., 2022)
can change the items of a DDM-generated image. However, it is difficult to learn textual features
corresponding to the real image. On the other hand, some models can only achieve sketchy editing for
real images. For example, the background replacement is made in Direct Inversion (Elarabawy et al.,
2022). The replacement of items in the real images is achieved in Jia et al. (2023). Some in-domain
attributes, such as the age, gender, and expression of humans, are modified by Asyrp (Kwon et al.,
2022). However, these models are incomplete for the attributes which need both visual and semantic
information such as wearing glasses.

3     P RELIMINARY
In this section, we provide a concise overview of the foundational knowledge of the diffusion model
and the Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP) model. The diffusion model is employed
for the generation of visual prompts, facilitating the editing of real images. Subsequently, CLIP is
utilized to adjust the images in accordance with the textual prompt.

3.1   D IFFUSION M ODEL

Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) produce more realistic samples than deep generative models
before, such as GANs (Karras et al., 2020). A typical DDM includes two stages: the forward
process to add Gauss noise to the original data and the reverse process to denoise samples until an
image. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), starting from white
noise, progressively denoises it into an image. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) (Song
et al., 2020a) reduce the number of iterations by taking generated results of different stages into the
condition of generation.
The forward process diffuses the original data x0 with Gaussian noise, indexed by a real vector
σ ∈ RT≥0 :
                                                       T
                                                       Y
                        qσ (x1:T |x0 ) := qσ (xT |x0 )   qσ (xt−1 |xt , x0 ),               (1)
                                                       t=2
                        √
where qσ (xT |x0 ) = N ( αT −1 , (1 − αT )I). The corresponding reverse process is
                p                 √                  q
       xt−1 = αt−1 /αt xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t) + 1 − αt−1 − σt2 · ϵθ (xt , t) + σt ϵt ,             (2)
where ϵp t ∼ N (0, I) is standard
                                pGaussian noise, αt is the parameter based on the forward process,
σt = η (1 − αt−1 )/(1 − αt ) 1 − αt /αt−1 , and ϵθ (xt , t) is a neural network to predict the noise
in xt . In this paper, we use a U-Net backbone which is introduced in the supplementary material.
When η = 1 for all t, the process of Equation 2 becomes DDPM (Ho et al., 2020). As η = 0, it
becomes DDIM and guarantees nearly perfect inversion (Song et al., 2020a).

3.2   C ONTRASTIVE L ANGUAGE -I MAGE P RE -T RAINING

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) encapsulates generic and
semantic information of image-text pairs. CLIP simultaneously learns an image encoder EI and a
text encoder ET to indicate the similarity between images and texts. StyleGAN-NADA (Gal et al.,
2022) produces images guided by a text prompt based on CLIP. Asyrp (Kwon et al., 2022) also uses
the CLIP to fine tune the pre-trained diffusion model. Inspired by previous works, we adopt CLIP as
guidance for the attribute modification:
                                                                               ∆I · ∆T
                        Ldirection (iout , ttarget ; iedit , tsource ) := 1 −           ,       (3)
                                                                              ∥∆I∥∥∆T ∥

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Prompt
                           “old person”                  Text Encoder
             Text                                                                          Trainable Neural Network
                                                                                           Frozen Neural Network



                        Editing Generator                                Optimize
                                                                                    CLIP      Recon
                                                                                    loss       loss
           Reference                        Attribute
                                            Encoder
            Image
                                                                    ∆ℎ



            Editing
            Image                                          ℎ



                                                Editing Generator


Figure 2: The framework of ZIP. A reference image, generated by the Visual Generator, is encoded
into edited features denoted as ∆h. These edited features are then integrated into the existing features
h of the editing image. The textual prompt contributes semantic information for the manipulation
process. To streamline computation, the parameters of both the Attribute Encoder and Editing
Generator are shared.

where ∆I = EI (iout ) − EI (iedit ) and ∆T = ET (ttarget ) − ET (tsource ), for the generated image iout ,
the editing image iedit , the target prompt ttarget , and the source prompt tsource .

4     M ETHOD
We present the Zero-shot Inversion Process (ZIP) as a method for attribute editing. The core
framework of ZIP is outlined in Figure 2, where each constituent element of the framework is
delineated. Subsequently, the principle of ZIP is elaborated in Section 4.1. Then, the optimization
process and the associated loss function of ZIP are discussed in Section 4.2. Finally, we summary the
real image editing via ZIP in Section 4.3.
Given an image iedit ∈ Rm×n and an attribute tattr , our primary objective is to modify the input image
iedit in accordance with the attribute tattr . This endeavor results in the creation of an edited image,
denoted as iout . Initially, a textual prompt denoted as t is formulated based on the specific attribute
tattr , an example being the prompt "an old person" associated with the "old" attribute. Subsequently,
the Visual Generator produces a reference image iref conditioned on the input t. In the third step,
attribute features ∆h are extracted from iref using the Attribute Encoder. Following this derivation,
∆h is integrated into the latent space of the Editing Generator. The resultant latent representation
h + ∆h forms the basis for generating the target image iout through the Editing Generator.
As illustrated in Figure 2, our framework encompasses four primary components: Text Encoder, Visual
Generator, Attribute Encoder, and Editing Generator. To obtain the visual attributes corresponding
to the designated attribute, we utilize a text-image model as Visual Generator. Furthermore, when
the attribute involves the addition of embellishments, such as the glasses, a reference image can
be manually specified to ensure consistency of embellishments during editing. Both the textual
prompt and the visual prompt, which are encoded by Text Encoder and Attribute Encoder respectively,
are employed for editing in the Editing Generator. Detailed descriptions of these components are
provided in Appendix B.

4.1   Z ERO - SHOT I NVERSION P ROCESS

Figure 3 provides a thorough overview of the entire Zero-shot Inversion Process (ZIP). Figure 3(a)
reveals its denoising process, where the feature ∆h from the reference image iref is integrated into the
original features h. Figure 3(b) illustrates the editing process in ZIP, where iedit is reverted to noise
xT and subsequently restored to x e0 as iout by ZIP.
As shown in Figure 3(a), the visual attributes extracted from the reference image iref are integrated
into the editing image iedit to amplify latent visual attributes that were hitherto unseen. For the
generation of the reference image iref under the influence of the prompt condition ttarget , we employ


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Zero-shot Inversion Process                                          Editing Process

                                       t Dt                            xT              xT 1                        x0
    xt              h                 t Pt (t )                          ZIP
                                                                                        xT 1
                         h                           xt 1                                      ZIP
  iref      Attribute                                                                                         ZIP
            Encoder                                                                                                   x0

          (a) Zero-shot Inversion Process.                                            (b) Editing process of ZIP.

Figure 3: Zero-shot Inversion Process. (a) The one step from xt to xt−1 in Zero-shot Inversion
Process. (b) The inversion process and the forward editing process for a real image.

UniDiffuser (Bao et al., 2023). Subsequently, through the utilization of the Attribute Encoder, we
extract the corresponding features ∆h = EA (iref ).
To facilitate latent manipulation on the images x0 generated from xT , a straightforward approach
could involve directly modifying the Attribute Encoder to minimize the loss outlined in Equation 3.
However, adopting this approach might engender distorted images or erroneous manipulations, as
observed in prior works (Choi et al., 2021; Mokady et al., 2022).
An alternative approach entails the modification of the noise ϵθt anticipated by the network during
each sampling iteration. In brief, we can express the abridged version of Equation 2 as follows:

                   √           1      √                    q
          xt−1 =        αt−1 √    xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t) + 1 − αt−1 − σt2 · ϵθ (xt , t) +σt ϵt .                           (4)
                               αt
                             |         {z                } |         {z                }
                                                                                   direction to xt ,Dt (ϵθ (xt ,t))
                                  predicted x0 ,Pt (ϵθ (xt ,t))
Nonetheless, a direct alteration of the noise ϵθ in both Pt and Dt leads to mutual nullification, yielding
an unchanged pθ (x0:T ). This phenomenon mirrors a form of destructive interference, as elucidated
in Kwon et al. (2022, Theorem 1).
Hence, in order to circumvent the interference delineated in Equation 4, we resort to the utilization of
an asymmetrical controllable reverse process within ZIP:
                                √
                        xt−1 = αt−1 Pt (e  ϵθ (xt , t)) + Dt (ϵθ (xt , t)) + σt ϵt .                 (5)
      ϵθ (xt , t) entails the adjustment of ϵθ (xt , t) grounded on the visual features ∆h. This is achieved
Here, e
by introducing ∆h into the original feature maps ht derived from xt .

4.2      O PTIMIZATION OF ZIP

Within the text-guided branch of ZIP, the text prompt t is harnessed to facilitate the optimization of
the ZIP generation process, relying on the CLIP model. Given the absence of ground truth labels
in editing tasks, training the model follows a distinct approach compared to conventional vision
tasks. As a result, we employ the CLIP loss to fine-tune the network. Aligning with the methodology
presented in Avrahami et al. (2022), we employ the directional CLIP loss outlined in Equation 3 as
our loss function:
                     L = λclip Ldirection (Pet , ttarget ; Pt , tsource ) + λrecon |xtout − xtedit |. (6)
The modified Pet and the original Pt correspond respectively to the formulations presented in Equa-
tion 5 and Equation 4. Here, tsource and ttarget reference the text prompts outlined in Appendix B.
The latter expression pertains to the reconstruction loss, which takes the form of the L1 Loss be-
tween the generated image and the original image. This reconstruction loss effectively preserves
the original features, thereby averting drastic alterations. To balance the aforementioned losses, the
hyperparameters λclip and λrecon are introduced.
During the training phase, the reference image iref and the editing image iedit are subject to encoding by
the Attribute Encoder and Editing Generator, in accordance with the architecture depicted in Figure 2.
Consequently, these encoded representations manifest as ∆h and h in the latent space, respectively.


                                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The resulting output image iout , generated by a frozen diffusion model (Editing Generator) with input
∆h + h, is harnessed for computing the CLIP loss, thereby facilitating the training of the Attribute
Encoder. In this process, updates are exclusively applied to the parameters of the Attribute Encoder,
while the other components, including the Editing Generator, remain frozen.

4.3   I MAGE E DITING VIA ZIP

Given an image iedit ∈ Rm×n and an attribute tattr , the visual features from reference image are
integrated into the latent space of iedit in diffusion model as Equation 5, and the textual prompt is
used to optimize the Attribute Encoder as Equation 6. We provide an illustration of our framework
in Figure 2, and pseudocode in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Zero-shot Inversion Process (ZIP)
Input: An editing image iedit ; A text prompt tattr
        Editing Generator ϵθ ; Visual Generator GV ; Attribute Encoder EA CLIP encoder ξclip
        Diffusion model timestep T ; ZIP timestep tzip
Output: A target image iout
 1: Initialize tsource and ttarget based on tattr                                 ▷ Get the textual prompt
 2: Generate the reference image iref = GV (ttarget )                              ▷ Get the visual prompt
 3: Encode ∆h = EA (iref )
 4: Get the noise image x0 from iedit based on ϵθ
 5: for i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
 6:     for t = T, T − 1 . . . , 0 do
 7:          if t > tzip then
                           √
 8:               xt−1 = αt−1 Pt (e    ϵθ (xt , t)) + Dt (ϵθ (xt , t)) + σt ϵt .          ▷ Editing for iedit
 9:          else          √
10:               xt−1 = αt−1 Pt (ϵθ (xt , t)) + Dt (ϵθ (xt , t)) + σt ϵt .      ▷ Improve editing quality
11:     iout ←− x0
12:     Update the parameters of Attribute Encoder EA as Equation 6
13: return iout



We depict the attribute editing process for the attribute “glasses” facilitated by ZIP in Figure 4. The
accompanying noise maps are showcased. As the temporal step t progresses, the cumulative noise
across 25 steps is visualized within the noise image. Each noise image is derived from a linear
extraction throughout the entire generation process. Concurrently, the respective generated images
are displayed. Up until t = 600, no ∆h is incorporated into the generation, thereby retaining the
original image’s style. After reaching the t = 300 mark, an additional point to note is that, in order to
enhance the quality of the generation process, ∆h is still not introduced.
Figure 4 effectively demonstrates that pixels are more concentrated on attribute features. This implies
the reference image’s efficacy in generating visual components associated with the target attribute.
Moreover, in our ZIP process, attribute generation becomes feasible following the insertion of ∆h.


5     E XPERIMENTS

Within this section, we present empirical evidence to substantiate the effectiveness of our Zero-shot
Inversion Process (ZIP) in conducting semantic latent editing across diverse attributes and datasets.
Section 5.3 delves into the outcomes achieved across various datasets. Additionally, the subsequent
section, Section 5.2, features comparative experiments that underscore ZIP’s superior capabilities in
semantic editing. This is observed across both in-domain and out-of-domain attributes.

Baselines. To facilitate comparison, we implement the ILVR (Choi et al., 2021) and Asyrp (Kwon
et al., 2022), as benchmarks against ZIP. ILVR operates as an image-guided approach to semantic
synthesis. In the forthcoming experiments, ILVR’s parameters include a low-pass filter scale of
N = 64 and a time step of t = 100. Asyrp, on the other hand, ascertains that diffusion models


                                                     6
                  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  W/O Reference
                     Image
                                                                                 Reference
                                                                                  Image


                                  t=T     Insert ∆ℎ     Without ∆ℎ         t=0
                  W/ Reference
                     Image


      Null-text
ZIP                                                                                                            Null-text
      Inversion                                                                    Origin    ZIP       ZIP     Inversion

                  Figure 4: The visualization of noises in ZIP at different time Figure 5: Consistent Editing: After
                  steps t. The image is edited for the attribute of “glasses.” The specifying an image as reference im-
                  top half is the editing process without the reference image age, ZIP can make a consistent and
                  while the bottom has the reference image. Pixels are more controllable editing to the original im-
                  concentrated on the features of the attribute, which implies age. However, other methods, like
                  that the reference image effectively works on generating Null-text Inversion, cannot generate
                  visual items of the target attribute.                            specific style of the attribute.

                  inherently possess a semantic latent space, rendering it a state-of-the-art text-guided approach. For
                  our Asyrp implementation, we adhere to the default parameters stipulated in the official codebase.

                  Implement Details. All methods, including ZIP, are subjected to training on the CelebA-HQ (Karras
                  et al., 2018), LSUN-church, and LSUN-bedroom datasets (Yu et al., 2015). In the case of ZIP, the Edit
                  Generator draws upon DDPM++ (Song et al., 2020b), and the employed model is sourced from the
                  official pre-trained checkpoint, thus bypassing any training specific to our experiments. Our Visual
                  Generator is realized through Unidiffuser (Bao et al., 2023), while the Text Encoder is represented by
                  the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021), both using the official checkpoints. Of note, only the last five
                  layers of the Attribute Encoder are subject to training within the ZIP framework. Further details can
                  be explored in the supplementary materials provided.

                  Evaluation. To assess the proficiency of image generation and editing, prior research has introduced
                  numerous evaluation metrics. In this study, we opt to employ the Inception Score (ISC) (Salimans
                  et al., 2016) and the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Szegedy et al., 2016) as indicators of the
                  image generation quality. Furthermore, the CLIP Score (Radford et al., 2021) is leveraged to gauge
                  the alignment between edited images and their intended semantic targets.

                  5.1             C ONSISTENCE OF ZIP

                  It is difficult to control the style of attributes based on text-image model, such as
                  Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) and Null-Text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022). As shown
                  in Figure 5, with a specific reference image, ZIP generates the same styles of glasses for different
                  images. However, Null-Text Inversion can only generate the glasses, which cannot be controlled.

                  5.2             G ENERALIZATION OF ZIP

                  In our evaluation, ZIP is assessed from two perspectives of generalization. Firstly, we scrutinize
                  its performance in manipulating attributes that are inherently present within the datasets. For
                  instance, in CelebA-HQ, numerous images feature individuals with smiling expressions, and the
                  attribute of “smiling” is explicitly labeled in the datasets. For the purposes of this evaluation, we
                  refer to these attributes as “In-domain Attributes”. Conversely, we examine attributes that are not
                  explicitly represented in the datasets, such as “Add glasses”. These are referred to as “Out-of-domain
                  Attributes”.


                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Origin


 Man



 Smile


 Old


Young


                                             Null-Text                                      Null-Text                                     Null-Text
           Ours        Asyrp     ILVR                            Ours     Asyrp     ILVR                   Ours       Asyrp      ILVR
                                             Inversion                                      Inversion                                     Inversion


Figure 6: Editing results for in-domain attributes. The same attributes are modified by ZIP, Asyrp
and ILVR.
                            Table 1: In-domain Attributes Modification
                                                         Man                        Old                    Smiling                    Young
                  Method                       ISC       FID       CLIP    ISC     FID     CLIP    ISC      FID      CLIP     ISC       FID   CLIP
         ILVR (Choi et al., 2021)             2.623      150.2    22.24    2.361   145.1   23.26   2.557   223.7     25.59    2.582   147.9   22.70
        Asyrp (Kwon et al., 2022)             1.808      77.65    19.15    1.833   77.82   22.73   1.760   73.93     26.31    1.705   80.03   26.11
 Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022)    2.219      52.23    23.02    2.075   50.65   22.46   2.014   44.25     25.98    2.089   40.52   24.42
                   Ours                       1.592      87.31    22.38    1.778   85.96   22.79   1.573   85.36     27.01    1.624   85.28   25.07


Figure 6 presents the outcomes of our method concerning in-domain attributes, juxtaposed with
results from ILVR and Asyrp. Our approach successfully alters specific attributes while keeping
other attributes constant. This includes modifying expressions of individuals. In the context of
text-guided approaches like Asyrp, attributes that don’t necessitate alterations in visual features are
handled adeptly. For example, attributes like “smiling” which entail facial feature deformations,
can be effectively edited by Asyrp. However, altering attributes like gender demands replacing
female features with male features, a feat that cannot be accomplished solely through text-guided
methods. Meanwhile, for image-guided approaches such as ILVR, the relationship between the target
attribute and the reference image can be less defined. Consequently, ILVR is prone to producing
distorted or inaccurately manipulated images, as depicted in Figure 6. ZIP’s strength lies in its
capacity to synergize textual prompts with reference images to yield high-quality edits across a
diverse array of attributes. The outcomes displayed in Table 1 corroborate this, demonstrating
that ZIP achieves superior editing outcomes for attributes, without compromising on quality, when
compared to alternative methods.
Figure 7 portrays the outcomes pertaining to out-of-domain attributes, such as the addition of glasses
and alteration of makeup. ZIP consistently achieves the highest CLIP scores across all attributes,
a fact corroborated by the data presented in Table 2 and 3. As observed with in-domain attributes,
Asyrp’s performance is impeded by its inability to access additional visual features. Conversely,
ZIP demonstrates its competence in generating novel attributes by leveraging the capabilities of the
Visual Generator and Text Encoder. This facilitates the generalization of both visual and semantic
information, rendering ZIP highly proficient in addressing out-of-domain attributes.

5.3      M ORE R ESULTS

Figure 8 illustrates the visual outcomes attained through our methodology across diverse datasets.
ZIP demonstrates its capacity to synthesize attributes present within the training datasets, such as age
and gender in CelebA-HQ. Additionally, it can manipulate attributes based on the semantics provided
by the text prompt, exemplified by “gothic” in LSUN-church. This versatility in semantic synthesis
showcases ZIP’s ability to accomplish varied tasks solely through training with distinct text prompts.


                                                                             8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 Table 2: Makeup Editing
                                                                                                Method ISC       FID       CLIP
                                                                                                ILVR 1.940 144.4           24.10
                                                                                                Asyrp 1.755 77.49          23.86
                                                                                                Null-text 1.976 69.64      26.46
                                                                                                Ours 1.467 108.0           25.12

                                                                                                  Table 3: Glasses Editing
                                                                                                Method ISC       FID       CLIP
                                                                                                    ILVR 3.060 165.6       24.52
                                   Null-text Null-text                                Null-text Null-text
Ours     Origin
       Ours               Asyrp
                       Origin     Asyrp
                                   Inversion Inversion
                                                         Ours    Origin
                                                                Ours         Asyrp
                                                                          Origin     Asyrp          Asyrp 1.390 147.5
                                                                                      Inversion Inversion                  29.55
                                                                                                    Null-text 1.98 47.55   26.17
                           (a) Makeup                             (b) Glasses
                                                                                                    Ours 1.418 154.6       30.07
         Figure 7: Editing results for out-of-domain attributes.
                  Origin
                  Recon.
                  Man
                  Old
                  Origin


                                                                          Origin
                  Recon.


                                                                          Recon.
                  Gothic


                                                                          Hotel
                  Night


 Figure 8: Editing results of ZIP on various datasets. We conduct experiments on CelebA-HQ,
 LSUN-church and LSUN-bedroom.

 6     C ONCLUSION
 This paper introduces ZIP, a novel approach for the manipulation of real-world images using natural
 language. ZIP achieves this by infusing a blend of generated visual reference and textual guidance
 into the semantic latent space of a frozen diffusion model. By bridging the gap between visual patterns
 and textual semantics, ZIP is capable of effectively altering attributes, irrespective of whether they
 are in-domain or out-of-domain.In the future, our research will delve into enhancing the accuracy of
 attribute acquisition from reference images. This involves refining methods for specifying attributes
 with similar visual features, thus further improving the manipulation process.
 Limitation. Indeed, while ZIP excels in producing realistic edits for real images, it’s important
 to acknowledge that it faces a limitation in the absence of a target mask, similar to the capability
 demonstrated by Imagen Editor (Wang et al., 2022). Imagen Editor’s ability to use an editing mask
 as input allows it to achieve intensive and precise editing of the target attributes. On the other hand,
 ZIP’s operation without a clearly defined mask might lead to inadvertent alignment of visual features
 and text prompts, potentially resulting in incorrect or unintended modifications. This points to an
 avenue for improvement in the future, as addressing this limitation could further enhance ZIP’s
 editing accuracy.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Avrahami, O., Lischinski, D., and Fried, O. (2022). Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
  natural images. In CVPR, pages 18208–18218.
Bao, F., Nie, S., Xue, K., Li, C., Pu, S., Wang, Y., Yue, G., Cao, Y., Su, H., and Zhu, J. (2023). One
  transformer fits all distributions in multi-modal diffusion at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06555.
Brooks, T., Holynski, A., and Efros, A. A. (2023). Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing
  instructions. In CVPR.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam,
  P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:1877–1901.
Choi, J., Kim, S., Jeong, Y., Gwon, Y., and Yoon, S. (2021). Ilvr: Conditioning method for denoising
  diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02938.
Daras, G. and Dimakis, A. G. (2022).           Multiresolution textual inversion.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.17115.
Elarabawy, A., Kamath, H., and Denton, S. (2022). Direct inversion: Optimization-free text-driven
  real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07825.
Gal, R., Patashnik, O., Maron, H., Bermano, A. H., Chechik, G., and Cohen-Or, D. (2022). Stylegan-
  nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  41(4):1–13.
Google (2023). Palm 2 technical report.
Hertz, A., Mokady, R., Tenenbaum, J., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., and Cohen-Or, D. (2022). Prompt-to-
  prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626.
Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., and Hochreiter, S. (2017a). Gans trained by a
  two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30.
Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., and Hochreiter, S. (2017b). Gans trained by a
  two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30.
Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851.
Jia, X., Zhao, Y., Chan, K. C., Li, Y., Zhang, H., Gong, B., Hou, T., Wang, H., and Su, Y.-C. (2023).
   Taming encoder for zero fine-tuning image customization with text-to-image diffusion models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02642.
Karras, T., Aila, T., Laine, S., and Lehtinen, J. (2018). Progressive growing of gans for improved
  quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Karras, T., Laine, S., Aittala, M., Hellsten, J., Lehtinen, J., and Aila, T. (2020). Analyzing and
  improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pages 8110–8119.
Kim, G., Kwon, T., and Ye, J. C. (2022). Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models for robust
  image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 2426–2435.
Kwon, M., Jeong, J., and Uh, Y. (2022). Diffusion models already have a semantic latent space. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2210.10960.
Lugmayr, A., Danelljan, M., Romero, A., Yu, F., Timofte, R., and Van Gool, L. (2022). Repaint:
  Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 11461–11471.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Meng, C., He, Y., Song, Y., Song, J., Wu, J., Zhu, J.-Y., and Ermon, S. (2021). Sdedit: Guided
 image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations.
Mokady, R., Hertz, A., Aberman, K., Pritch, Y., and Cohen-Or, D. (2022). Null-text inversion for
 editing real images using guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09794.
Nguyen, T., Li, Y., Ojha, U., and Lee, Y. J. (2023). Visual instruction inversion: Image editing via
 visual prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14331.
Nitzan, Y., Aberman, K., He, Q., Liba, O., Yarom, M., Gandelsman, Y., Mosseri, I., Pritch, Y., and
  Cohen-Or, D. (2022). Mystyle: A personalized generative prior. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 41(6):1–10.
OpenAI (2023). Gpt-4 technical report.
Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A.,
  Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al. (2021). Learning transferable visual models from natural language
  supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR.
Ramesh, A., Pavlov, M., Goh, G., Gray, S., Voss, C., Radford, A., Chen, M., and Sutskever, I. (2021).
  Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  8821–8831. PMLR.
Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. (2022). High-resolution image
  synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 10684–10695.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., and Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III
 18, pages 234–241. Springer.
Saharia, C., Chan, W., Saxena, S., Li, L., Whang, J., Denton, E. L., Ghasemipour, K., Gontijo Lopes,
  R., Karagol Ayan, B., Salimans, T., et al. (2022). Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models
  with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36479–
  36494.
Salimans, T., Goodfellow, I., Zaremba, W., Cheung, V., Radford, A., and Chen, X. (2016). Improved
  techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29.
Schick, T. and Schütze, H. (2020). Exploiting cloze questions for few shot text classification and
  natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07676.
Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. (2020a). Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.02502.
Song, Y., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Kingma, D. P., Kumar, A., Ermon, S., and Poole, B. (2020b). Score-based
  generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna, Z. (2016). Rethinking the inception
  architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pages 2818–2826.
Wallace, B., Gokul, A., and Naik, N. (2022). Edict: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled transforma-
 tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12446.
Wang, S., Saharia, C., Montgomery, C., Pont-Tuset, J., Noy, S., Pellegrini, S., Onoe, Y., Laszlo, S.,
 Fleet, D. J., Soricut, R., et al. (2022). Imagen editor and editbench: Advancing and evaluating
 text-guided image inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06909.
Yu, F., Seff, A., Zhang, Y., Song, S., Funkhouser, T., and Xiao, J. (2015). Lsun: Construction
  of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1506.03365.


                                                 11
