Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ASTERING S YMBOLIC O PERATIONS :
AUGMENTING L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH C OMPILED
N EURAL N ETWORKS
                                                                                                                                                                       B                                      B
   Yixuan Weng 1∗ , Minjun Zhu1,2∗, Fei Xia1,2 , Bin Li3 , Shizhu He1,2, , Kang Liu1,2, , Jun Zhao1,2
   1
     The Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, IA, CAS
   2
     School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
   3
     College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University
   wengsyx@gmail.com, {shizhu.he, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn


                                                                                                   A BSTRACT
                     Language models’ (LMs) proficiency in handling deterministic symbolic rea-
                     soning and rule-based tasks remains limited due to their dependency implicit
                     learning on textual data. To endow LMs with genuine rule comprehension abil-
                     ities, we propose "Neural Comprehension" - a framework that synergistically
                     integrates compiled neural networks (CoNNs) into the standard transformer archi-
                     tecture. CoNNs are neural modules designed to explicitly encode rules through
                     artificially generated attention weights. By incorporating CoNN modules, the
                     Neural Comprehension framework enables LMs to accurately and robustly ex-
                     ecute rule-intensive symbolic tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the su-
                     periority of our approach over existing techniques in terms of length general-
                     ization, efficiency, and interpretability for symbolic operations. Furthermore,
                     it can be applied to LMs across different model scales, outperforming tool-
                     calling methods in arithmetic reasoning tasks while maintaining superior in-
                     ference efficiency. Our work highlights the potential of seamlessly unifying
                     explicit rule learning via CoNNs and implicit pattern learning in LMs, paving
                     the way for true symbolic comprehension capabilities. The code is released at:
                     https://github.com/wengsyx/Neural-Comprehension.


1          I NTRODUCTION
Language models (LMs), particularly large                  ф      /ŶͲ ŝƐƚ      х ф                         KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ                         х


language models (LLMs), have exhibited

impressive performance on complex rea-
                                                                                                         ^ŽůǀĞ ZĂƚĞ ;йͿ


soning tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang

et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2022a; Suzgun et al., 2022). De-                                    *37

spite this, the proficiency of LMs in tack-                                 *37
                                                                            7  EDVH
ling deterministic symbolic reasoning and

rule-based tasks is still limited (Welleck                                                                       ŶƚĞƌ dĞǆƚ >ĞŶŐƚŚ ; ŝŐŝƚƐͿ
et al.; Razeghi et al., 2022). For example, Figure 1: The length generalization of T5 (with fine-
GPT-3’s arithmetic performance declines tune), GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 (with few-shot) on symbolic
with higher digit numbers (Brown et al., operations (Addition) tasks. To evaluate the model’s
2020), and its mathematical accuracy is in- proficiency, we conducted experiments on tasks ranging
fluenced by word frequency in training data from 3 to 30 digits, with longer than 10 digits being
(Razeghi et al., 2022). Moreover, length out-of-distribution of training data.
generalization (Anil et al., 2022) remains a challenge even for 100-billion-parameter models, such
as GPT-4 (Bubeck et al., 2023). We hypothesize that these limitations stem from the dependency
of LMs on implicitly learning rules from textual data. As illustrated in Figure 1, a simple length
generalization experiment using addition tasks with varying numbers of digits highlights this limi-
tation. Performance deteriorates as test length increases, indicating that these models strongly rely
on statistical patterns in the data rather than capturing fundamental logical structures. This implicit
learning of statistical patterns constrains the accuracy of LMs in executing symbolic operations tasks.
       ∗
           These authors contribute equally to this work. And B means corresponding author.


                                                                                                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We propose a transformer-based language model framework, termed "Neural Comprehension", which
synergistically integrates a pretrained LM (Li et al., 2021b) and compiled neural networks (CoNNs)
(Weiss et al., 2021), combines their complementary strengths in a plug-and-play manner, to achieve
high accuracy and robust performance. CoNNs are neural networks but the rules are explicitly coded
through transformer-liked structures and attention. Therefore, the CoNN is human-controllable,
executing rules through artificially generated attention weights, and can achieve perfect accuracy
once compiled network is done. Neural Comprehension relys solely on neural networks without
requiring additional tools. It employs a token-by-token generative method, analogous to GPT-3,
where each token can be generated by either the pretrained LM or one of the CoNNs. The Neural
Comprehension comprises a pretrained LM and multiple sets of CoNNs. The implementation of the
Neural Comprehension framework facilitates the integration of rule-intensive abilities and reasoning
capabilities into LMs, endowing them with genuine symbolic comprehension skills.
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of our proposed Neural Compre-
hension method on a variety of rule-intensive tasks. Our experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach in comparison with existing state-of-the-art techniques, such as vanilla
fine-tuning, few-shot learning, and Chain-of-Thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b). Specifically,
Neural Comprehension outperforms these methods in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and interpretabil-
ity, showcasing its superiority in handling rule-intensive tasks. On the other hand, compared to
the Tool-Based method (Mialon et al., 2023), Neural Comprehension provides a unified end-to-end
neural network framework, eliminating the need for external interpreters and having higher inference
efficiency. Historically, LMs are far from mastering robust symbolic task, such as symbolic operations
and arithmetic reasoning (Stolfo et al., 2023). Our research provides a compelling case for LMs in
neural network frameworks mastering symbolic operations, highlighting its potential to transform the
landscape of symbolic reasoning and numerical computation capabilities for LMs.
Contributions Our main contributions are as follows:

       • We pioneer the implementation of flawless execution rule-intensive symbolic operations
         for language models that rely on neural networks. By employing a plug-and-play way, we
         successfully integrate CoNNs, which are interpretable and human-controllable, into the
         language model. Our method facilitates direct rule deduction without the need for learning
         from conditional probabilities, leading to a more robust and effective approach. (Section 4)
       • We have built the AutoCoNN toolkit to make Neural Comprehension scalable, which
         leverages LLMs’ contextual learning capabilities to automatically generate new CoNNs.
         Our method can be easily extended to various symbolic operations tasks. (Seciton 4.3)
       • Our experimental results on symbolic tasks and real-world arithmetic reasoning tasks
         demonstrate the superior performance of our method in comparison to existing techniques.
         Notably, our LM achieves flawless execution on symbolic reasoning tasks. (Section 5.1 5.2)
       • It is worth noting that tool-based methods are only applicable to language models with code
         generation capabilities and require the cooperation of external interpreters. Our experiments
         demonstrate that the symbolic processing capabilities of neural understanding are on par
         with tool-based methods, but are applicable to models ranging from small ones like T5-Small
         (60M) to large ones like GLM-130B (130B) and GPT-3.5 (175B). (Section 5.3)
       • We also studied the potential of combining multiple CoNNs and found that adding correlated
         CoNNs can continuously increase performance, while adding uncorrelated CoNNs rarely
         leads to performance degradation. This provides a new approach for model fusion, enabling
         the model to easily acquire new knowledge. (Section 5.4)


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Pretrained Language Models encompass those trained on general-purpose corpora (Lewis et al.,
2019; Scao et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022) and specialized symbolic tasks (Geva et al., 2020;
Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023). They primarily aim to capture statistical patterns
in language, which limits their capacity for symbolic reasoning. Symbolic reasoning involves ma-
nipulating abstract symbols and logical rules to derive new knowledge (Shindo et al., 2021; Yang &
Deng, 2021) and necessitates the ability to extrapolate to novel situations and reason about concepts


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


absent in the training data (Fujisawa & Kanai, 2022). Due to the constraints of gradient learning,
LMs face challenges in wholly solving symbolic problems (Stolfo et al., 2023).
In-Context Learning has emerged as a promising approach to address these challenges (Dong et al.,
2022) and closely approximate the predictors computed by gradient descent (Akyürek et al., 2022).
By prompting the language model to generate an explanation before generating an answer, the chain
of thought (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022a) encourages
the model to think sequentially. This technique has been employed in various numerical and symbolic
reasoning tasks, such as scratchpad prompting (Nye et al., 2021) for length generalization (Anil
et al., 2022) and utilizing the chain of thought to perform arithmetic operations like summing pairs of
single digits with carry (Zhou et al., 2022b). However, this approach often necessitates substantial
computational resources, and achieving perfect accuracy remains challenging.
Augmented Language Models have been proposed as an alternative, supplementing language models
with external tools (Mialon et al., 2023). Examples include generating Python code for numerical
reasoning (Gao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) or incorporating tool usage as a pretraining task
(Schick et al., 2023). However, using external tools lacks a unified framework with language models
and instead relies on the normativity of program generation.

3       P RELIMINARIES
               Example 1 The Parity CoNN
              If we want the transformer to perform the Parity task full accurately:
                 Input: 1 0

                                                         1 1
                    1. Select(Indices,Indices,True) =
                                                         1 1

                                     1 1
                    2. Aggregate            , [1 0] = [1 1]
                                     1 1
                  3. Zipmap([1 1] , Lambda x : 0 if x % 2 == 0 else 1) = [1 1]
                Output: [1 1]
                                                                                           ⋆
                        Figure 2: Demonstration of the principles of Parity CoNN.
Compiled Neural Network (CoNN). CoNN is a transformer-based neural network leveraging
artificially compiled attention weights to execute rules. CoNN has multiple attention layers and Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) layers, and each attention layer facilitates interactions between tokens. For
example, in Figure 2, the multiplication of query and key elements representing a "Select" operation
in CoNN. Subsequent multiplication with value elements indicates an "Aggregate" operation. The
MLP layer is responsible for the token itself and is referred to as the "Zipmap" operation (Weiss et al.,
2021). By utilizing the three operations (Select, Aggregate, and Zipmap) to represent the sequence-
to-sequence process, we can convert symbolic parity task into transformer weights (Lindner et al.,
2023). CoNN can also stack multiple layers to address various human-defined rule problems, such as
mathematical calculations and symbol operations 1 . Figure 2 shows an example of Parity CoNN:
The first step is to obtain a matrix of all ones to that of the sequence using the "Select" operation.
Secondly, the "Aggregate" operation is used to combine the matrix obtained in the previous step with
the input sequence (with the aim of calculating the total number of 0’s and 1’s in the sequence). The
third step involves determining whether the total count is odd or even by "Zipmap".

4       M ETHOD
Language models excel in language understanding tasks, but lack robust capabilities for symbolic
tasks. We propose a Neural Comprehension framework that make CoNN guided by abstract rules
into language models in a plug-and-play fashion, which integrates the language model’s implicit
learning parameters and CoNNs’ explicit learning parameters. In Neural Comprehension, we designed
CoNNs in neural networks with weights and structures directly encoding the symbolic rules within
the standard architecture of the LM to enhance deterministic rule comprehension and allow for
deterministic execution of rule-based tasks.
    1
        Appendix B provides a more detailed description of CoNN.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   216582               =                147843             meters     …                                                                                                                        Input


                                                                                     Both neural networks are similar to the decoder structure of transformer
   LMCON              LMCON              LMCON              LMCON


      -              216582                =                147843     …



                                                                                                                                                                                      ...                                                      ...
                                                                                                                                                                    Pre-training                                         Compiled
                                                                                                                                                                 Neural Network                                Neural Network
            The iWatch show that Stanley ran 364425 meters and walked
 Input      216582 meters a month. How much farther did Stanley run than
                                                                                                                                                                216582   =   148843    meters                ---------    ---------   147843    ---------
            walk ?

                To find out how much farther Stanley ran than walked, we
            need to subtract the distance he walked from the distance he ran
 Output     364425 - 216582 = 147843 meters. Therefore, Stanley ran                                                                                                                   216582    =   147843    meters
            147843 meters farther than he walked.

                                                                                     Language Models with Compiled Neural Networks


               Figure 3: The architecture of the proposed Neural Comprehension framework.


4.1       N EURAL C OMPREHENSION

Neural Comprehension is a MoE-style (Shazeer et al., 2017) neural network framework we designed,
which is entirely composed of neural networks and maintains the generative seq2seq style. It uses
predefined CoNNs as gating to determine when to output results from CoNNs. This approach is
simple and plug-and-play, allowing combination with pretrained LMs. As illustrated in Figure 3, the
language model encodes the context and produces the textual and reasoning process context D(x)
step by step, a decoder architecture to generate the subsequent context step by step iteratively. And
CoNNs handle sequence transformations involving rules, when a rule-required operation emerges,
CoNN’s attention is utilized to calculate specific values. For example, in Figure 3, when calculating
364425-216582, the only pretrained language model may output 148843, which is incorrect. However,
the Subtraction CoNN can correct the result to 147843 in the neural comprehension framework.
This dynamically encoded process improves intermediate results interpretability and final result
accuracy. Neural Comprehension combines LM and CoNNs in a piecewise function to perform
                                                                     ⊤
gradient update. LM’s hidden state output is HL = HL1 · · · HLdL         ∈ RdL , HLi ∈ (0, 1), and
                                            ⊤
CoNN’s output is HC = HC1 · · · HCdC          ∈ RdC , HCi ∈ {0, 1},

                                                                      IdL , 0        HL ,
                                     î = argmax                                                                                                                         ,     β ∈ {0, 1}                                                                   (1)
                                                    i                0, βIdC         HC

where HC is a one-hot vector, and dL and dC here refer to the vocabulary size of the Model’s decode
output. 2 The Neural Comprehension combines the LLM’s hidden state output, HL , and CoNN’s
output, HC , using identity matrices IdL (for dL ) and IdC (for dC ) to concatenate them for model
fusion. Specifically, the hidden state representation matrix is obtained by extending the original
hidden state representation matrix of the LM with the hidden state matrix on the CoNNs’ vocabulary
through a block matrix operation, resulting in a larger matrix.

4.2       G RADIENT M ODIFICATION IN N EURAL C OMPREHENSION

To better appreciate the benefits of our method in handling rule-intensive tasks and improving
accuracy, it is crucial to understand the gradient perspective of In-Context Learning (ICL). Recent
studies on ICL algorithms have shown that the learning process of language models within the
optimization process in ICL can be viewed as a search for suitable gradients to minimize the loss
   2
     It is worth noting that in this paper, for ease of implementation, the output vocabulary size of CoNNs’
decode dC is generally less than 100 due to limitations in computing resources (detailed information is shown in
Appendix Table 1).


                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function. (Garg et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023). Due to the implicit learning nature of standard
ICL methods, gradients learned from data may not always be ideal for addressing rule-intensive
tasks. Therefore, our proposed method introduces an explicit learning component to provide more
appropriate gradient updates for such tasks, ultimately leading to enhanced overall performance. We
focus on elucidating the changes in the gradient introduced by the Neural Comprehension model, the
gradient of the model during the execution of ICL can be partitioned into two categories based on the
origin of the gradients:

                                           GT Text: Language Model
                            Gradient =                                                              (2)
                                           GR Rule: CoNNs
Here, GT represents the gradients derived implicitly from the language model (LM) and corresponds
to the text-based learning aspect of the model. Conversely, GR represents the gradients explicitly
derived from the CoNNs, encoding rule-based knowledge. The specific computation process can be
seen in Equation 1. Note that the gradients’ decomposition is only approximate and may not reflect
the true generating process of text. The Neural Comprehension framework integrates both gradient
sources to optimize the ICL process. In linear regression problems (Akyürek et al., 2022), the loss
function can be expressed as a piecewise function according to Equation 1, here P1 (x) is the LM and
P2 (x) is CoNN, the In-context-learner can be separate into two process:
                                                 2
                                L = y − β⊤x                                                        (3)
                                    (
                                               2
                                       y − G⊤
                                            Tx           x ∈ P1 (x)
                                  =            2                                                   (4)
                                       y − G⊤
                                            Rx           x ∈ P2 (x)

Based on the partitioned gradient as defined in Equation 2, the overall gradient of the Neural
Comprehension model can be obtained by computing their individual gradients concerning the
respective β:                              ∂L
                                 ∂L         ∂GT   x ∈ P1 (x)
                                      =      ∂L                                            (5)
                                 ∂β         ∂GR   x ∈ P2 (x)
                                |{z}
                                  Gradient


This partitioning allows the Neural Comprehension model to specifically address the gradient require-
ments of both implicit learning via LM and explicit learning via CoNNs. It is crucial to note that
CoNNs are designed to minimize the loss associated with rule-based tasks, essentially providing an
optimal gradient for tasks involving rule-intensive operations. This leads to a substantial improvement
in the model’s accuracy for rule-based tasks, as the gradient updates provided by CoNNs are more
suitable for rule learning compared to the initially available gradients from the LM. By amalgamating
both of gradient sources, the Neural Comprehension model achieves a more refined optimization of
in-context learning. The Neural Comprehension model effectively balances the need for implicit and
explicit learning within the ICL framework, leading to enhanced overall performance in terms of
accuracy and interpretability.

4.3   AUTO C O NN T OOLKIT

To improve the scalability of Neural Comprehension frameworks, we propose the AutoCoNN toolkit,
which can automatically generate new CoNNs and adapt Neural Comprehension given by "Instruct"
and "Example", where "Instruct" serves as explicit symbolic definitions, and "Example" provides
some input-output pairs for the operation. Considering that LLMs like GPT-4 can describe symbolic
reasoning processes but cannot faithfully execute them (Cai et al., 2023), AutoCoNN Toolkit enables
converting the reasoning process of symbols into CoNNs while maintaining a complete neural network
framework without extra interpreters. The AutoCoNN process is divided into three steps. First, we
provide 24 Tracr code (Lindner et al., 2023) examples as context. Then the LLM is asked to generate
20 different Tracr codes by sampling decoding based on the "Instruct" and "Example". Finally,
we convert these codes into pytorch-form (Paszke et al., 2019) CoNNs and filter them on the pre-
provided Examples to obtain accurate CoNNs. We provide further experimental analysis to test the
performance of AutoCoNN in Appendix D. Meanwhile, the Parity, Reverse, Copy and Last
Letter CoNN mentioned in the Section 5 are constructed by AutoCoNN, which demonstrates the
practical value of AutoCoNN.


                                                  5
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        5                                  E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULT
        5.1                                       S YMBOLIC TASKS
                                        ф     KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ     х ф         /ŶͲ ŝƐƚ         х ф                        KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ                        х                                           ф     KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ     х ф         /ŶͲ ŝƐƚ         х ф                        KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ                        х


6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                      7  VPDOO                             7  ODUJH                             *37                             6FUDWFKSDG  7  EDVH                                                                                                     7  VPDOO                             7  ODUJH                             *37                             1HXUDO &RPSUHKHQVLRQ
                                                                      7  EDVH                               *37                                   */0                               1HXUDO &RPSUHKHQVLRQ                                                                                                    7  EDVH                               *37                                   */0


                                                                                                                                     $  3DULW\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %  5HYHUVH

                                                        фKƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚх ф         /ŶͲ ŝƐƚ         х ф                        KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ                        х                                                               фKƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚх ф         /ŶͲ ŝƐƚ         х ф                        KƵƚͲŽĨͲ ŝƐƚ                        х


6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                      7  VPDOO                             7  ODUJH                             *37                             $OJRULWKP  *37                                                                                                           7  VPDOO                             7  ODUJH                             *37                             1HXUDO &RPSUHKHQVLRQ
                                                                      7  EDVH                               *37                                   */0                               1HXUDO &RPSUHKHQVLRQ                                                                                                    7  EDVH                               *37                                   */0


                                                                                                                                 &  $GGLWLRQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '  6XEWUDFWLRQ


      Figure 4: Comparison of Neural Comprehension and other implicit learning-based methods in symbolic
      operations tasks to test length generalization performance. In this, the T5 model uses the Vanilla Fine-tune
      method for learning, and LLMs use the Few-shot learning method. In Neural Comprehension, each task has a
      different CoNN, namely Parity, Reverse, Addition, and Subtraction.


                               Techniques                                                                                                                             In-distribution                                                          Out-of-distribution                                                                                   Time and Space Complexity                                                                                                        Interpretability
                               Vanilla Fine-tune (For LM)                                                                                                                                    ✓✓                                                                             ✗                                                                                                                            ✓✓                                                                                                     ✗
                               Vanilla Few-shot (For LLM)                                                                                                                                     ✓                                                                             ✓                                                                                                                            ✓✓                                                                                                     ✗
                               Scratchpad (Anil et al., 2022)                                                                                                                                ✓✓                                                                            ✓                                                                                                                              ✗                                                                                                     ✓
                               Algorithmic (Zhou et al., 2022b)                                                                                                                              ✓✓                                                                            ✓                                                                                                                              ✗                                                                                                     ✓
                               Neural Comprehension (Ours)                                                                                                                                   ✓✓                                                                            ✓✓                                                                                                                            ✓✓                                                                                                    ✓✓


     Table 1: Performance on Symbolic operations tasks of five techniques that language models admit: (1) Vanilla
     Finetuning, (2) Vanilla Few-shot, (3) Scratchpad (Chain-of-Thought reasoning), (4) Algorithmic (Chain-of-
     Thought reasoning) and (5) Neural Comprehension. We find that the first four learning-based methods have
     different modes of failure regarding in and out-of-distribution coverage for symbolic operations. However,
     Neural Comprehension has strong advantages in terms of length generalization, efficiency, and interpretability.
     ✗ signifies poor ✓ signifies nontrivial, ✓✓ signifies near-perfect performance. (*) Refers to task-dependency.

    We conduct a length generalization experiment (Anil et al., 2022) to examine the distinctions between
    the Neural Comprehension and learning-based methods, as depicted in Figure 4. Our experimental
    design encompasses 1000 × 40 independent test sets, comprising problems with varying digit lengths
    from 1 to 40 digits. 10 to 20 digits within the range are provided by us for methods based on implicit
    learning for training; during the testing phase, this range is called In-Dist. Furthermore, we present
    results for both Scratchpad (Anil et al., 2022) and Algorithmic (Zhou et al., 2022b) approaches.
     The results of our experiment demonstrate that the Vanilla Fine-tune (red lines) method performs
     optimally on the in-domain (10-20 digit) training set, while its performance deteriorates for both
     more simplistic and more intricate. This finding suggests that the absence of relevant samples in the
     training set may cause gradient descent-based language models to underperform on both simpler and
     more complex tasks. As further discussed in the appendix D.1, this phenomenon can be attributed to
     the inherent generalization limitations of statistical models and the position bias of language models.
      Considering the Vanilla Few-shot method (green lines), we determine that its performance is less
      impacted by the prompt sample range compared to Vanilla Fine-tune. Large language models, which
      are trained on extensive text corpora, excel at solving more straightforward problems such as symbolic
      operations within a ten-digit range. Nevertheless, performance remains below par for test sets with
      more than ten digits, even when prompted with 10-20 digit samples.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Observing CoT-like methods (we use GPT-3.5), including Scratchpad and Algorithmic, unveils their
robust length generalization capabilities. Scratchpad works by requiring large language models
to record intermediate steps, while Algorithmic employs a similar approach to record the carry
operations involved in the addition process. This can be primarily attributed to their proficiency in
decomposing complex problems into smaller incremental steps and maintaining intermediate states.
However, these methods necessitate substantial computational resources, and extending the length
beyond the input limit of the model becomes challenging.
Our study reveals that Neural Comprehension attains remarkably high accuracy in symbolic operations.
This implies that Neural Comprehension, unlike conventional methods, does not rely on training data
and remains unaffected by discrepancies in input lengths for in-distribution and out-of-distribution
data. Consequently, it alleviates the requirement for step-by-step work tracking, and language
models with CoNNs only need relatively fewer computational steps to execute sequence operations
directly. Encoding rules into neural network modules endows us with greater interpretability, enabling
language models to flawlessly perform purely symbolic operation tasks.

5.2   S YMBOLIC R EASONING

In this section, we investigate the                                                      Vanilla Fine-tune                    Direct Fine-tune
performance of Neural Comprehen-                                                         Neural Comprehension                 Improve Performance
sion in terms of symbolic reasoning                                   100%
                                                                                 T5 Small:60M      100%
                                                                                                              T5 Base:220M    100%
                                                                                                                                          T5 Large:770M
capabilities. Our hypothesis is that,
although pretrained Language Mod-                                     80%                          80%                          80%
els (LMs) demonstrate strong lan-
                                          Coin Flip


                                                                      60%                          60%                          60%
guage understanding abilities, they
lack the capacity to deduce and com-                                  40%                          40%                          40%
prehend rules regarding symbolic
                                                                      20%                          20%                          20%
reasoning tasks. Thus, we aim to
evaluate whether the incorporation                                     0%                           0%                          0%
                                                                             0    6K 12K 18K 24K          0    6K 12K 18K 24K         0     6K 12K 18K 24K
of compiled neural networks in the                                                    Iterations                 Iterations                  Iterations
form of CoNNs can address this lim-                                   100%                         100%                       100%
                                          Last Letter Concatenation


itation and improve the LM’s sym-                                     80%                          80%                          80%
bolic reasoning abilities.
                                                                      60%                          60%                          60%
To assess the performance of
the rule comprehension component            40%                  40%                  40%
(CoNNs) in symbolic reasoning, we           20%                  20%                  20%
devise an experiment that measures
the model’s accuracy using interme-          0%
                                                0 6K 12K 18K 24K
                                                                  0%
                                                                     0 6K 12K 18K 24K
                                                                                       0%
                                                                                          0 6K 12K 18K 24K
diate processes and represents them                 Iterations           Iterations           Iterations
in a "Chain of Thought"-like manner.
In doing so, the experiment decom- Figure 5: In the iterative process of gradient descent during
poses language understanding and training. The bleu line represents a language model that in-
rule comprehension explicitly into corporates neural comprehension, and the red line represents
simpler outputs, avoiding the com- the original language model. Additionally, we provide Direct,
plexities of reasoning and additional which is a direct prediction of the final result, as a reference.
error propagation in the models. Ex-
ample outputs from this approach can be found in Appendix F. We observed that neural compre-
hension improves the symbolic reasoning capabilities of pretrained language models in most cases
(Neural Comprehension almost always outperforms Vanilla Fine-tune in Figure 5), and can fit faster.
This observation suggests that the introduction of compiled neural networks has a positive impact on
pretrained LMs, addressing rule comprehension limitations in symbolic reasoning tasks.

5.3   A RITHMETIC R EASONING
Arithmetic reasoning serves as a suitable testbed for evaluating language models and their ability to
address real-world problems. In this study, we examine the AddSub+ dataset variants that involve
different digit lengths, utilizing the Addition and Subtraction models from the CoNNs family.
Notably, the capabilities of Neural Comprehension extend beyond these tasks, as CoNNs can also
simulate calculators that support multiplication and division operations, and potentially perform


                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 9DQLOOD &R7                                            3$/                  1HXUDO &RPSUHKHQVLRQ                                      ,PSURYH 3HUIRUPDQFH

                                                              *37        %                                                                                               *37      %                                                                                             */0     %



  6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                                                                      6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6ROYH 5DWH


                                                      7KH QXPEHU RI GLJLWV                                                                               7KH QXPEHU RI GLJLWV                                                                        7KH 1XPEHU RI 'LJLWV


Figure 6: We conducted simulations of the AddSub dataset with varying digits by modifying the "lEquations"
parameter. We then tested the performance of three LLMs with and without Neural Comprehension in generating
CoT outputs for AddSub+ . And we reported the solve rates of three LLMs and compared the solve rates of
using additional tools (PAL (Gao et al., 2022)).
Addition                                  llama-2-7b        llama-2-70b          GLM-130B              Avg           Subtraction                                    llama-2-7b          llama-2-70b         GLM-130B              Avg                 Mixed                           llama-2-7b          llama-2-70b          GLM-130B              Avg
CoT                                             6.3               43.8                   6.3           18.8          CoT                                                    6.3              27.9                    1.8         12.0                 CoT                                  11.1                   16.7                  0.0           9.3
PAL                                            18.7               37.5                   6.3           20.8          PAL                                                    7.2              31.5                    3.6         14.1                 PAL                                  11.1                   27.8                  5.6          14.8
NC (Ours)                                      12.5               43.8                   7.2           21.2          NC (Ours)                                              9.9              32.4                    4.5         15.6                 NC (Ours)                            27.8                   33.3                  5.6          22.2



Table 2: Experiments on the addition and subtraction subset for GSM8K-Hard dataset showing
performance comparisons across different models and methods: Only Addition (left), Only Subtrac-
tion (center), and Mixed addition and subtraction (right), using Vanilla CoT, PAL, and NC (Neural
Comprehension) methods.


linear algebra computations or even in-context learning algorithms that employ backpropagation
(Giannou et al., 2023).
To evaluate the impact of Neural Comprehension on arithmetic reasoning, we compare the output
of vanilla CoT language models and those incorporating Neural Comprehension, using the vanilla
CoT baseline as a reference. As demonstrated in Figure 6 and Table 2, the vanilla CoT model
struggles to extrapolate and solve arithmetic problems involving longer digit lengths. However,
integrating Neural Comprehension significantly improves the performance of language models on
such complex arithmetic tasks. Since we only incorporated the Addition and Subtraction
CoNNs, we attribute the observed performance enhancement to the increased computational accuracy
of the language model. For further evidence, we present additional experimental results on widely-
used arithmetic reasoning datasets in Appendix E.2, which reinforce the benefits of using Neural
Comprehension over the vanilla CoT model.
In comparison to language models employing external tools like PAL (Gao et al., 2022), our findings
suggest that Neural Comprehension offers greater flexibility for LM. Firstly, by design, it minimizes
the necessity for additional processing steps or external tools, leading to an efficient direct computa-
tional approach. This contrasts with Tool-based methods that often require additional programming
and execution steps, increasing complexity and computational resources. Moreover, CoNN maintains
end-to-end differentiability, crucial for models adapting to new data or tasks. In contrast, Tool-based
methods are non-differentiable, limiting their adaptability in reinforcement learning settings or tasks
with sparse delayed rewards (Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). Furthermore, CoNN’s modu-
larity enhances performance across various model scales, applicable regardless of a language model’s
ability to call functions, unlike tools only operable in large, additionally code-trained models. Thus,
the Neural Comprehension framework’s efficiency, unified end-to-end neural network architecture,
and extensive applicability constitute its distinct advantages over the Tool-based approach, offering a
robust and scalable solution for a multitude of linguistic and computational challenges.

5.4                                       A BLATION AND A NALYSES : M ODULE C OMBINATION FOR N EURAL C OMPREHENSION

Efficiently deploying multiple CoNNs is crucial for achieving exceptional Neural Comprehension
performance. As depicted in Figure 7, the amalgamation of distinct CoNNs, tailored for both
symbolic and arithmetic reasoning tasks within the language model framework, can lead to remarkable
benefits. Similar to ToolFormer (Schick et al., 2023), we combine multiple different CoNNs into


                                                                                                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A Pre-trained Model with some CoNNs
                                                                  A Pre-trained Model with a CoNN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Increase from left to right)

                                                                                                                                                                                                � + 1�                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      � + ��
    /DVW /HWWHU &RQFDWHQDWLRQ


              6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                           7  VPDOO   0                             7  EDVH    0                         7  ODUJH    0                                                                                                                     7  VPDOO   0                                    7  EDVH    0                                    7  ODUJH    0
                                                                                 9DQLOOD )LQH WXQH                   &RUUHODWHG  /DVW :RUG                 &RUUHODWHG  &RS\ /HWWHU                                                                      8QFRUUHODWHG  3DULW\                          8QFRUUHODWHG  $GG                           8QFRUUHODWHG  6XE


       'LVWV RI $GG6XE


        6ROYH 5DWH


                                                                           *37       %                               *37     %                                                 */0    %                                                                                                                  *37       %                               *37     %                                 */0    %
                                                                               9DQLOOD &R7                      &RUUHODWHG  $GG                                &RUUHODWHG  6XE                                 8QFRUUHODWHG  3DULW\                                            8QFRUUHODWHG  /DVW :RUG                  8QFRUUHODWHG  &RS\ /HWWHU


Figure 7: In Neural Comprehension framework, the performance of multiple different module combination is
demonstrated. The left side shows the effect of combining a pretrained language model with a CoNN, while
the right side shows the impact of combining a language model with multiple CoNNs. For different tasks, we
categorize CoNNs as Correlated (green) and Uncorrelated (red), indicating whether the CoNN is related to the
current task or not.


one framework, enabling the language model to have multiple capabilities. We conduct experiments
on Last Letter Concatenation tass and AddSub+ dataset, which shows the plug-and-play gating
mechanism can still well control these CoNNs to output what should be output. It is observed that
integrating pertinent CoNNs bolsters the performance of the initial language model, whereas the
inclusion of unrelated language models rarely causes detrimental effects, regardless of whether single
or multiple CoNNs are combined.
This can be ascribed to the refined design of the Neural Comprehension framework, which ensures
the precise execution of assigned tasks by CoNNs without interference from irrelevant modules. Each
CoNN module is adept at generating the appropriate output when needed, thereby preventing the
emergence of erroneous results from unrelated components. Importantly, as seen in Appendix B.3,
the parameter count for each CoNN module ranges from 1/1000 to 1/1000000 of that for GPT-3,
and the experiments in Appendix D.3 show that the inference latency in the neural understanding
framework only increases by 1%-3% compared to Vanilla.
This observation underscores the remarkable scalability of the Neural Comprehension framework,
which possesses the capability to not only accommodate existing knowledge concepts but also
assimilate novel ones as the number of CoNNs expands. Theoretically, the integration of tens of
thousands of CoNN modules within language models holds the potential to foster a comprehensive
understanding of concepts.

6                                      C ONCLUSION
We have observed that language models lack an intrinsic comprehension of rule-based concepts and
explored how Neural Comprehension can integrate compiled neural networks into the language model
framework in a simple and plug-and-play manner. On the one hand, we demonstrated the superiority
of our approach over existing learning-based methods, where our method implements comparable
improvements to external tools within the neural network framework but does not require additional
interpreters. This also enables language models without coding capabilities to possess symbolic
manipulation abilities. On the other hand, compared to external tools, gradients can propagate without
proxies, allowing better integration and full differentiability. The Neural Comprehension solves
the issue of language models themselves being unable to perform robust symbolic operations and
providing a foundation for future work on unifying both implicit and explicit learning in language
models and facilitating seamless integration.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

All CoNN models mentioned in this paper have been saved in Pytorch format in the Supplementary
Materials, with dropout set to 0 to ensure deterministic outputs that conform to human-specified
rules. The code for the AutoCoNN toolkit and Neural Comprehension framework in this paper can
be found in the code portion of the Supplementary Materials. Details of all experiments setting
referenced in this paper are included in Appendix F.1. Detailed descriptions of all tasks, datasets,
and baselines mentioned in this paper are provided in Appendix F.2. Details of all few-shot prompts
referenced in this paper are included in Appendix G.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No.2022ZD0118501) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.U1936207, No.62376270, No.62171183). Youth
Innovation Promotion Association CAS, and OPPO Research Fund.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS FOR C OLLEAGUES AND FRIENDS

We appreciate the interest shown in this work by our colleagues and friends:

      • Haining Xie, Huanxuan Liao, Jiachun Li, Liang Gui, Pengfan Du, Pengfei Cao, Shaoru Guo,
        Wangtao Sun, Wenting Li, Xiusheng Huang, Yao Xu, Yifan Wei, Zhao Yang, Zhiqi Wang,
        Zhongtao Jiang, Zhuoran Jin, Ziyang Huang, who offered enthusiasm and backing.

      • Bingmei Sun, Boyuan Jiang, HaoChen Cao, Zixuan Cao, Donghui Li, Dongfang Suze, Ertan
        Zhuang, Jiajia Li, Mingwei Zhang, Lin Zhang, Mingwen Niu, Min Xiao, Qiaomu Tan,
        Tianyu Mu, Yuxin Liu, Xiaoyan Yu, Yuke Shi, Yixuan Li, Yang Zhou.


R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.

Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Peter Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  Mathqa: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based formalisms. north
  american chapter of the association for computational linguistics, 2019.

Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Johan Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Venkatesh
  Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length
  generalization in large language models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=zSkYVeX7bC4.

Patel Arkil, Bhattamishra Satwik, and Goyal Navin. Are nlp models really able to solve simple math
  word problems? 2021.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio
  Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4,
  2023.

Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as
  tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.12588, 2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
 Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun
  Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin
  Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang,
 Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny
  Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models, 2022.
Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson. Transformers as soft reasoners over language.
  In Christian Bessiere (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-20, pp. 3882–3890. International Joint Conferences on Artificial
  Intelligence Organization, 7 2020. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/537. URL https://doi.org/
  10.24963/ijcai.2020/537. Main track.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
  Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Xavier Daull, Patrice Bellot, Emmanuel Bruno, Vincent Martin, and Elisabeth Murisasco. Complex
  qa and language models hybrid architectures, survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09051, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, and
  Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Ippei Fujisawa and Ryota Kanai. Logical tasks for measuring extrapolation and rule comprehension.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07727, 2022.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10435, 2022.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Injecting numerical reasoning skills into language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04487, 2020.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D. Lee, and Dimitris
  Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers, 2023.
Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Oren Etzioni, and Nate Kushman. Learning to
 solve arithmetic word problems with verb categorization. empirical methods in natural language
 processing, 2014.
Minghao Hu, Yuxing Peng, Zhen Huang, and Dongsheng Li. A multi-type multi-span network for
 reading comprehension that requires discrete reasoning. empirical methods in natural language
 processing, 2019.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han.
   Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610, 2022.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=e2TBb5y0yFf.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ashish Sabharwal, Oren Etzioni, and Siena Dumas Ang.
  Parsing algebraic word problems into equations. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2015.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461,
 2019.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858, 2022.
Bin Li, Encheng Chen, Hongru Liu, Yixuan Weng, Bin Sun, Shutao Li, Yongping Bai, and Meiling
  Hu. More but correct: Generating diversified and entity-revised medical response. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01266, 2021a.
Bin Li, Yixuan Weng, Bin Sun, and Shutao Li. Learning to locate visual answer in video corpus
  using question. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Bin Li, Yixuan Weng, Fei Xia, and Hanjun Deng. Towards better chinese-centric neural machine
  translation for low-resource languages. Computer Speech & Language, 84:101566, 2024.
Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Pretrained language models for text
  generation: A survey, 2021b.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
David Lindner, János Kramár, Matthew Rahtz, Thomas McGrath, and Vladimir Mikulik. Tracr:
  Compiled transformers as a laboratory for interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05062, 2023.
Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2019/file/bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf.
Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. True few-shot learning with language models.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:11054–11070, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinyu Pi, Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Morteza Ziyadi, Zeqi Lin, Yan Gao, Qiang Fu, Jian-Guang Lou, and
  Weizhu Chen. Reasoning like program executors. 2022.
Jing Qian, Hong Wang, Zekun Li, Shiyang Li, and Xifeng Yan. Limitations of language models in
   arithmetic and symbolic induction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05051, 2022.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07206, 2022.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. Solving general arithmetic word problems. arXiv: Computation and
  Language, 2016.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost,
  2018.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc V. Le, Geoffrey E. Hinton,
  and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer.
  CoRR, abs/1701.06538, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06538.
Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Neuro-symbolic forward reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09383, 2021.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W.
  Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda
  Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders An-
  dreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew Dai, Andrew La,
  Andrew Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta, Anna
  Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul Menezes,
  Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia Efrat, Aykut
  Erdem, Ayla Karaka{¸s}, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bart{ł}omiej Bojanowski,
  Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk
  Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine Stinson,
  Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramírez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng, Chitta
  Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Manning,
  Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney
  Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth,
  Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí González, Danielle Perszyk,
  Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David Drakard, David
  Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen,
  Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang,
  Dong-Ho Lee, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth
  Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola, Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang,
  Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice En-
  gefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar, Fernando Martínez-Plumed,
  Francesca Happé, Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Gerard
  de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo
  Jaimovitch-López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic, Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu
 Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet, Jack Geissinger,
  Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, James B. Simon, James
  Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocoń, Jana Thompson, Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Boss-
  cher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming
  Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden, John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Berant,
  Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, Jose Hernandez-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Jones, Joshua B.
  Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik
  Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin
  Omondi, Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell,
  Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-
  Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón, Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem {¸S}enel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap,
  Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco
  Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria Jose Ramírez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha
  Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert, Medina Orduna
  Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud, Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen, Michael Gu,
  Michael Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Micha{ł} Sw{˛e}drowski, Michele Bevilac-
  qua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mo Tiwari, Mohit
  Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun Peng, Nathan
  Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick Doiron,
  Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Niveditha S. Iyer,
  Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy,
  Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul
  Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon
  Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Mi{ł}kowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei,
  Qing Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker,
  Ramón Risco Delgado, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku
  Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan
  LeBras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee,
  Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Sajant Anand, Sam
  Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman, Samuel S. Schoen-
  holz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan Ghosh, Sean Casey,
  Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi, Shadi Hamdan,
  Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang Shane
  Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima (Shammie) Debnath,
  Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini, Soo-Hwan
  Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella
  Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Mish-
  erghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali,
  Tatsu Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang,
  Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Titus Tunduny, Tobias
  Gerstenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant
  Misra, Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu,
  Vishakh Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders, William Zhang, Wout
  Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh,
  Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen,
  Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian Wang,
  Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating
  the capabilities of language models. 2022.

Alessandro Stolfo, Zhijing Jin, Kumar Shridhar, Bernhard Schoelkopf, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A
  causal framework to quantify the robustness of mathematical reasoning with language models.
  In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 545–561, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.32. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.32.

Tian-Xiang Sun, Xiang-Yang Liu, Xi-Peng Qiu, and Xuan-Jing Huang. Paradigm shift in nat-
  ural language processing. Machine Intelligence Research, 19(3):169–183, 2022. ISSN 2731-
  538X. doi: 10.1007/s11633-022-1331-6. URL https://www.mi-research.net/en/
  article/doi/10.1007/s11633-022-1331-6.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks
 and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Xiao Wang, Guangyao Chen, Guangwu Qian, Pengcheng Gao, Xiao-Yong Wei, Yaowei Wang,
  Yonghong Tian, and Wen Gao. Large-scale multi-modal pre-trained models: A comprehensive
  survey. Machine Intelligence Research, 20(4):447–482, 2023a. ISSN 2731-538X. doi: 10.1007/
  s11633-022-1410-8. URL https://www.mi-research.net/en/article/doi/10.
  1007/s11633-022-1410-8.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations.
Yixuan Weng and Bin Li. Visual answer localization with cross-modal mutual knowledge transfer. In
  ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Yixuan Weng, Bin Li, Fei Xia, Minjun Zhu, Bin Sun, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao.
  Large language models need holistically thought in medical conversational qa. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.05410, 2023a.
Yixuan Weng, Zhiqi Wang, Huanxuan Liao, Shizhu He, Shengping Liu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao.
  Lmtuner: An user-friendly and highly-integrable training framework for fine-tuning large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10252, 2023b.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Shengping Liu, Bin Sun, Kang Liu, and
  Jun Zhao. Large language models are better reasoners with self-verification. In Findings of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 2550–2575, 2023c.
Yixuan Weng, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, Shengping Liu, and Jun Zhao. Controllm: Crafting diverse
  personalities for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10151, 2024.
Fei Xia, Bin Li, Yixuan Weng, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, Bin Sun, Shutao Li, and Jun Zhao. Medconqa:
  Medical conversational question answering system based on knowledge graphs. In Proceedings
  of the The 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
  Demonstrations, pp. 148–158, 2022.
Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning symbolic rules for reasoning in quasi-natural language. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.12038, 2021.
Zhen Yang, Ming Ding, Qingsong Lv, Zhihuan Jiang, Zehai He, Yuyi Guo, Jinfeng Bai, and Jie Tang.
  Gpt can solve mathematical problems without a calculator, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5NTt8GFjUHkr.
Yang Zhao, Jiajun Zhang, and Chengqing Zong. Transformer: A general framework from ma-
  chine translation to others. Machine Intelligence Research, 20(4):514–538, 2023. ISSN 2731-
  538X. doi: 10.1007/s11633-022-1393-5. URL https://www.mi-research.net/en/
  article/doi/10.1007/s11633-022-1393-5.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022a.
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
  Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09066, 2022b.
Minjun Zhu, Yixuan Weng, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Reasonchainqa: Text-based complex
 question answering with explainable evidence chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08763, 2022.
Minjun Zhu, Yixuan Weng, Shizhu He, Cunguang Wang, Kang Liu, Li Cai, and Jun Zhao. Learning
 to build reasoning chains by reliable path retrieval. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
 Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.


A    D ISCUSSION OF L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We have presented a novel framework that integrates Compiled Neural Networks (CoNNs) with
existing language models to bolster their rule understanding abilities. Although our approach has
shown promising performance improvements on symbolic and arithmetic reasoning tasks, there are
several limitations and potential avenues for future research that warrant further exploration.
A significant limitation of our current framework lies in the more efficient and natural incorporation of
CoNNs into language models. Currently, our method employs a sparse neural network that treats the
pretrained language model and CoNNs as separate modules. A more desirable solution is to leverage
a dense neural network, simultaneously utilizing the benefits of both components. Examining the
large-scale applicability of CoNNs is a beneficial endeavor. Although our experiments have been
conducted on a relatively small scale (up to five stacked CoNNs), the advancements and abilities
language models may gain from larger-scale combinations of CoNNs remain unclear. Exploring
the scalability of our method and the performance advantages of deploying more complex CoNN
architectures in language models could provide valuable insights into their potential.
Another promising area of research is the inclusion of explicit knowledge into CoNNs. While the
current implementation centers on encoding rules into CoNNs, future work could exploit techniques
from knowledge graphs to compile explicit knowledge into language models. This may significantly
enhance language models’ interpretability and knowledge representation capabilities, potentially
resulting in improved performance on an even broader range of tasks.
In conclusion, our work on enhancing language models’ rule understanding capabilities through
CoNN integration has yielded promising results, albeit with some limitations and remaining chal-
lenges. By addressing these areas and extending our approach, we believe that it can ultimately lead
to the development of more powerful, interpretable, and knowledge-rich language models.

B    C OMPILED N EURAL N ETWORKS
In this section, we will discuss the concept, implementation, and potential of Compiled Neural
Networks (CoNN), a type of neural network inspired from previous works on transformers. CoNNs
can perform diverse tasks such as computer arithmetic and linear algebra, demonstrating a wide range
of applications in LMs and beyond.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.1     I NTRODUCTION

Transformers have garnered significant attention due to their ability to capture high-order relations
and manage long-term dependencies across tokens through attention mechanisms. This enables
transformers to model contextual information effectively. Pretrained language models, such as GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020), exploit contextual learning to invoke various modules for different tasks, like
performing arithmetic upon receiving arithmetic prompts. To further enhance rule comprehension in
such models, CoNN-based modules are introduced as a part of Neural Comprehension.
Distinct from common models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), CoNNs leverage a transformer
structure and derive their weights from specialized design rather than pretraining. Each Attention
layer and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) layer in a CoNN represents a specific sequence transformation,
leading to a neural network module embodying explicit and interpretable operations.
RASP (Weiss et al., 2021) is a Restricted Access Sequence Processing Language that abstracts
the computational model of Transformer-encoder by mapping its essential components, such as
attention and feed-forward computation, into simple primitives like select, aggregate, and zipmap.
This language enables RASP programs to perform various tasks like creating histograms, sorting, and
even logical inference, as demonstrated by Clark et al. (2020).
Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023) serves as a compiler that converts human-readable RASP code into
weights for a GPT-like transformer architecture with only a decoder module. The Tracr framework
uses JAX to transform RASP-defined code into neural network weights. Our neural reasoning
framework employs weights generated by Tracr, which are then converted into PyTorch weights to be
compatible with the pretrained language model.
Looped Transformers as Programmable Computers (Giannou et al., 2023) introduces a novel trans-
former framework that simulates basic computing blocks, such as edit operations on input sequences,
non-linear functions, function calls, program counters, and conditional branches. This is achieved
by reverse engineering attention and hardcoding unique weights into the model, creating a looped
structure. The resulting CoNN can emulate a general-purpose computer with just 13 layers of trans-
formers, and even implement backpropagation-based context learning algorithms, showcasing the
approach’s vast application prospects.
Overall, the potential applications of CoNNs are extensive, given their capacity to perform a wide
array of tasks beyond natural language processing. CoNNs offer increased interpretability and
transparency through explicitly defined operations, which is vital in fields such as medical diagnosis
and legal decision-making. Additionally, CoNNs can lead to more efficient and effective neural
network architectures by reducing pretraining requirements and facilitating improved optimization of
network parameters.

B.2     E XAMPLE

In this subsection, we briefly describe how computational processes can be represented using trans-
former code and demonstrate how new CoNN weights can be obtained with the aid of the Tracr
compiler.

B.2.1    P A R I T Y C O NN

In the introduction, we tried to introduce how to perform parity checking on a sequence containing [0
| 1] using a CoNN. Whenever we need to check the sequence, this CoNN can output the completely
correct answer.
Figures 8 and 9 present two distinct input sequences, and illustrate the corresponding hidden state
and final output obtained after passing through the internal layers of the Parity CoNN architecture.

B.2.2    R E V E R S E C O NN

Figures 10 and 11 show the hidden state and output of Reverse CoNN when inputting text. The
embedding of CoNN can be customized, so tokens can be either words like ’hello’ or individual
letters.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE TRACR CODE OF P A R I T Y C O NN
def parity(sop) -> rasp.SOp:
    """Multiply the length of each token."""
    sop = rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x,y: x * y,sop,length).named(’map_length’)

    """Add each bit."""
    out = rasp.numerical(rasp.Aggregate(rasp.Select(rasp.indices,rasp.indices,rasp.Comparison.
      TRUE).named(’Select’),rasp.numerical(rasp.Map(lambda x: x, sop).named(’map_length’)),
      default=0).named(’Aggregate’))

    """Calculate whether the remainder of dividing it by 2 is odd or even."""
    out = rasp.Map(lambda x: 0 if x % 2 == 0 else 1,out).named(’Zipmap’)

    return out


                           Input        Attn 1        MLP 1        Attn 2         MLP 2        Attn 3        MLP 3        Attn 4        MLP 4
             tokens: pad
             tokens: bos
                                   25            25           25            25            25            25           25            25
             tokens:   1
             tokens:   0
     selector_width:
   selector_width_6:   5
   selector_width_6:   4
                                   20            20           20            20            20            20           20            20
   selector_width_6:   3
   selector_width_6:   2
   selector_width_6:   1
   selector_width_6:   0
                one:
                                   15            15           15            15            15            15           15            15
      map_length_17:   5
      map_length_17:   4
      map_length_17:   3
      map_length_17:   2
      map_length_17:   1
                                   10            10           10            10            10            10           10            10
      map_length_17:   0
      map_length_16:
            indices:   4
            indices:   3
            indices:   2
                                   5             5            5             5             5             5            5             5
            indices:   1
            indices:   0
          Zipmap_13:   1
          Zipmap_13:   0
       Aggregate_14:
                                   0             0            0             0             0             0            0             0
                       bos
                         1
                         0
                         0
                         0
                         1
                                   bos
                                     1
                                     0
                                     0
                                     0
                                     1
                                                 bos
                                                   1
                                                   0
                                                   0
                                                   0
                                                   1
                                                              bos
                                                                1
                                                                0
                                                                0
                                                                0
                                                                1
                                                                            bos
                                                                              1
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              1
                                                                                          bos
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                        bos
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                     bos
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                   bos
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     1
                            Figure 8: Input the [1,0,0,0,1] (target output = 0) for Parity CoNN.

                           Input        Attn 1        MLP 1        Attn 2         MLP 2        Attn 3        MLP 3        Attn 4        MLP 4
             tokens: pad
             tokens: bos
                                   25            25           25            25            25            25           25            25
             tokens:   1
             tokens:   0
     selector_width:
   selector_width_6:   5
   selector_width_6:   4
                                   20            20           20            20            20            20           20            20
   selector_width_6:   3
   selector_width_6:   2
   selector_width_6:   1
   selector_width_6:   0
                one:
                                   15            15           15            15            15            15           15            15
      map_length_17:   5
      map_length_17:   4
      map_length_17:   3
      map_length_17:   2
      map_length_17:   1
                                   10            10           10            10            10            10           10            10
      map_length_17:   0
      map_length_16:
            indices:   4
            indices:   3
            indices:   2
                                   5             5            5             5             5             5            5             5
            indices:   1
            indices:   0
          Zipmap_13:   1
          Zipmap_13:   0
       Aggregate_14:
                                   0             0            0             0             0             0            0             0
                       bos
                         1
                         0
                         1
                         0
                         1
                                   bos
                                     1
                                     0
                                     1
                                     0
                                     1
                                                 bos
                                                   1
                                                   0
                                                   1
                                                   0
                                                   1
                                                              bos
                                                                1
                                                                0
                                                                1
                                                                0
                                                                1
                                                                            bos
                                                                              1
                                                                              0
                                                                              1
                                                                              0
                                                                              1
                                                                                          bos
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            0
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                        bos
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                     bos
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                   bos
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     1


                            Figure 9: Input the [1,0,1,0,1] (target output = 1) for Parity CoNN.


B.2.3          A D D I T I O N C O NN

Due to the high complexity of the model, we decided to omit the hidden state transformation
for the Addition CoNN. However, we have provided code later in the text that will allow for
easy implementation of this CoNN. The code includes add_in_the_same_position and
add_carry functions, which are used to calculate the addition and carry of pairs in the CoNN
respectively. We divide the entire operation into two models. For the add_carry model, we refer
to the approach of ALBERT. After the output of the add_in_the_same_position model, we
cyclically use the add_carry model L times, where L is the length of the text, to ensure that all
digits can carry. It is important to note that this particular Addition CoNN is only capable of
performing addition operations on natural numbers.


                                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE TRACR CODE OF R E V E R S E C O NN

def reverse(sop) -> rasp.SOp:
    """Get the indices from back to front."""
    opp_idx = (length - rasp.indices).named("opp_idx")

    """opp_idx - 1, so that the first digit of indices = 0."""
    opp_idx = (opp_idx - 1).named("opp_idx-1")

    """Use opp_idx to query indices, get the Select."""
    reverse_selector = rasp.Select(rasp.indices, opp_idx,rasp.Comparison.EQ).named("
      reverse_selector")

    """Aggregate the reverse_selector and sop"""
    return rasp.Aggregate(reverse_selector, sop).named("reverse")


T HE TRACR CODE OF A D D I T I O N C O NN
def split(sop, token, index):
    """Match the position of target token"""
    target_position = rasp.Aggregate(rasp.Select(sop, rasp.Map(lambda x: token, sop), rasp.
      Comparison.EQ), rasp.indices)

    """If need to match the front position."""
    if index == 0:
        out = rasp.Aggregate(rasp.Select(rasp.indices, rasp.indices - (length -
          target_position), rasp.Comparison.EQ),
                             sop) # Move the sop on the left side of the token to the far
                               right.
        return rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x, i: x if i == 2 else "_", out, rasp.categorical(
            rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x, i: 2 if x >= i else 0, rasp.indices, length -
              target_position))) # Use "_" to fill the empty position on the left.

    """If need to match the finally number."""
    else:
        return rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x, i: x if i else "_", sop,
                                rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x, i: 1 if x > i else 0, rasp.indices,
                                   target_position)).named(
            f"shift") # Use "_" to fill the empty position on the left.

def atoi(sop):
    """Converts all text to number, and uses 0 for strings of types other than numbers, It may
        be mixed with ’str’ or ’int’.
    """

    return rasp.SequenceMap(lambda x, i: int(x) if x.isdigit() else 0, sop, rasp.indices).
      named(
        "atoi")

def shift(sop):
    """Get the target indices."""
    idx = (rasp.indices - 1).named("idx-1")


    """Use opp_idx to query indices, get the Select."""
    selector = rasp.Select(idx, rasp.indices,
        rasp.Comparison.EQ).named("shift_selector")


    """Aggregates the sops and selectors (converted from indexes)."""
    shift = rasp.Aggregate(selector, sop).named("shift")
    return shift

def add_in_the_same_position(sop):
    x = atoi(split(sop,’+’,0)) + atoi(split(sop,’+’,1))
    return x

def carry(sop):
    weight = shift(rasp.Map(lambda n:1 if n>9 else 0,sop))

    weight = rasp.Aggregate(rasp.Select(rasp.indices,rasp.indices,lambda key,query:key ==
      query),weight,default=0)
    x = rasp.Map(lambda n:n-10 if n>9 else n,sop)
    return x + weight


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  tokens: world
                                   Input    80
                                                   Attn 1   80
                                                                   MLP 1   80
                                                                                  Attn 2   80
                                                                                                  MLP 2   80
                                                                                                                 Attn 3   80
                                                                                                                                 MLP 3   80
                                                                                                                                                Attn 4   80
                                                                                                                                                                MLP 4   80
                                                                                                                                                                               Attn 5   80
                                                                                                                                                                                               MLP 5
                  tokens:   pad
                  tokens: hello
                  tokens:   bos
                  tokens:     ,
            selector_width:
        selector_width_6:     8
        selector_width_6:     7
        selector_width_6:     6
        selector_width_6:     5             70              70             70              70             70              70             70              70             70              70
        selector_width_6:     4
        selector_width_6:     3
        selector_width_6:     2
        selector_width_6:     1
        selector_width_6:     0
              reverse_40:     7
              reverse_40:     6
              reverse_40:     5
              reverse_40:     4
              reverse_40:     3             60              60             60              60             60              60             60              60             60              60
              reverse_40:     2
              reverse_40:     1
              reverse_40:     0
              opp_idx_43:     8
              opp_idx_43:     7
              opp_idx_43:     6
              opp_idx_43:     5
              opp_idx_43:     4
              opp_idx_43:     3
              opp_idx_43:     2             50              50             50              50             50              50             50              50             50              50
              opp_idx_43:     1
              opp_idx_43:     0
              opp_idx_43:    -1
              opp_idx_43:    -2
              opp_idx_43:    -3
              opp_idx_43:    -4
              opp_idx_43:    -5
              opp_idx_43:    -6
              opp_idx_43:    -7
            opp_idx-1_42:     7             40              40             40              40             40              40             40              40             40              40
            opp_idx-1_42:     6
            opp_idx-1_42:     5
            opp_idx-1_42:     4
            opp_idx-1_42:     3
            opp_idx-1_42:     2
            opp_idx-1_42:     1
            opp_idx-1_42:     0
            opp_idx-1_42:    -1
            opp_idx-1_42:    -2
            opp_idx-1_42:    -3             30              30             30              30             30              30             30              30             30              30
            opp_idx-1_42:    -4
            opp_idx-1_42:    -5
            opp_idx-1_42:    -6
            opp_idx-1_42:    -7
            opp_idx-1_42:    -8
                     one:
                  map_37:     8
                  map_37:     7
                  map_37:     6
                  map_37:     5             20              20             20              20             20              20             20              20             20              20
                  map_37:     4
                  map_37:     3
                  map_37:     2
                  map_37:     1
                 indices:     7
                 indices:     6
                 indices:     5
                 indices:     4
                 indices:     3
                 indices:     2             10              10             10              10             10              10             10              10             10              10
                 indices:     1
                 indices:     0
            aggregate_38:     7
            aggregate_38:     6
            aggregate_38:     5
            aggregate_38:     4
            aggregate_38:     3
            aggregate_38:     2
            aggregate_38:     1
            aggregate_38:     0              0               0              0               0              0               0              0               0              0               0
                                   bos
                                  hello
                                      ,
                                  world

                                                   bos
                                                  hello
                                                      ,
                                                  world

                                                                   bos
                                                                  hello
                                                                      ,
                                                                  world

                                                                                  bos
                                                                                 hello
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                 world

                                                                                                  bos
                                                                                                 hello
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                 world

                                                                                                                 bos
                                                                                                                hello
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                world

                                                                                                                                 bos
                                                                                                                                hello
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                world

                                                                                                                                                bos
                                                                                                                                               hello
                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                               world

                                                                                                                                                                bos
                                                                                                                                                               hello
                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                               world

                                                                                                                                                                               bos
                                                                                                                                                                              hello
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                              world

                                                                                                                                                                                               bos
                                                                                                                                                                                              hello
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              world
                                                  Figure 10: Input the [’hello’,’,’,’world’] for Reverse CoNN.

                    tokens:   z
                                   Input           Attn 1          MLP 1          Attn 2          MLP 2          Attn 3          MLP 3          Attn 4          MLP 4          Attn 5          MLP 5
                    tokens:   y
                    tokens:   x             100             100            100             100            100             100            100             100            100             100
                    tokens:   w
                    tokens:   v
                    tokens:   u
                    tokens:   t
                    tokens:   s
                    tokens:   r
                    tokens:   q
                    tokens: pad
                    tokens:   p
                    tokens:   o
                    tokens:   n
                    tokens:   m
                    tokens:   l
                    tokens:   k
                    tokens:   j
                    tokens:   i
                    tokens:   h
                    tokens:   g
                    tokens:   f
                    tokens:   e             80              80             80              80             80              80             80              80             80              80
                    tokens:   d
                    tokens:   c
                    tokens: bos
                    tokens:   b
                    tokens:   a
            selector_width:
          selector_width_6:   8
          selector_width_6:   7
          selector_width_6:   6
          selector_width_6:   5
          selector_width_6:   4
          selector_width_6:   3
          selector_width_6:   2
          selector_width_6:   1
          selector_width_6:   0
                reverse_33:   7
                reverse_33:   6
                reverse_33:   5
                reverse_33:   4
                reverse_33:   3             60              60             60              60             60              60             60              60             60              60
                reverse_33:   2
                reverse_33:   1
                reverse_33:   0
                opp_idx_36:   8
                opp_idx_36:   7
                opp_idx_36:   6
                opp_idx_36:   5
                opp_idx_36:   4
                opp_idx_36:   3
                opp_idx_36:   2
                opp_idx_36:   1
                opp_idx_36:   0
                opp_idx_36: -1
                opp_idx_36: -2
                opp_idx_36: -3
                opp_idx_36: -4
                opp_idx_36: -5
                opp_idx_36: -6
                opp_idx_36: -7
              opp_idx-1_35:   7             40              40             40              40             40              40             40              40             40              40
              opp_idx-1_35:   6
              opp_idx-1_35:   5
              opp_idx-1_35:   4
              opp_idx-1_35:   3
              opp_idx-1_35:   2
              opp_idx-1_35:   1
              opp_idx-1_35:   0
              opp_idx-1_35: -1
              opp_idx-1_35: -2
              opp_idx-1_35: -3
              opp_idx-1_35: -4
              opp_idx-1_35: -5
              opp_idx-1_35: -6
              opp_idx-1_35: -7
              opp_idx-1_35: -8
                       one:
                    map_30:   8
                    map_30:   7
                    map_30:   6
                    map_30:   5             20              20             20              20             20              20             20              20             20              20
                    map_30:   4
                    map_30:   3
                    map_30:   2
                    map_30:   1
                   indices:   7
                   indices:   6
                   indices:   5
                   indices:   4
                   indices:   3
                   indices:   2
                   indices:   1
                   indices:   0
              aggregate_31:   7
              aggregate_31:   6
              aggregate_31:   5
              aggregate_31:   4
              aggregate_31:   3
              aggregate_31:   2
              aggregate_31:   1
              aggregate_31:   0              0               0              0               0              0               0              0               0              0               0
                            bos
                              r
                              e
                              v
                              e
                              r
                              s
                              e
                                            bos
                                              r
                                              e
                                              v
                                              e
                                              r
                                              s
                                              e
                                                            bos
                                                              r
                                                              e
                                                              v
                                                              e
                                                              r
                                                              s
                                                              e
                                                                           bos
                                                                             r
                                                                             e
                                                                             v
                                                                             e
                                                                             r
                                                                             s
                                                                             e
                                                                                           bos
                                                                                             r
                                                                                             e
                                                                                             v
                                                                                             e
                                                                                             r
                                                                                             s
                                                                                             e
                                                                                                          bos
                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                          bos
                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                         bos
                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                         bos
                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                        bos
                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                          v
                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                        bos
                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                          v
                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                           Figure 11: Input the [’r’,’e’,’v’,’e’,’r’,’s’,’e’] for Reverse CoNN.


T HE TRACR CODE OF S U B T R A C T I O N C O NN
def split(sop, token, index):...

def atoi(sop):...

def shift(sop):...


def sub_in_the_same_position(sop):
    x = atoi(split(sop,’-’,0)) - atoi(split(sop,’-’,1))
    return x


def carry(sop):
    weight = shift(rasp.Map(lambda n:1 if n<0 else 0,sop))
    weight = rasp.Aggregate(rasp.Select(rasp.indices,rasp.indices,lambda key,query:key ==
      query),weight,default=0)
    x = rasp.Map(lambda n:n+10 if n<0 else n,sop)
    return x - weight


B.2.4        S U B T R A C T I O N C O NN

The subtraction CoNN is similar to the addition CoNN. First, each digit is subtracted from its
corresponding digit, and then it is determined whether to carry over. For ease of experimentation, this
subtraction CoNN only supports subtraction of natural numbers where the minuend is greater than
the subtrahend.


B.3     C O NN MODEL PARAMETERS

The parameter sizes of all CoNN models used in this work are listed in Table 3. It is noteworthy that
even for GPT-3, which has parameters that are orders of magnitude larger, it remains challenging to
solve symbolic problems. However, with the use of compiled neural networks, only a small number
of parameters are needed to achieve Neural Comprehension.


                                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model                      Layers   Heads   Vocabulary Size    Window Size   Hidden Size     MLP Hidden Size   # Parameters   Compared to GPT-3
 Pariity                      4       1             4               40           132               1959            2.2M          ≈ 1/100,000
 Reverse                      4       1            28               40           297               1640            4.3M          ≈ 1/50,000
 Last Letter                  3       1            28               16           103                32             62.6K        ≈ 1/3,000,000
 Copy                         1       1           28                16           69                 26              8.8K        ≈ 1/20,000,000
 Add_in_the_same_position     7       1            13               40           535               6422            51.8M           ≈1/3000
 Add_Carry                    3       1           122               40           130                52             117K         ≈1/1,500,000
 Sub_in_the_same_position     7       1            13               40           535               6422            51.8M           ≈1/3000
 Sub_Carry                    3       1           122               40           130                52             117K         ≈1/1,500,000

Table 3: We reported on a CoNN with a single function, including its actual parameter size and
comparison with the parameters of GPT-3.

B.4       E NVIRONMENTAL AND H UMAN - CENTRIC B ENEFITS OF C OMPILED N EURAL N ETWORKS

Compiled Neural Networks (CoNNs) address concerns related to the environmental impact of training
large models and the need for human-centric computing. CoNN models can reduce energy consump-
tion and carbon emissions by minimizing extensive pretraining and decreasing parameter size, as seen
in Table 3. This reduction in computational power and energy requirements makes both the training
and inference processes more environmentally friendly. Additionally, Neural Comprehension offers a
more interpretable and transparent alternative to conventional deep learning models. CoNN’s explicit
operation definitions and specialized architecture enable users to comprehend the reasoning behind
model decisions, fostering trust and facilitating human-AI collaboration. Increased interpretability
also allows for scrutiny of model behavior, promoting the development of fair, accountable, and
transparent systems aligned with ethical considerations and human values.’


C        E XPERIMENT FOR AUTO C O NN

C.1       M ETHOD

For experts, they may need to spend
a lot of time writing code suitable for                        CoNN Model              Example=1           Example=2            Example=5
CoNN, while non-expert users find it                       Parity Model                5/10                10/10                10/10
hard to obtain or modify CoNN. These                       Reverse Model               10/10               10/10                10/10
issues limit the efficient combination                  Last Letter Model              9/10                10/10                10/10
of CoNN and LM, so we utilized the                             Copy Model              10/10               10/10                10/10
few-shot ability of language models
to make the AutoCoNN toolkit (Weng
                                                     Table 4: For each CoNN model, we selected ten groups
et al., 2023b). In this section, we
                                                     of models that were judged to be correct by AutoCoNN.
will show a series of detailed exper-
                                                     We manually evaluated whether these models were indeed
iments on AutoCoNN to demonstrate
                                                     correct. The ’Example=x’ means that x Examples were
this. First, It is the Demo of Auto-
                                                     provided in the validation stage.
CoNN code:

D EMO OF AUTO C O NN
from NeuralCom.AutoCoNN import AutoCoNN

INSTRUCT = ’Create an SOp that is the last letter of a word’
VOCAB = [’a’,’b’,’c’,’d’,’e’,’f’,’g’]
EXAMPLE = [[[’a’,’b’,’c’],[’c’,’c’,’c’]],[[’b’,’d’],[’d’,’d’]]]

auto = AutoCoNN()
model,tokenizer = auto(instruct=INSTRUCT,vocab=VOCAB,example=EXAMPLE)


Table 5 shows the efficiency comparison between experts and AutoCoNN. This demonstrates that the
AutoCoNN toolkit can generate various CoNNs faster. But we also found that for more difficult ones
like Addition and Subtraction, it fails to successfully generate, which becomes one of the limitations
of AutoCoNN. On the other hand, we tried providing only "Instruct" or "Example" for AutoCoNN to
generate3 , and often "Instruct" can generate CoNN with higher accuracy, while "Example" cannot.
This shows that giving explicit operational instructions performs better than directly observing data
in AutoCoNN.
    3
        In this experiment, the few-shot samples also contained only one of them


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      CoNN Model     Expert’s Working Time   Success by AutoCoNN    Can AutoCoNN solve   AutoCoNN (w. Instruct)   AutoCoNN (w. Example)
     Parity Model    1 hours                 8/20                   ✓✓                   7/20                     3/20
    Reverse Model    0.5 hour                15/20                  ✓✓                   16/20                    11/20
 Last Letter Model   0.5 hour                13/20                  ✓✓                   12/20                    10/20
      Copy Model     0.2 hour                17/20                  ✓✓                   17/20                    15/20
    Addition Model   48 hours                0/20                   ✗                    0/20                     0/20
 Subtraction Model   48 hours                0/20                   ✗                    0/20                     0/20


Table 5: Comparison between AutoCoNN and Expert Built CoNN. The column ’Expert’s Working
Time’ refers to the time required for a trained engineer to write the CoNN code; ’Success by
AutoCoNN’ refers to the accuracy of 20 results generated by using GPT-3.5 for diverse decoding;
’Can AutoCoNN solve’ refers to whether AutoCoNN can identify suitable CoNN code from the 20
results through validation. It is worth noting that in this experiment, we use sampling decoding with
temperature=0.7 to generate 20 different CoNNs codes, which we convert to Pytorch versions of
CoNNs models. We report the accuracy of the CoNNs codes through manual (expert) evaluation.


It is difficult for non-expert users to assess the accuracy of the generated code, we automatically
utilize the Example information to verify the accuracy of the CoNN model - checking whether the
output result of the input sequence is exactly consistent with the Example. The results shown in Table
4 demonstrate that generally 2 Examples are sufficient to select an accurate CoNN model, which
means it is very easy for users to use and demonstrate. However, considering the varying difficulty of
different tasks, we still suggest non-expert users provide more Examples to ensure the accuracy of
the generated CoNN.


D      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

In this study, we primarily explore the capacity of language models to address symbolic reason-
ing tasks, concentrating on three areas: symbolic operations, symbolic reasoning, and arithmetic
reasoning.
Symbolic Operations Building upon the approaches developed by Anil et al. (2022) and Qian
et al. (2022), we examine the following tasks: Parity, Reverse, Addition and Subtraction. These
tasks do not require complex text understanding, but only require faithfully implementing symbolic
operations and outputting the corresponding results.
Symbolic Reasoning We employ the experimental framework of Wei et al. (2022b) for the two
tasks, Last Letter Concatenation and Coin Flip. These tasks require a combination of language
understanding and rule comprehension abilities.
Arithmetic Reasoning To evaluate the method’s generalization ability from symbolic operations
to arithmetic reasoning in addition and subtraction tasks, we use five established arithmetic reasoning
datasets: AddSub (Hosseini et al., 2014), SingleEq (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2015), MultiArith (Roy
& Roth, 2016), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), and SVAMP (Arkil et al., 2021). Additionally, we
introduce the AddSub+ dataset, containing tasks of varying complexity based on the number of digits
involved in arithmetic operations, ranging from 1-digit addition to 20-digit addition/subtraction tasks.


E      S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENT

E.1     T HE EFFECT OF TRAINING DATA SCALE ON LENGTH GENERALIZATION OF
        GRADIENT- BASED MODELS

To investigate the impact of training data scale on out-of-distribution (OOD) performance, we
conducted experiments using the T5-large model with varying amounts of in-distribution training
data. The experimental setup closely followed that of Main Figure 3, utilizing numbers with 10 to
20 digits as the training set but varying the number of training examples between 1 million and 15
million. The peak validation set performance for each experiment is reported in Figure 12.


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                           ϭϬϬ                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϬϬ

                                                                                                                                           ϴϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϴϬ


                                                                                                                                                      ĐĐƵƌĂĐǇ ;йͿ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ĐĐƵƌĂĐǇ ;йͿ
                                                                                                                                          ϲϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϲϬ

                                                                                                                                          ϰϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϰϬ

                                                                                                                                         ϮϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϮϬ

                                                                                                                                           Ϭ                                                                                                                                                                             Ϭ
                                                                                                                                       ϭϱD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϱD
                                                                                                                                  ϭϯD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϯD
                                                                                                                             ϭϭD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϭD
             Ϭ                                                                                                          ϵD                                                               Ϭ                                                                                                          ϵD


                                                                                                                              ĂƚĂ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ĂƚĂ
                      ϱ                                                                                         ϳD                                                                                ϱ                                                                                         ϳD
                            ϭϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϭϬ


                                      ϭϱ                                                                                                                                                                           ϭϱ


                                                                                                                        ŶŐ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ŶŐ
                                                                                                          ϱD                                                                                                                                                                           ϱD
                                                   ϮϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϮϬ


                                                                                                                   ŝŶŝ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ŝŶŝ
                                    dĞǆƚ >             Ϯϱ                                  ϯD                                                                                                            dĞǆƚ >             Ϯϱ                                  ϯD


                                                                                                            dƌĂ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dƌĂ
                                                   ĞŶŐ            ϯϬ                                                                                                                                                         ĞŶŐ            ϯϬ
                                                                             ϯϱ           ϭD                                                                                                                                                            ϯϱ           ϭD
                                                                                     ϰϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϰϬ


                                                          (a) Parity                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Reverse


                                                                                                                                         ϭϬϬ                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϬϬ

                                                                                                                                          ϴϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϴϬ
                                                                                                                                                   ĐĐƵƌĂĐǇ ;йͿ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ĐĐƵƌĂĐǇ ;йͿ
                                                                                                                                         ϲϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϲϬ

                                                                                                                                         ϰϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϰϬ

                                                                                                                                        ϮϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϮϬ

                                                                                                                                          Ϭ                                                                                                                                                                             Ϭ
                                                                                                                                      ϭϱD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϱD
                                                                                                                                 ϭϯD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϯD
                                                                                                                            ϭϭD                                                                                                                                                                         ϭϭD
                                                                                                                        ϵD                                                                                                                                                                           ϵD
                                                                                                                              ƚĂ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ƚĂ
                  ϯ ϱ                                                                                          ϳD                                                                            ϯ ϱ                                                                                          ϳD
                                                                                                                            Ă


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ă
                           ϭϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϭϬ
                                     ϭϱ                                                                                                                                                                           ϭϱ
                                                                                                                    ŶŐ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ŶŐ
                                                                                                          ϱD                                                                                                                                                                           ϱD
                                                  ϮϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϮϬ
                                                                                                                 ŝŶŝ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ŝŶŝ
                                   dĞǆƚ >             Ϯϱ                                   ϯD                                                                                                           dĞǆƚ >             Ϯϱ                                   ϯD
                                                                                                           dƌĂ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dƌĂ
                                               ĞŶŐ               ϯϬ                                                                                                                                                      ĞŶŐ               ϯϬ
                                                                            ϯϱ            ϭD                                                                                                                                                           ϯϱ            ϭD
                                                                                    ϰϬ                                                                                                                                                                           ϰϬ


                                                   (c) Addition                                                                                                                                                             (d) Subtraction


Figure 12: Length Generalization Performance of Language Models with Different Dataset Sizes.



The results in Figure 12 show that increasing the scale of the In-Dist training data leads to only
marginal improvements in OOD performance. This finding is discouraging, suggesting that gradient-
based language models face challenges in capturing the true underlying meaning of symbols and their
transformation rules based on the data distribution alone.


E.2    R EAL - WORLD A RITHMETIC R EASONING TASKS


                           Method                                                                           GSM8K                                                            SingleEq       AddSub                                       MultiArith                                SVAMP                                             Average
           Previous SOTA (Fintune)                                                                          35a /57b                                                         32.5c          94.9d                                        60.5e                                     57.4f                                             -
                  GPT-3 Standard                                                                            19.7                                                             86.8           90.9                                         44.0                                      69.9                                              62.26
   GPT-3 (175B)             CoT                                                                             13.84                                                            62.02          57.22                                        45.85                                     38.42                                             43.47
code-davinci-001 CoT + Neural Comprehension                                                                 13.95(+0.11)                                                     62.83(+0.81)   60.25(+3.03)                                 45.85(+0.0)                               38.62(+0.2)                                       44.30(+0.83)
  GPT-3.5 (175B)            CoT                                                                             60.20                                                            91.01          82.78                                        96.13                                     75.87                                             81.20
code-davinci-002 CoT + Neural Comprehension                                                                 60.42(+0.22)                                                     91.01(+0.0)    82.78(+0.0)                                  96.13(+0.0)                               76.09(+0.22)                                      81.29(+0.09)


Table 6: Problem solve rate (%) on arithmetic reasoning datasets. The previous SoTA baselines are
obtained from: (a) GPT-3 175B finetuned (Cobbe et al., 2021); (b) GPT-3 175B finetuned plus an
additional 175B verifier(Cobbe et al., 2021); (c) Hu et al. (2019); (d) Roy & Roth (2016); (e) Roy &
Roth (2016); (f) Amini et al. (2019); (f) Pi et al. (2022)



                                                                                                                                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As model parameters, training calculations, and dataset sizes have increased, language models have
gained new capabilities (Srivastava et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a; Weng et al., 2024), such as Machine
Translation (Zhao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), complex QA (Zhu et al., 2022; Daull et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2023), Multimodal QA (Wang et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023; Weng & Li, 2023), coding (Li
et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2022), few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2021), medical
diagnosis (Li et al., 2021a; Xia et al., 2022; Weng et al., 2023a), and chain of thought (Wei et al.,
2022b; Weng et al., 2023c).
In Table 6, we compared Vanilla CoT with the Neural Comprehension framework for arithmetic
reasoning tasks. We integrated the Addition and Subtraction CoNNs with LLMs and observed
improved performance across several tasks. This suggests that the proposed Neural Comprehension
framework can compensate for the difficulties faced by large-scale language models in computational
tasks. Nevertheless, the performance improvement is not as significant due to the choice of specific
CoNN models to ensure clarity in our experiments. Designing CoNN models to support more general
arithmetic tasks could potentially yield more substantial improvements. In addition, since the Neural
Comprehension framework improves the gap between the data distribution learned by the language
model during training through gradient descent and the real rules, it can also be combined with some
existing logical improvements to language models, including self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b),
least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2022a), self-improve (Huang et al., 2022), and self-verification (Weng
et al., 2023c). It can also be combined with some zero-shot methods (Kojima et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2023).
To further evaluate the effectiveness of the Neural
Comprehension framework, Table 7 presents the
                                                            Method      T5-small   T5-base  T5-large
results of fine-tuning T5 models with Addition
                                                             Origin     1.74       1.52     3.87
and Subtraction CoNN on the GSM8K train- Neural Comprehension 1.82                 1.59     4.02
ing dataset. The comparison of three different-sized      Ours Improve +0.08      +0.07    +0.15
models reveals that the framework can model deter-
ministic rules defined by humans, thus avoiding the
uncertainty associated with gradient descent learning Table 7: The test set problem-solving rate (%)
from data distribution.                               of the T5 model on the GSM8K dataset.


E.3    T HE E FFICIENCY OF N EURAL C OMPREHENSION


                                                      Vanilla         Neural Comprehension                δTime
  Model     Params             Task                GPU          CPU     GPU          CPU              GPU              CPU

 T5-small    60M            Coin Flip             5.280s     5.720s    5.431s       5.872s   0.151s (2.86%)   0.152s (2.66%)
 T5-base    220M            Coin Flip             7.865s    13.767s    8.010s      13.939s   0.145s (1.84%)   0.172s (1.25%)
 T5-large   770M            Coin Flip            14.055s    32.953s   14.194s      33.120s   0.139s (0.99%)   0.167s (0.51%)

 T5-small    60M     Last Letter Concatenation   16.233s    28.309s   16.744s      28.720s   0.511s (3.15%)   0.411s (1.45%)
 T5-base    220M     Last Letter Concatenation   28.912s    55.660s   29.426s      56.087s   0.514s (1.78%)   0.427s (0.77%)
 T5-large   770M     Last Letter Concatenation   49.584s   103.739s   50.066s     104.134s   0.482s (0.97%)   0.395s (0.38%)



Table 8: In Neural Comprehension framework, the inference latency comparison of the T5 model.

To evaluate the efficacy of Neural Comprehension, we conducted further experiments comparing the
inference latency of both the Vanilla and Neural Comprehension frameworks on an equal number of
sequences and equal sequence lengths using GPU and CPU configurations. We employed a batch
size of 1 and assessed the inference latency of Neural Comprehension in conjunction with various T5
model sizes across two symbolic inference tasks to ascertain efficiency. The full results are detailed
in Table 8.
Our findings reveal that implementing Neural Comprehension increases computational requirements,
primarily attributed to the supplementary parameter volume and computational demands introduced by
CoNNs. However, as the scale of pretrained language models expands, the proportion of δTime within
the Neural Comprehension framework progressively diminishes, particularly for larger language
models.


                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F      I MPLEMENTATION AND D ETAILS

 Model           Model Creator              Modality                Version        # Parameters   Tokenizer   Window Size   Access
 T5-small            Google                   Text                   T5.1.0            60M           T5          512        Open
 T5-base             Google                   Text                   T5.1.0           220M           T5          512        Open
 T5-large            Google                   Text                   T5.1.0           770M           T5          512        Open
 GLM-130B      Tsinghua University           Text                 GLM-130B             130B         ICE          2048         open
 GPT-3              OpenAI                 Text,Code            code-davinci-001      175B*        GPT-2         2048       limited
 GP-3.5             OpenAI             Text,Code,Instruct       code-davinci-002      175B*        GPT-2         8096       limited
 GPT-4              OpenAI           Text,Code,Instruct,. . .        gpt-4           1750B*        GPT-2         8000       limited


Table 9: Models. Description of the models evaluated in this effort: provenance for this information
is provided in models. ∗ indicates that we believe the associated OpenAI models are this size, but this
has not been explicitly confirmed to our knowledge.
In this section, we provide a detailed description of the experimental setup from a model and dataset
perspective, ensuring repeatability of our experiments.

F.1     M ODEL

Our experiments primarily involve the T5, GPT, and GLM-130B families of models. Neural Compre-
hension framework supports seamless integration with language models having decoder structures,
regardless of the scale of the language model. We fine-tune the T5 models, while the larger mod-
els with over 10 billion parameters are used for few-shot In-context learning. Table 9 presents a
comprehensive list of all models used in our experiments4 .

F.1.1       F INE - TUNING
For the T5 models, we employ the standard fine-tuning approach using the pretrained models as a
starting point. We follow the pre-processing steps in the T5 original paper, which involves set the
input text max length to 150 and using the tokenizer to process the data. We use a batch size of 64 for
all models and the Adafactor optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 .
The models are trained for a maximum of 20 epochs. We use a cosine learning rate schedule with a
warm-up phase comprising 5% of the total number of training steps. We employ a dropout rate of 0.1
during training to mitigate overfitting. Our experiments utilize the PyTorch framework (Paszke et al.,
2019) for training and inference. Table 5 displays the parameter settings for the T5 models during
training, which is conducted on four NVIDIA A6000 GPUs with 48GB of memory each.
                                                    In Table 10, we list the hyperparameters used to
      Training Setting                 Configurationtrain the T5 model. We carefully selected these
      optimizer                            Adafactorparameters to ensure that the within-distribution
      base learning rate                    1 × 10−4validation accuracy roughly converged. We re-
      weight decay                          2 × 10−5port all peak validation set results, and in ev-
      decay rate                                    ery experiment we ran, we found that within-
                                                 -0.8
                                 −30        −3      distribution validation accuracy monotonically
      optimizer eps       (1 × 10    ,2 × 10 )
      batch size                             64     increased during training iterations (until it ap-
      training epochs                        20     proached 100%), and we never observed over-
      gradient clip                         1.0     fitting. This may be due to the regular nature
                                                    of the tasks we considered in the paper. We fol-
            Table 10: Training Setting              lowed the Anil et al. (2022)’s setup and did not
                                                    use OOD performance in model selection, as this
would constitute "peaking at the test conditions". Regarding the number of training iterations, we
also tried training the T5 model with more iterations in the addition task, but this did not lead to
substantial differences in OOD performance (i.e., it was still equally poor).

F.1.2       F EW- SHOT I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING
For the few-shot context learning on GPT and GLM-130B models, we employ an approach inspired
by the recent work on GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). In this methodology, the models are provided a
  4
    The specific configurations of the GPT series of models can be found at https://platform.openai.
com/docs/model-index-for-researchers/model-index-for-researchers


                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PARITY DATASET
def generate_parity_data(n):
    data = []
    for _ in range(100000):
        input_str = ’’.join(str(random.randint(0, 1)) for _ in range(n))
        label = sum(int(x) for x in input_str) % 2
        data.append({’input’: input_str, ’label’: label})
    return data

parity_data = {}
for n in range(1, 41):
    parity_data[n] = generate_parity_data(n)



context consisting of a few examples of the input-output pairs in natural language format. Following
this, the models are expected to generalize and perform well on the task without any explicit fine-
tuning. We carefully design the context to include diverse examples that represent the range of
input types and required model reasoning. Importantly, we limit the context length to be within the
maximum token limits of the models. For instance, GPT-3 has a token limit of 2048. Due to limited
access to the GPT family of models, we utilize the official API for these experiments 5 . .For the
GLM-130B, we employ the FasterTransformer framework to set up local inference with INT4 on
eight NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs with 24GB of memory each.
To compare with CoT and PAL which experimented on GPT-3 series models, we simulated Neural
Comprehension (NC) within the constraints of the API access. We treated the API’s output as if
it were part of the Neural Comprehension structure. This involved a simulated gating mechanism,
where the output from the API was corrected using CoNNs form left to right, and then the adjusted
response (Truncate the text after the altered text.) was changed into the API’ input for continued
generation. This simulation was to ensure that the benefits of NC could be compared fairly with the
existing results from PAL.

F.2     TASKS AND DATASET

In this paper, all data sets related to length generalization consist of independent data sets with the
same number of digits but different lengths, and each digit in the test set is unique. Therefore, there
may be slight fluctuations between data sets of different lengths, but the overall trend is generally clear.
To further illustrate the differences between data sets of different lengths, the following examples are
provided:

                Parity:         110 = 0
                                |{z}               | {z } = 1
                                                   101100                010001110101
                                                                         |    {z    }=0
                              Length = 3           Length = 6               Length = 12
              Reverse:          abc = cba
                                |{z}                figure = erugif        accomplished = dehsilpmocca
                                                    | {z }                 |    {z    }
                              Length = 3           Length = 6                 Length = 12
             Addition:         1+2 =3              18 + 245 = 263            48864 + 964315 = 1013179
                               | {z }              | {z }                    |     {z     }
                              Length = 3            Length = 6                    Length = 12
Arithmetic Reasoning:         Joan found 6546634574688499
                                         |      {z      } seashells and Jessica found
                                                Length = 16
                          3855196602063621
                          |      {z      } seashells on the beach. How many seashells did they find
                               Length = 16
                       together ?

F.2.1     DATA G ENERATION D ETAILS

Synthetic Parity Dataset: We sample instances of lengths 1-40 from a uniform Bernoulli distribution.
We first uniformly sample the number of ones, and then randomly shuffle the positions of each one
within a fixed-length bitstring. For the experiments in Figure 5.1, we train T5 on lengths 10-20, with
99000 training samples per bit. For all methods, we test each bit using 1000 samples.

   5
       OpenAI’s API:https://openai.com/api/


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EVERSE DATASET
reverse_data = {}
for n in range(1, 41):
    reverse_data[n] = []
    for _ in range(100000):
        word = ’’.join(random.choice(string.ascii_lowercase) for _ in range(n))
        reverse_data[n].append({’input’:word,’label’:’’.join(list(reversed(word)))})

A DDITION DATASET
# Generate two random n-digit numbers and their sum
def generate_additive_example(n):
    data = []
    k = (n - 1) % 2
    n = (n - 1) // 2 if n > 2 else n

    for _ in range(100000):
        a = random.randint(10**(n+k-1), 10**(n+k) - 1)
        b = random.randint(10**(n-1), 10**n - 1)
        data.append({’input’: str(a)+’+’+str(b), ’label’: a + b})
    return data

# Generate an additive data set for digits ranging from 3 to 40
additive_data = {}
for n in range(3, 41):
    additive_data[str(n)] = generate_additive_example(n)



Synthetic Reverse Dataset: We selected a dataset of instances with lengths ranging from 1 to 40.
For the experiments in Figure 5.1, the training set consists of 99000 samples each for lengths 10-20.
Each input is a randomly generated word string of specified length, where the letters are selected
uniformly at random from a set of 26 letters using a Bernoulli distribution (without necessarily having
any actual meaning), and all letters are converted to lowercase. The test set for lengths 1-40 contains
at least 1000 test samples.


Synthetic Addition and subtraction Dataset: Addition and subtraction are fundamental arithmetic
operations that are commonly taught in primary school. To generate the dataset, we takes as input the
number of digits n and returns a list of 100000 examples. The function first calculates the remainder
k when (n − 1) is divided by 2, and then divides (n − 1) by 2 if n is greater than 2, else it sets n
to itself. This ensures that the length of the first number is either equal to or one digit longer than
the length of the second number. The function then generates 100000 examples using randomly
generated numbers. Specifically, it generates two numbers a and b where a is a random integer
between 10(n+k−1) and 10(n+k) − 1, and b is a random integer between 10(n−1) and 10n − 1. It
then appends each example to the list data in the form of a dictionary with the input as the string
"a+b" and the label as the sum a+b.


For the experiments in Figure Figure 1, we provided 99000 training data examples for addition with
numbers ranging from 3 to 10 digits in length for the T5 model. For the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models,
we provided 8 few-shot samples within 10 digits. We evaluated the performance of all three models
on numbers ranging from 3 to 30 digits in length, with 1000 test samples per digit. On the other hand,
for the experiments in Figure Figure 5.1, we provided 99000 training data examples for addition with
numbers ranging from 10 to 20 digits in length for the T5 model. For the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models,
we provided 8 few-shot samples within the range of 10 to 20 digits. We evaluated the performance of
all three models on numbers ranging from 3 to 30 digits in length, with 1000 test samples per digit.
For subtraction, we use a similar approach.


F.2.2   S YMBOLIC R EASONING DATASET
Coin Flip: We followed Wei et al. (2022b)’s setup and randomly concatenated first and last
names from the top 1000 names in the census data (https://namecensus.com/) to create the
<NAME> token. In our work, flipping a coin corresponds to 1 and not flipping a coin corresponds
to 0. To make the inputs as close to English as possible without using too many symbols, we used
the sentence models "<NAME> flips the coin." and "<NAME> does not flip the coin." to represent


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UBTRACTION DATASET
# Generate two random n-digit numbers and their minus
def generate_minus_example(n):
    data = []
    k = (n - 1) % 2
    n = (n - 1) // 2 if n > 2 else n
    for _ in range(100000):
        a = random.randint(10**(n+k-1), 10**(n+k) - 1)
        b = random.randint(10**(n-1), 10**n - 1)
        if a > b:
            data.append({’input’: str(a)+’-’+str(b), ’label’: a - b})
        else:
            data.append({’input’: str(b)+’-’+str(a), ’label’: b - a})
    return data

# Generate an subtraction data set for digits ranging from 3 to 40
minus_data = {}
for n in range(3, 41):
    minus_data[str(n)] = generate_minus_example(n)

C OIN F ILP DATASET
dataset = []
for i in range(500):
    # randomly choose two names from the name_list
    for o in range(2,5):
        sentence = ’A coin is heads up.’
        label = []
        for time in range(o):
             name = random.sample(names, k=1)[0]

             # randomly choose whether to flip the coin or not
             flip = random.choice([True, False])

             # generate the statement and label based on whether the coin was flipped or not
             if flip:
                 sentence += f" {name.capitalize()} flips the coin."
                 label.append(1)
             else:
                 sentence += f" {name.capitalize()} does not flip the coin."
                 label.append(0)
         sentence += ’ Is the coin still heads up?’

         dataset.append({’question’:sentence, ’answer’:{0:’yes’,1:’no’}[sum(label)%2]})


whether the coin was flipped or not. This task is similar to the parity task, but requires further
semantic understanding. We constructed a training set of 1500 samples, with 500 samples for each of
2-4 coin flips. For the test set, we selected 100 non-overlapping samples for each of 2-4 coin flips,
and evaluated the model every 5 steps.


Last Letter Concatenation: We followed Wei et al. (2022b)’s setup and randomly concatenated first
and last names from the top 1000 names in the census data to create the <NAME> token. This task
requires the model to connect the last letter of each word in a concatenated name. This task requires
Neural Comprehension of rules in two aspects. First, it requires the model to correctly identify the
last letter of each word. Second, it requires the model to concatenate all the last letters of the words
together. We concatenated 2-5 first or last names, and constructed a training set of 1500 samples,
with 500 samples for each name length of 2-4. For the test set, we selected 100 non-overlapping
samples for each name length of 2-4, and evaluated the model every 5 steps.

F.2.3   A RITHMETICAL R EASONING DATASET
In Table 11, we summarize the information of all arithmetic reasoning datasets used in this work. We
provide the links to access these datasets:

        • GSM8K: https://github.com/openai/grade-school-math
        • SingleEq: https://gitlab.cs.washington.edu/ALGES/TACL2015
        • AddSub: https://www.cs.washington.edu/nlp/arithmetic
        • MultiArith: http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/resource_view/
          98


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Dataset        Number of samples          Average words    Answer Format         Lience
       GSM8K               1319                       46.9           Number         MIT License
       SingleEq             508                       27.4           Number         MIT License
       AddSub               395                       31.5           Number         Unspecified
       MultiArith           600                       31.8           Number         Unspecified
       SVAMP               1000                       31.8           Number         MIT License


                          Table 11: Arithmetical Reasoning Dataset Description.


         • SVAMP: https://github.com/arkilpatel/SVAMP


G      S OME EXAMPLES OF N EURAL C OMPREHENSION

In this section, we will use gray font to represent the task input, yellow font to represent the neural
network output during training, and blue background to represent the neural network output during
generated.

G.1     S YNTHETIC S YMBOLIC


    Q: 1011001010 A: 1
    Q: 01111011000 A: 0
    Q: 1010011001110 A: 1
    Q: 10000001001001 A: 0
    Q: 110100011110001 A: 0
    Q: 1110011001010110 A: 1
    Q: 1100000111011000101 A: 1
 Q: 01100000110110010001 A: 0
 ——–(LLM’s few-shot prompt)——–
 Q: 011110001010101101011 A: 0


                                        Table 12: The example of Parity



    Q: neofascism A: msicsafoen
    Q: betaquinine A: eniniuqateb
    Q: corediastasis A: sisatsaideroc
    Q: ferroelectronic A: cinortceleorref
    Q: cryoprecipitation A: noitatipicerpoyrc
    Q: cryofibrinogenemia A: aimenegonirbifoyrc
    Q: chemocarcinogenesis A: sisenegonicracomehc
 Q: ponjpcdqjuuhiviojmby A: ybmjoivihuujqdcpjnop
 ———-(LLM’s few-shot prompt)———-
 Q: helloworldhellochina A: anihcollehdlrowolleh


                                        Table 13: The example of Reverse


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Q: 82637+3058 A: 85695
  Q: 58020+96632 A: 154652
  Q: 717471+58704 A: 776175
  Q: 298309+702858 A: 1001167
  Q: 1061462+2623780 A: 3685242
  Q: 58720970+61609034 A: 120330004
  Q: 364920479+78861480 A: 443781959
 Q: 6050330002+211065324 A: 6261395326
 ———-(LLM’s few-shot prompt)———-
 Q: 20021012+20021004 A: 40042016


                                    Table 14: The example of Addition


  Q: 82637-3058 A: 79579
  Q: 96632-58020 A: 38612
  Q: 717471-58704 A: 658767
  Q: 702858-298309 A: 404549
  Q: 2623780-1061462 A: 1562318
  Q: 68720970-61609034 A: 7111936
  Q: 364920479-78861480 A: 286058999
 Q: 6050330002-211065324 A: 393967676
 ———-(LLM’s few-shot prompt)———-
 Q: 20021012-20021004 A: 8


                                  Table 15: The example of Subtraction


G.2    S YMBOLIC R EASONING


  A coin is heads up. Devin flips the coin. Maxwell does not flip the coin.
  James flips the coin. Kenneth flips the coin. Is the coin still heads up?
  1 0 1 1 -> 1
  A coin is heads up. Ira flips the coin. Danny does not flip the coin.
  Horace flips the coin. Is the coin still heads up?
  1 0 1 -> 0


                                   Table 16: The example of Coin Flip


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Take the last letters of the words in Elias Earnest Milton and concatenate them.
  The last letter of Elias -> s The last letter of Earnest -> t
  The last letter of Milton -> n The answer is stn
  Take the last letters of the words in Randolph Weldon Olin Robbieänd concatenate them.
  The last letter of Randolph -> h The last letter of Weldon -> n
  The last letter of Olin -> n The last letter of Robbie -> e The answer is hnne


                         Table 17: The example of Last Letter Concatenation


G.3   A RITHMETICAL R ESONING


  Joan found 65466345746884996 seashells and Jessica found 38551966020636213
  seashells on the beach . How many seashells did they find together ?
  Joan started with 65466345746884996 seashells. She gave some to Sam. So:
  65466345746884996 - 38551966020636213 = 2691437972624878
  The answer is 2691437972624878


                          Table 18: The example of Arithmetirc Reasoning


                                                     31
