Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V IDEO L ANGUAGE P LANNING
 Yilun Du†‡ , Mengjiao Yang†§ , Pete Florence† , Fei Xia† , Ayzaan Wahid† , Brian Ichter† ,
 Pierre Sermanet† , Tianhe Yu† , Pieter Abbeel§ , Joshua B. Tenenbaum‡ , Leslie Kaelbling‡
 Andy Zeng† , Jonathan Tompson †
 Google Deepmind† , Massachusetts Institute of Technology‡ , UC Berkeley§
 https://video-language-planning.github.io/


                                             A BSTRACT

         We are interested in enabling visual planning for complex long-horizon tasks in
         the space of generated videos and language, leveraging recent advances in large
         generative models pretrained on Internet-scale data. To this end, we present video
         language planning (VLP), an algorithm using a tree search procedure, where we
         train (i) vision-language models to serve as both policies and value functions, and
         (ii) text-to-video models as dynamics models. VLP takes as input a long-horizon
         task instruction and current image observation, and outputs a long video plan that
         provides detailed multimodal (video and language) specifications that describe
         how to complete the final task. VLP scales with increasing computation budget
         where more computation time results in improved video plans, and is able to
         synthesize long-horizon video plans across different robotics domains – from multi-
         object rearrangement, to multi-camera bi-arm dexterous manipulation. Generated
         video plans can be translated into real robot actions via goal-conditioned policies,
         conditioned on each intermediate frame of the generated video. Experiments show
         that VLP substantially improves long-horizon task success rates compared to prior
         methods on both simulated and real robots (across 3 hardware platforms).


1    I NTRODUCTION
Intelligently interacting with the physical world involves planning over both (i) high-level semantic
abstractions of the task (i.e., what to do next), as well as the (ii) low-level underlying dynamics of
the world (i.e., how the world works). Factorizing the planning problem into two parts, one driven
by task-specific objectives and the other a task-agnostic modeling of state transitions, is an idea that
is pervasive and fundamental. This factorization drives much of the classic work in robotics from
integrating task and motion planning (Cambon et al., 2009; Wolfe et al., 2010; Kaelbling & Lozano-
Pérez, 2011) to deriving control policies that can perform complex manipulation tasks over long time
horizons such as tidying a dining table or rearranging a collection of objects to build new structures.
Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022) have shown
to be capable of generating high-level step-by-step plans for long-horizon tasks over symbolic (often
linguistic) abstractions of the task (Huang et al., 2022a; Ahn et al., 2022), but this is only part of the
solution. LLMs are restricted by what they can represent in text, and struggle with grounding i.e.,
reasoning over shapes, physics, and constraints of the real world (Tellex et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2023). LLMs can be integrated into larger vision-language models (VLMs) (Driess et al., 2023) that,
when trained on sufficient data, can respect physical constraints observed in image inputs to generate
more feasible plans that may be less likely to command the robot to perform impossible actions, or
manipulate inaccessible objects. However, existing VLMs are predominantly trained on static image
captioning and Q&A datasets – consequently, they continue to struggle to reason over dynamics e.g.,
how objects may move or collide with one another over time.
Meanwhile, recent text-to-video models trained on the wealth of videos on the Internet (Villegas
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), have demonstrated an ability to learn the dynamics and motions of
objects by synthesizing video predictions of the future (Du et al., 2023b). Existing video models
can only generate short time horizon clips without losing visual fidelity, and whether they can be
applied for long-horizon planning remains unclear. Nevertheless, they exhibit properties that are
complementary to VLMs in that they (i) can model the low-level visual dynamics of objects in ways
that are more information-rich than text, and (ii) can absorb another source of Internet data e.g.,
YouTube videos. This leads to the natural question of how to build a planning algorithm that can


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Step 1: push red star to left …              Step 1: push blue triangle to …


                                                                                                                t                    t+k


                                 Step 2: (re-plan)             Step 2: (re-plan)          Step 2: (re-plan)


                                                                                                                t current   t goal


Figure 1: Video Language Planning uses forward tree search via vision-language models and text-to-video
models to construct long-horizon video plans. From an image observation, the VLM policy (top left) generates
next-step text actions, which a video model converts into possible future image sequences (top right). Future
image states are evaluated using a VLM heuristic function (bottom left), and the best sequence is recursively
expanded with tree search (middle). Video plans can be converted to action execution with goal-conditioned
policies (bottom right).
leverage both long-horizon abstract planning from LLMs / VLMs and detailed dynamics and motions
from text-to-video-models.
In this work, we propose to integrate vision-language models and text-to-video models to enable video
language planning (VLP), where given the current image observation and a language instruction, the
agent uses a VLM to infer high-level text actions, and a video model to predict the low-level outcomes
of those actions. Specifically, VLP (illustrated in Fig. 1) synthesizes video plans for long-horizon
tasks by iteratively: (i) prompting the VLM as a policy to generate multiple possible next-step text
actions, (ii) using the video model as a dynamics model to simulate multiple possible video rollouts
for each action, and (iii) using the VLM again but as a heuristic function to assess the favorability of
each rollout in contributing task progress, then recursively re-planning with (i).
The combination of both models enables forward tree search over the space of possible video se-
quences to discover long-horizon plans (of hundreds of frames) that respect visual dynamics. In partic-
ular, VLP offers advantages in that it (i) can generate higher quality plans at inference time by expand-
ing the branching factor of the search, allowing plan quality to scale with increasing compute budget,
and (ii) benefits from training on incomplete language-labeled video data, which may contain short-
horizon snippets (that can be re-composed and sequenced into long-horizon ones), or segments of
videos with missing language labels (but contain dynamics that the video model can still learn from).
Experiments in both simulated and real settings (on 3 robot hardware platforms) show that VLP
generates more complete and coherent multimodal plans than baselines, including end-to-end models
trained directly to generate long videos conditioned on long-horizon task instructions. VLPs exhibit
improved grounding in terms of the consistency of scene dynamics in video plans, and when used in
conjunction with inverse dynamics models or goal-conditioned policies to infer control trajectories
(Du et al., 2023b), can be deployed on robots to perform multi-step tasks – from picking and stowing
a variety of objects over countertop settings, to pushing groups of blocks that rearrange them into new
formations. In terms of execution success, VLP-based systems are far more likely to achieve task
completion for long-horizon instructions than state-of-the-art alternatives, including PaLM-E (Driess
et al., 2023) and RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023) directly fine-tuned for long-horizon tasks. We also observe
that when co-trained on Internet-scale data, VLP generalizes to new objects and configurations.
Our main contributions are: (i) video language planning, a scalable algorithm for generating long-
horizon video plans by synergising vision-language models and text-to-video models, (ii) experiments


                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that show how VLP enables both simulated and real robots to perform complex long-horizon
manipulation tasks, exhibiting task completion rates that often exceed that of the next best available
approach by a significant margin, and (iii) ablations that study modes of generalization, as well as
how VLP scales with more compute. VLP presents a modern re-examination of visual planning by
integrating large generative models pretrained on Internet-scale data, and is not without limitations.

2     V IDEO L ANGUAGE P LANNING
Our planning system, VLP, takes a visual observation x0 of a scene and a natural language goal g and
infers a video plan {xt }1:T , where each image xt is as a sub-goal to accomplish g. We assume that
each image xt serves as an accurate representation of world state and use an image goal-conditioned
policy as a controller to infer low level control actions u to reach each image state.
Below, we first discuss how vision-language and video models are used in VLP as planning sub-
modules in Sec. 2.1. Next, we talk about our tree-search algorithm using vision-language and video
building blocks in Sec. 2.2. Finally, in Sec. 2.3, we discuss how we can convert video plans into
policies to accomplish each long-horizon task.
2.1   U SING V ISION -L ANGUAGE AND V IDEO M ODELS AS P LANNING S UBMODULES
We first discuss how to use vision-language and video models as sub-modules in VLP to synthesize
long horizon plans. At a high level, we use the multimodal processing power of VLMs to propose
abstract text actions ai to execute given goals and images. We then use the dynamics knowledge
of video models to accurately synthesize possible future world states xi1:T when abstract actions
are executed. Finally, we use a VLM to process possible future world states xi1:T and assess which
sequence x1:T and associated actions are the most promising to complete a task.
Vision-Language Models as Policies. Given a high-level goal g, VLP searches over a space of
possible abstract actions; these text actions a are generated by a VLM policy πVLM (x, g) → a that
is conditioned both on the goal g and an image x of the current state. We implement this policy
following Driess et al. (2023) and query the VLM for a natural language action to take given as context
the natural language goal and a tokenized embedding of the current image (Fig. 1 Top Left). We
experiment with two different strategies for constructing this policy. In the first, we provide the VLM
a set of example text action labels and ask the VLM to predict possible actions to accomplish a goal.
In the second, we finetune the PaLM-E model on randomly selected short trajectory snippets x1:S
labeled with abstract actions inside a long trajectory x1:H that accomplishes a long horizon goal g.
Video Models as Dynamics Models. In order to perform the high-level search, given an image x
of a current state and a language description of an abstract action, we need to predict the concrete
resulting state. In addition, to generate low-level controls that instantiate this abstract action, we need
a feasible sequence of low-level states that “interpolate” between the current state and the resulting
state. We obtain both of these things from a text-to-video model fVM (x, a), which takes an image x
and a short horizon text instruction a and outputs a short synthesized video x1:S starting at the image
observation x0 (Fig. 1 Top Right) following Du et al. (2023b). We construct this text-to-video model
by training on a set of short image trajectory snippets x1:T and associated language labels a.
Vision-Language Models as Heuristic Functions. To effectively prune branches in search, we
use a VLM to implement a heuristic function HVLM (x, g) which takes as input an image observation
x and a natural language goal description g and outputs a scalar “heuristic” predicting the number
of actions required to reach a state satisfying goal g from current state x (Fig. 1 Bottom Left). To
construct this heuristic function, we finetune a PaLM-E model using long trajectory snippets x1:H
which accomplish a long horizon goal g, and train it to predict, given an image in the subtrajectory
xt , the number of steps left until the end of the trajectory snippet. The negated number of predicted
steps to goal completion from VLM is used to implement HVLM (x, g) (so that high heuristic value
corresponds to being close to goal completion).
2.2   P LANNING WITH V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS AND V IDEO M ODELS
Given a combination of modules discussed in Sec. 2.1, directly applying the πVLM to infer text actions
a to reach goal g is not sufficient, as πVLM is not able to perform sufficiently accurate long-horizon
reasoning to select actions that are helpful in the long run. Furthermore, there are many possible
low-level image sub-sequences that correspond to different ways to perform a, but it is critical to
select one that is consistent with the rest of the actions that must be taken to reach g.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Decision Making with VLP
 1: Input: Current visual observation x0 , Language goal g
 2: Functions: VLM Policy πVLM (x, g), Video Model fVM (x, a), VLM Heuristic Function HVLM (x, g)
 3: Hyperparameters: Text-Branching factor A, Video-Branching factor D, Planning Beams B, Planning
    horizon H
 4: plans ← [[x0 ] ∀ i ∈ {1 . . . B}]                                            # Initialize B Different Plan Beams
 5: for h = 1 . . . H do
 6:    for b = 1 . . . B do
 7:       x ← plans[b][−1]                                         # Get the Latest Image State in the Plan Beam
 8:       a1:A ← π(x, g)                                                        # Generate A Different Text Actions
 9:       video branches ← [fVM (x, ai ) for i in (1 . . . A) for j in (1 . . . D)]
10:       plans[b].append(argmax(video branches, HVLM ))                 # Add Video with Highest Value to Plan
11:    end for
12:    max idx, min idx ← argmax(plans, HVLM ), argmin(plans, HVLM )
13:    plans[min idx] ← plans[max idx]                             # Periodically Replace the Lowest Value Plan
14: end for
15: plan ← argmax(plans, HVLM )                                                         # Return Highest Value Plan
Instead, we propose to search for a sequence of actions to reach g, corresponding to finding a
long-horizon video plan x1:H which optimizes
                              x∗1:H = arg max HVLM (xH , g).                               (1)
                                              x1:H ∼fVM ,πVLM
A separate procedure is then used to instantiate control actions u to enact the optimized video plan
x∗1:H . To sample long-horizon video plans x1:H , we first synthesize a short horizon video plan x1:S
from a starting image x through x1:S = fVM (x, πVLM (x, g)) and autoregressively extend to a full
long-horizon video plan by recursively applying fVM (x, πVLM (x, g)) on the final synthesized image
state xS . To optimize across video plans in Eqn (1), we use a tree-search procedure based on parallel
hill climbing (Selman & Gomes, 2006) (illustrated in Algorithm 1).
Our planning algorithm initializes a set of B parallel video plan beams. At each step of the planning
horizon, for each video beam, we first sample a set of A actions using πVLM (x, g), and for each action
we synthesize D different videos using fVM (x, a). We then use our heuristic function HVLM (x, g) to
select the generated video with the highest heuristic among the A × D generated videos and extend
the corresponding video plan beam with this generated video. Over the course of plan generation,
certain video plan beams will obtain high heuristic value and be more promising to explore. Therefore,
every 5 steps, we discard the beam with the lowest value and replicate its video plan with the beam
with the highest value. Our final full long horizon video plan corresponds to the beam with highest
heuristic value at the end of planning.
Preventing Exploitative Model Dynamics. When our planning procedure optimizes the VLM
heuristic function HVLM (x, g) it can exploit irregularities in the dynamics model fVM (x, a) to get
artificially high estimates. For instance, the planning procedure can exploit videos from fVM (x, a)
where key objects have teleported to desired locations or where the final image observation obscures
undesirable portions of world state. To prevent over-exploitation of HVLM (x, g), during the planning
procedure in Algorithm 1, we discard generated videos from fVM (x, a) if they increase the the
heuristic estimate HVLM (x, g) above a fixed threshold.

2.3   ACTION R EGRESSION F ROM V IDEO THROUGH G OAL -C ONDITIONED P OLICIES

Given a synthesized video plan x1:H , to execute tasks, we must infer control actions u to reach
synthesized images. Prior work infers actions from synthesized videos by using an inverse-dynamics
model on each synthesized frame (Du et al., 2023b).
In many settings, a single action may not be sufficient to directly reach the next synthesized image,
i.e. if you need to remove the cap off a toothbrush, and even in settings in which this is the case,
it may be difficult to precisely predict the correct action to reach the next frame. To reduce the
burden on the inverse dynamics model, we propose to use a short-horizon goal-conditioned policy
πcontrol (x, xg ), which given the current image observation x and next frame in a video plan xg outputs
a low level control action u that makes progress towards xg . For each frame in our video plan x1:H ,
the goal-conditioned policy is executed for a fixed pre-specified number of timesteps. We train πcontrol
using paired image and low level control snippets xi1:T and ui1:T , where we sample a random timestep
t, a corresponding state xt , and future state xt+h , and train πcontrol (xt , xt+h ) to predict ut .


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         group blocks by color

 1. Separate the blue cube from       2. Move the blue cube into the      3. Move the blue cube into the     4. Move the arm to the left of      5. move the blue blocks and
 the yellow star                            yellow pentagon                       red crescent                     the red crescent              yellow pentagon towards the
                                                                                                                                                          right side


    6. Push the yellow pentagon        7. Move the arm towards the        8. Push the green star into the    9. Move your arm towards the       10. Push red blocks slightly to
         into the yellow star                   top center                          green cube                       green blocks                         the down


         make a horizontal line

 1. Move the red circle to the left   2. Move the green circle closer     3. Move the blue triangle to the    4. Move the blue cube to the      5. Move the green circle to the
     of the yellow hexagon                   to the red circle                top left of the red circle         left of the blue triangle                 center


     6. Move the green circle         7. Move the blue triangle to the    8. Slide the blue cube towards     9. Push the red circle closer to   11. Move the yellow hexagon
     towards the yellow heart             right of the green circle               the blue triangle                 the blue cube…                 closer to the red circle


Figure 2: Long Horizon Video Plan. Long horizon video plans generated by VLP on both simulated and real
images. VLP is only given the initial image and language goal. Language subplans and other image frames are
directly synthesized.                         Sim Environment          Real Environment
                                                                         Move        Group           Make        Move           Group           Make
                        Model                                            Area        Color           Line        Area           Color           Line
                        UniPi                                             2%           4%             2%           4%            12%             4%
                        VLP (No Value Function)                          10%          42 %            8%          20%            64%             4%
                        VLP (Ours)                                       58%          98%            66%          78%           100%            56%
Table 1: Accuracy of Generated Video Plans. The percentage VLP and baselines are able to synthesize a full
video plan which can fully complete tasks in simulation and real environments. VLP substantially outperforms
both UniPi and directly combining the VLM policy
Replanning. Given a very long-horizon task, it is both difficult to use πcontrol to accurately execute
the full video plan x1:H (due to accumulating error) and difficult to fully synthesize a plan that
completely finishes a long-horizon task given a fixed planning horizon. To circumvent this issue, we
use receding horizon control strategy (Kwon & Han, 2005), where we generate videos plans with a
fixed horizon (that might not fully complete the task), and then repeatedly regenerate/replan video
plans with the same horizon after a fixed number of action executions.
3       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We first evaluate the ability of VLP to synthesize long-horizon video plans for different tasks in
Sec. 3.1. We then investigate VLP’s ability to execute generated video plans in various environments
in Sec. 3.2. Finally, we further investigate generalization capabilities of VLP in Sec. 3.3.
3.1       L ONG -H ORIZON V IDEO S YNTHESIS
Baselines. We compare our approach with two other approaches for synthesizing long-horizon
video plans. First, we consider training a text-to-video model fVM on long horizon text goals, as in
UniPi (Du et al., 2023b), omitting the entire VLP planning process. Next, we consider synthesizing
long horizon video plans by chaining πVLM policy with fVM , without the heuristic function.
Object Rearrangement. We first illustrate video plans in the Language Table environment (Lynch
et al., 2023), which consists of a dataset of long-horizon demonstrations and text labels with incom-
plete short horizon labels (Appendix A.3). We give as input to VLP a random image and randomly
chosen language goal. We then visualize the generated VLP plans (Fig. 2). We report the quantitative
success of synthesizing long-horizon videos given random starting images for each task in Language
Table in Tab. 1. For each reported number, we generated a total of 50 videos from each method
and visually assessed the percentage of time the video successfully solved the given task. VLP
substantially outperforms the baseline of directly synthesizing videos given a long-horizon prompt,


                                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Language               Video                      Line                                                      Beam 1, Branch 1
        Beams                Branch                Branch                 Performance
              1                1                          1                    4%
              1                1                          4                   10%                                                      Beam 2, Branch 16
              1                4                          4                   22%
              2                4                          4                   56%

Figure 3: Video Accuracy vs Planning Budget. Left: VLP scales positively with more compute budget; it is
better able to synthesize plans to solve tasks with more planning (i.e. with a higher beam-search branching factor).
Success percentage reported on the make line task. Right: Qualitative illustration of video plans for making
a line generated without planning (Beam 1, Branch 1) compared to extensive planning (Beam 2, Branch 16).


                                                                          ✕                                                                                   ✕
      Put the fruits into
      the top drawer               Action 1. Place apple in top drawer                                               Action 3. Close top drawer


                                                                                                                                                                                               ✓
                                   Action 1. Open top drawer                  Action 2. Place banana in top drawer   Action 3. Place apple in top drawer          Action 4. Close top drawer


                                                                          ✕                                                                                   ✕
                                   Action 1. Place banana in top drawer                                              Action 3. Place coke can in top drawer



Figure 4: Planning Tree on 7DoF Mobile Manipulator. VLP is able to prune unlikely language and video
branches to synthesize a coherent long-horizon video plan.
indicating the importance of hierarchical structure. VLP further outperforms the ablation of only
using a VLM policy with a video model, pointing to the effectiveness of the VLP planning procedure
and including the value function.
Effect of Search of Video Synthesis. We analyze the effect of search in generating long-horizon
videos in Fig. 3 (left). We consider increasing the video branching, language branching and the
beams in the search procedure. We find that each increase of branching factor in search substantially
increases the success of synthesized long horizon plans. A qualitative illustration of the difference of
generated plans with small and large branching factor is illustrated in Fig. 3 (right).
Planning on 7DoF Mobile Manipulators. We qualitatively illustrate how we can generate plans
on a higher-DoF, 7DoF Mobile Manipulator in Fig. 4. Our planning system is able to generate videos
of actions that both open and close drawers in order to satisfy specified text prompts.
Planning on Multicamera 14DoF Bi-Manual Manipulators. We further illustrate how our ap-
proach can generate multi-view 4-camera videos of dexterous manipulation on the 14DoF bi-manual
ALOHA (Zhao et al., 2023) platform in Fig. 5. Our video model outputs videos across views simulta-
neously (by concatenating each view channelwise), while our VLM policy and heuristic function
takes as input top and side views. While short horizon text labels are incomplete (Appendix A.3), our
approach synthesizes multiview consistent plans which stack bowls, cups, and utensils.
3.2         L ONG -H ORIZON E XECUTION
We next evaluate the ability of VLP to not only generate plans as in Sec. 3.1, but to actually use
planning (and replanning) to execute long-horizon tasks in closed-loop environments.
Baselines. We compare our approach to a set of approaches to solve long-horizon tasks. (i) We
consider using a VLM to directly plan, using PaLM-E (Driess et al., 2023) to plan short horizon
text snippets to execute, which are converted to actions using a text-conditioned policy, conditioned
on generated text snippets from PaLM-E. We also (ii) compare with UniPi (Du et al., 2023b),
where videos are directly generated by a text-to-video model trained on long-horizon text goals and
converted to actions using our goal-conditioned policy. Next, we consider (iii) directly learning
language-conditioned behavioral cloning policy on long-horizon text and actions, using the codebase
and architecture of the LAVA model Lynch et al. (2023). Finally, we (iv) compare with a multi-modal
transformer architecture to predict actions, and finetune the RT2 model Brohan et al. (2023) on
long-horizon text and actions. Note that methods that plan in language space (Hao et al., 2023) are
not applicable, as they cannot simulate detailed visual dynamics (Appendix A.1).


                                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                             …



                                                                                                             …



                                                                                                             …



                                                                                                             …


         Pick up the   Place pink bowl in      Pick up green cup   Stack green cup on   Pick up orange cup       Push the bowl to
         pink bowl         blue bowl                                 top of blue cup                                the center
Figure 5: Multiview Video Plans for Dexterous Manipulation. Long horizon video plans (and associated
language subgoals) generated by VLP for solving the long horizon task of stacking everything in a table together.
VLP is able to synthesize multiview video plans across 4 cameras, that are consistent with each other and with
task completion. The first 5 generated language subgoals goals are illustrated as well as the final generated goal
image. VLP is only given first image.
                                        Move to Area           Group by Color                  Make Line
 Model                                      Reward     Completion        Reward         Completion           Reward     Completion
 UniPi (Du et al., 2023b)                    30.8            0%             44.0            4%                44.0            4%
 LAVA (Lynch et al., 2023)                   59.8           22%             50.0            2%                33.5            0%
 RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023)                  18.5            0%             46.0           26%                36.5            2%
 PALM-E (Driess et al., 2023)                36.5            0%             43.5            2%                26.2            0%
 VLP (Ours)                                  87.3           64%             95.8           92%                65.0           16%

Table 2: Execution Performance on Long Horizon Tasks. VLP is able to accurately execute actions for
different long-horizon synthetic language table tasks. VLP substantially outperforms all existing methods.
         Move all
       blocks to the
        bottom left
          corner


          Group
        Blocks By
          Color

        Make a
       Horizontal
       Line in the
         Center
Figure 6: Simulation Execution. Illustration of execution of VLP on different simulated environments. VLP is
able to accomplish different long horizon goals.
Quantitative Results. We evaluate each approach quantitatively on moving all blocks to different
areas of the board, grouping blocks by color, or making blocks in a line (details on quantitative
evaluation in Appendix). We report quantitative results in Tab. 2, and find that our approach
substantially outperforms all baseline methods. As the task horizon of each task is very long (around
1500 steps), we found that many baseline methods would become “stuck” and stop acting effectively.
We illustrate example executions using VLP in Fig. 6.
Effect of Planning. Next, we analyze the effect of the amount of planning on execution success
rates in Tab. 3. We find that increasing both the planning horizon and the branching factor of planning
substantially improves the success of task execution (at the cost of inference time).
Ablations of Goal-Conditioned Policy We further conduct experiments on different approaches to
extracting actions from videos in Tab. 4. We find that using a goal-conditioned policy conditioned on
each intermediate frame in a synthesized video leads to the best overall performance (outperforming
using a goal-conditioned policy sparsely on the end frames of each short-horizon video).
Real Execution. We provide executions of VLP on multiple real-world robots in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.
As in Fig. 7, VLP is able to effectively execute each shown long-horizon task on a real Language
Table robot. We further provide executions of generated video plans of our approach on the 7DoF
mobile manipulator in Fig. 8. Similarly we find that a goal-conditioned policy can realize plans.


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Move all
    Blocks to the
    Right Corner


       Group
     Blocks By
       Color


      Make a
     Horizontal
       Line


Figure 7: Real Execution. Illustration of execution VLP on real world robots. VLP is able to accomplish
different long horizon goals when executed on real robots.


                                    1. Open top drawer                                            2. Place banana in top drawer
 Task: Put the fruits
 into the top drawer


                                 3. Place apple in top drawer                                       4. Close top drawer

Figure 8: 7DoF Mobile Robot Execution. VLP is able to execute complex, long horizon plans on mobile robot.
           Planning Branching Line      Line                                 Group Color Group Color
  Beams Horizon      Factor   Score Completion          Action Inference         Score       Completion
       1                1    4              48.9                 0%         Inverse Dynamics              89.7                    80%
       1                1   16              53.3                 2%         Goal Policy (Last)            85.0                    66%
       1                2   16              58.1                 8%         Goal Policy (Every)           95.8                    92%
       2                2   16              65.0                16%
                                                                          Table 4: Extracting Actions From VLP Video Plans.
Table 3: Execution Accuracy vs Planning Budget.                           Comparison of using inverse dynamics or applying a
VLP is able to more accurately execute video plans to                     goal-conditioned policy to either the last frame or ev-
solve tasks with a larger amount of planning. Success                     ery frame of synthesized short-horizon video. Success
percentage reported on the make line task.                                percentage reported on the group by color task.
3.3        G ENERALIZATION
Generalization to Lighting and Objects.           In VLP, policy execution is abstracted into visual
goal generation followed by a goal-conditioned controller. With this abstraction, a video model can
simply focus on capturing the visual dynamics objects, while a goal-conditioned policy needs to
focus only on relevant visual details to achieve the next (nearby) goal. We found that this enables
VLP to generalize well, as the video model is able to visually generalize to new images, while the
policy is able to generalize well to nearby new visual goals. In Fig. 9 (top), VLP is able to generalize
the task of putting all objects in top right corner, to three new objects, a rubber donut and cupcake
and a wooden hexagon. In Fig. 9 (bottom) VLP is further able to generalize to lighting conditions
substantially different than the ones the model was trained on and can be successfully deployed to a
new robot in a different building location.
Generalization to New Tasks In VLP, both VLM and text-to-video models may be pre-trained on
a vast amount of Internet data. In Fig. 10, we train both VLM and text-to-video models on a large
mix of datasets and illustrate how it further generalizes and executes new tasks on unseen objects.
4       R ELATED W ORK
There is a great deal of recent work in leveraging large pretrained foundation models for decision-
making agents (Yang et al., 2023b) – in particular, using LLMs (and the commonsense knowledge
they store) to infer actions represented in text. For example, given language instructions, LLMs
can be prompted to generate high-level step-by-step plans (Huang et al., 2022a; Ahn et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023a) – each step mapped robot actions, invoked with pre-trained policies or existing
APIs (Liang et al., 2023). Using existing VLMs (Chen et al., 2022), plans can also be conditioned
on visual inputs, represented with language descriptions (Zeng et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b)
or token embeddings co-trained with LLMs (Driess et al., 2023). Nevertheless, VLMs are often


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          New
         Objects


           New
         Lighting


Figure 9: Generalization to Objects and Lighting. VLP can generalize execution to scenes with new objects
(top) consisting of a wooden yellow hexagon, rubber donut and rubber cupcake and to a new office (bottom)
with different lighting conditions (a lot more lighting on the right side of the board) and similarly execute tasks.

      Generated
      Video


      Real
      Rollout



                    Novel instruction: Pick snicker energy bar          Novel instruction: Move moose toy near green pear
Figure 10: Task Generalization VLP can generalize to new tasks on unseen objects using internet knowledge.
pretrained on static image datasets (i.e., image-in, text-out), and subsequently (i) are limited to plans
that can be expressed in text, and (ii) may struggle to reason about the dynamics of the world.
Video models, on the other hand, exhibit potential to generate informative image sequences of the
future, and there exists a body of work using them as dynamics models to capture object motion across
image states (Finn et al., 2016; Xue et al., 2016; Oprea et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2015). Generating
high-quality videos over long time horizons is a known challenge (Babaeizadeh et al., 2021; Saxena
et al., 2021); however, recent progress in larger models and text-conditioning give rise to a new
generation of text-to-video models that can generate detailed image frames (Ho et al., 2022; Villegas
et al., 2022), that can drive policies for decision making (Du et al., 2023b). However, these works
focus predominantly on short-horizon videos. Our work investigates using text-to-video models
together with VLMs to produce long-horizon video plans (potentially predicting hundreds of frames
into the future), leveraging the scalability of tree search to plan in the space of videos and language.
Our work can be viewed as bringing together two families of generative foundation models to
compose new capabilities – a strategy shown to be effective for applications such as 2D image
synthesis (Du et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022; Du
et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023b), 3D synthesis (Po & Wetzstein, 2023), video synthesis (Yang et al.,
2023a), trajectory planning (Du et al., 2019; Urain et al., 2021; Gkanatsios et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023c) and multimodal perception (Li et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022). Most similar to our work,
HiP (Ajay et al., 2023) combines language models, video models, and action models for hierarchical
planning. In contrast, our work uses a forward search procedure to combine the strengths of a VLM
and a video model. This composition through forward search enables us to simulate and reason about
long horizons of future actions, while HiP only generates and acts on plans one step at a time.
5 L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION
Limitations. Our planning approach leverages images as a world state representation. In many
tasks, this is insufficient as it does not capture the full 3D state and cannot encode latent factors
such as physics or mass. Limitations can be partly remedied by generating multi-view videos or by
using heuristic function with the full video plan as input. In addition, we observed that our video
dynamics model does not always simulate dynamics accurately. In several situations, we observed
that synthesized videos would make objects spontaneously appear, change shape, or teleport to
new locations. We believe that larger video models or explicit reinforcement learning feedback for
physics (Black et al., 2023) could help solve these problems. Finally, our video generation is slow,
and it takes 30 minutes to synthesize a full long-horizon video plan, which can be accelerated by
distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022) or alternative video generation procedures (Villegas et al., 2022).
Conclusion. We have presented VLP, an approach to long-horizon decision-making by combining
VLMs with text-to-video models. We illustrate the power of test-time composition, in this case
planning, to generate behaviors much more complex than its components. While our experiments
largely explore VLP in the context of robotics, there may be downstream applications in other areas
too, such as steerable media generation as well as additional methods to compose models.


                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Tomas Lozano-Perez for providing helpful comments
in the project and Kamyar Ghasemipour for help in setting up experiments on the Language Table real
robot. We gratefully acknowledge support from NSF grant 2214177; from AFOSR grant FA9550-22-
1-0249; from ONR MURI grant N00014-22-1-2740; from ARO grant W911NF-23-1-0034; from
the MIT-IBM Watson Lab; from the MIT Quest for Intelligence; and from the Boston Dynamics
Artificial Intelligence Institute. Yilun Du is supported by a NSF Graduate Fellowship.
R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as I can, not as I
 say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691. 1, 8, 16
Anurag Ajay, Seungwook Han, Yilun Du, Shaung Li, Abhi Gupta, Tommi Jaakkola, Josh Tenenbaum,
  Leslie Kaelbling, Akash Srivastava, and Pulkit Agrawal. Compositional foundation models for
  hierarchical planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08587, 2023. 9
Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Suraj Nair, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Du-
 mitru Erhan. Fitvid: Overfitting in pixel-level video prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13195,
 2021. 9
Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023. 9
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022. 15, 16
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
  Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. 2, 6, 7,
 15, 16
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 1
Stephane Cambon, Rachid Alami, and Fabien Gravot. A hybrid approach to intricate motion,
  manipulation and task planning. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 28(1):104–126,
  2009. 1
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, et al. Pali: A jointly-scaled multilingual
  language-image model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06794, 2022. 8
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022. 1, 16
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al. Scaling egocentric
  vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
  (ECCV), pp. 720–736, 2018. 15
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 16
Yilun Du, Toru Lin, and Igor Mordatch. Model based planning with energy based models. CORL,
  2019. 9
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional visual generation with energy based models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6637–6647, 2020. 9


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus, Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle: Compositional
  generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11552,
  2023a. 9
Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. arXiv
  e-prints, pp. arXiv–2302, 2023b. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 15, 16
Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas
  Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic skills
  with cross-domain datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13396, 2021. 15
Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
  through video prediction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. 9
Nikolaos Gkanatsios, Ayush Jain, Zhou Xian, Yunchu Zhang, Christopher Atkeson, and Katerina
  Fragkiadaki. Energy-based models as zero-shot planners for compositional scene rearrangement.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14391, 2023. 9
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022. 15
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023. 6
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022. 1, 9
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a. 1, 8
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b. 8
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Dhruv Shah, Danny Driess, Andy Zeng, Yao Lu, Pete Florence, Igor
 Mordatch, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, et al. Grounded decoding: Guiding text generation
 with grounded models for robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00855, 2023. 1
Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Hierarchical task and motion planning in the now.
  In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1470–1477. IEEE, 2011.
  1
Wook Hyun Kwon and Soo Hee Han. Receding horizon control: model predictive control for state
 models. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005. 5
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An
  Huang, Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive
  decision-making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31199–31212, 2022. 9
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023. 8
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Josh Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Learning to compose visual
  relations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23166–23178, 2021. 9


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01714, 2022. 9

Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis
  Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 2023. 5, 6, 7, 16

Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, and Anima Anandkumar. Controllable and compositional generation with
 latent-space energy-based models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
 9

Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard L Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-conditional
  video prediction using deep networks in atari games. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 28, 2015. 9

Sergiu Oprea, Pablo Martinez-Gonzalez, Alberto Garcia-Garcia, John Alejandro Castro-Vargas,
  Sergio Orts-Escolano, Jose Garcia-Rodriguez, and Antonis Argyros. A review on deep learning
  techniques for video prediction. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
  44(6):2806–2826, 2020. 9

Ryan Po and Gordon Wetzstein. Compositional 3d scene generation using locally conditioned
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12218, 2023. 9

Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022. 9

Vaibhav Saxena, Jimmy Ba, and Danijar Hafner. Clockwork variational autoencoders. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:29246–29257, 2021. 9

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022. 15

Bart Selman and Carla P Gomes. Hill-climbing search. Encyclopedia of cognitive science, 81:82,
  2006. 4

Stefanie Tellex, Nakul Gopalan, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Cynthia Matuszek. Robots that use language.
  Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 3:25–55, 2020. 1

Julen Urain, Anqi Li, Puze Liu, Carlo D’Eramo, and Jan Peters. Composable energy policies for
  reactive motion generation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04962, 2021. 9

Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02399,
  2022. 1, 9

Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and select:
  Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023a. 8

Zihao Wang, Lin Gui, Jeffrey Negrea, and Victor Veitch. Concept algebra for text-controlled vision
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03693, 2023b. 9

Jason Wolfe, Bhaskara Marthi, and Stuart Russell. Combined task and motion planning for mobile
  manipulation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and
  Scheduling, volume 20, pp. 254–257, 2010. 1

Tailin Wu, Megan Tjandrasuwita, Zhengxuan Wu, Xuelin Yang, Kevin Liu, Rok Sosic, and Jure
  Leskovec. Zeroc: A neuro-symbolic model for zero-shot concept recognition and acquisition at
  inference time. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9828–9840, 2022. 9


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianfan Xue, Jiajun Wu, Katherine Bouman, and Bill Freeman. Visual dynamics: Probabilistic future
  frame synthesis via cross convolutional networks. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016. 9
Mengjiao Yang, Yilun Du, Bo Dai, Dale Schuurmans, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Probabilistic adaptation of text-to-video models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01872, 2023a. 9
Sherry Yang, Ofir Nachum, Yilun Du, Jason Wei, Pieter Abbeel, and Dale Schuurmans. Foun-
  dation models for decision making: Problems, methods, and opportunities. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04129, 2023b. 8
Zhutian Yang, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Jiajun Wu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tomás Lozano-Pérez,
  and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Compositional diffusion-based continuous constraint solvers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2309.00966, 2023c. 9
Andy Zeng, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit,
  Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Socratic models: Com-
  posing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00598. 8, 9
Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual
  manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023. 6


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
In the Appendix, we provide additional results in Sec. A.1. We provide evaluation details in Sec. A.2,
dataset details in Sec. A.3, training details in Sec. A.4, and planning details in Sec. A.5.
A.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Below, we provide additional experimental results.
Failure Cases. We observed several failures cases when applying our approach across tasks. First,
when using world knowledge from other text-to-video datasets to generalize and execute new tasks,
we found that sometimes the video model would incorrectly interpret tasks as illustrated in Fig. XI,
where it interprets the manipulator as an octopus. In addition, we found that our approach sometimes
synthesized videos with inconsistent physics, where objects would infrequently appear or disappear
as illustrated in Fig. XII.
Robustness of Goal-Conditioned Policy We found that our decomposition of execution in VLP
to visual goal generation and subsequent execution allowed for strong generalization in the goal-
conditioned policy. This was because the goal-conditioned policy can discard most information
in image goals and focus only on the portion required for immediate execution of the policy. We
illustrate this robustness in Fig. XIII. Even when the generated goals are misaligned with the observed
board, with many artifacts in the generated boundaries, our goal-conditioned policy is still able to
execute the visual task.
Additional Video Plans. We provide additional video plans synthesized by our approach on block
arrangement in Fig. XIV. Our approach is able to robustly synthesize both language and video plans.
Planning with Language Models.               To directly plan with language models, we would need
a language model to accurately simulate the visual dynamics of an image serialized to text. In
Fig. XV, we find that existing LLMs are unable to accurately simulate visual dynamics, missing
object collisions, identities and gripper movement, preventing them from being effectively used to
plan.
A.2   E VALUATION D ETAILS
Video Evaluation.        To evaluate whether a generated video satisfied a long horizon task, we
manually assessed whether at any point in the generated video, the image state in the video satisfied
the specified long-horizon goal. Due to the computational cost of generating long-horizon video
(taking approximately 30 minutes per video), we generated a total of 50 videos for each goal across
each task and method.
Execution Evaluation. We used the ground truth simulation state of each block in the Language
Table environment to compute rewards and task completion thresholds for each task in the paper. To
compute the reward function for “group blocks by color”, we assessed the percentage of blocks of the
same color that were within 0.1 units of each other. To compute the reward for “move blocks to an
area”, we assessed the number of blocks within 0.2 x units and 0.27 y units to a specified corner. To
compute the reward for “move blocks into a line in the center of a board”, we computed the number
of blocks with 0.05 units of the center of the board. We gave all baselines and VLP a total of 1500
timesteps of execution in each environment, with performance measured at the end of 1500 timesteps.
If at an intermediate timestep the task was complete, we terminated execution early.
We evaluated each method on a total of 50 environments on each task due to slowness in execution of
both our method and baselines (VLP took approximately 1 hour per environment, while RT2 baselines
took approximate 0.5 hours per environment). For VLP, we generated a plan of horizon length 2 with
beam width 2 and branching factor 16, where each video in a planning horizon corresponded to 16
frames. We called the goal-conditioned policy a total of 4 times for each of the first 16 frames of
the synthesized video plan in simulated environments. On real world evaluation tasks, we called the
goal-conditioned policy on the first 10 frames of the synthesized video plan to more finely account
for differences in physics of the real world execution compared to those used to gather the data.
A.3   DATASET D ETAILS
Language Table.        We trained VLP on approximately 10000 long horizon trajectories in both
simulation and real across a set of several hundred different long horizon goals. We chose a total of 3
goals to run experiments on as they allowed easy automated evaluation. Data in simulation and real
combined in total is roughly 20000 trajectories and with approximately 400000 short-horizon text
labels. Since long-horizon goal demonstrations are gathered all at once, without any intermediate
short-horizon text goals, short-horizon text is labeled in hindsight on long-horizon demonstrations. A


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Low data
  regime


  No data
  regime


Figure XI: Failure in Transferring          Web
                               Instruction is       Knowledge.
                                              “pick octopus               VLP
                                                            toy”, in low data    is instructed
                                                                              regime,                to “pick
                                                                                      the diffusion model has  up octopus toy”. In the
low-data regime, the model hasseen   octopus toy a few times. The reconstruction seems to be correct thought
                                  only    seen    the  octopus
                               the dynamics are slightly wrong.
                                                                   toy   in training    data    a few  times,  and the generated frames
roughly reconstructed the shape of the toy, but fails at accurately recover the dynamics. The the no-data regmie,
                               In no-data regime, the octopus toy was not seen, and the model tries to apply
the model has never seen in training     data, and without any training data VLP transfers the wrong web knowledge
                               octopus texture to robot arm. It shows signs of transfer of internet knowledge,
and makes the gripper octopusbutarms.
                                   still need correct understanding of the scene to apply those knowledge.


Figure XII: Failure in Physics. When synthesizing videos, VLP will sometimes make objects dissappear or
reappear. Creating long videos that respect object permanence remains an important future direction for our
work.
set of human raters are asked to go through long-horizon demonstrations and select sub-snippets that
correspond to interpretable short-horizon text goals. As many robot motions do not easily map to text
actions, these sub-snippets do not capture all frames in demonstrations and are often overlapping in
time, leading to short-horizon text labels to be incomplete.
7DoF Mobile Manipulator. For our 7DoF mobile manipulator planning and execution experiments,
we trained VLP on the dataset from RT-1 (Brohan et al., 2022). For our generalization experiments
of VLP, we train a large text-to-video diffusion model using a mix of data from our particular 7DoF
Mobile Manipulator, Bridge (Ebert et al., 2021), RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023), Ego4D (Grauman et al.,
2022), EPIC-KITCHEN (Damen et al., 2018), and LAION-400M (Schuhmann et al., 2022).
14DoF Bi-Manual Manipulation. For our 14DoF Bi-Manual Manipulation, we train VLP on
approximately 1200 teleoped demonstrations on a kitchen stacking task, where operators were first
asked to stack bowls on top of each other, then cups on top of bowls, and then utensils on top of
cups. Each demonstration was annotated with roughly 20 language instructions, leading to roughly
25k short-horizon text labels. Similar to the Language Table setting, short-horizon text labels are
incomplete and generated through hindsight relabeling of the long teleoped trajectories.

A.4         T RAINING D ETAILS

Video Models. To train video diffusion models, we follow the model architecture and training
approach from (Du et al., 2023b). We train a base text-conditioned video generation model at 24 × 40
resolution and upsample it to 48 × 80 resolution and then 192 × 320 resolution, where videos at each
resolution are set to generate a temporal video of length 16 frames. We use a base channel width of
256 across models and train a base text-conditioned video model using 64 TPUv3 pods for 3 days
and higher resolution superresolution models for 1 day. We train separate text-to-video models per
domain.


                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure XIII: Goal Policy Robustness to Synthesized Goals The goal-conditioned policy is robust to noise in
synthesized goals. In the above example, given synthesized goals in the top row, the policy can directly execute
a control actions in the real environment in the bottom row.
VLM Models. To train VLMs, we follow the architecture and codebase of PaLM-E (Driess et al.,
2023). We fine-tune a single 12B PaLM-E (Driess et al., 2023) jointly to both predict heuristics values
and policies. We formulate heuristic value prediction as a sequence prediction problem, allowing the
heuristic functions to predict multiple different values for multi-modal demonstrations. We finetune
the VLM model using 64 TPUv3 pods for 1 day on data in each domain and use separate models per
domain.
Goal-Conditioned Policy. To train our goal-conditioned policy, we use the LAVA model (Lynch
et al., 2023) architecture, where the text-encoder from CLIP is replaced with a ResNet encoder for
the goal image. We train our goal-conditioned policy in each domain using 16 TPUv3 pods for 1 day.
Baselines. We compare our approach with a set of multiple baselines. For the LAVA baseline,
we follow the exact settings from the LAVA paper (Lynch et al., 2023), where we train the model
conditioned on long-horizon goal text and trained the model for 1 day use 16 TPUv3 pods. For our
UniPi (Du et al., 2023b) baseline, we followed the same training architecture and approach as the
text-conditioned video model in VLP, where the model is trained on long-horizon video elements.
For the RT-2 baseline, we follow the architecture and codebase of the original paper (Brohan et al.,
2023), where we use the 12B RT2-PaLM-E model. We trained RT-2 using 64 TPUv3 pods for 3 days.
A.5    P LANNING D ETAILS
Language Table. To generate video plans, we planned with a horizon of 16, a beam width of 2, a
language branching factor of 4, and a video branching factor of 4. To enable fast video generation,
we used the DDIM sampler, with a total of 64 timesteps of sampling at the base resolution and 4
timesteps of sampling at the higher resolution samples, with a classifier-free guidance scale of 5 for
the base model. We generated 16 videos in parallel at once use a 4 TPU inference pod.
We queried the VLM policy to generate different text actions given an image with a temperature
of 0.3. Our VLM heuristic function decoded the number of steps left until task-completion with a
temperature of 0.0. We set our heuristic function clipping threshold during planning to be 50 and
removed videos if the improvement was larger than 50 after one video rollout. This number was
heuristically determined based off generated plans at different thresholds, with the aim of finding the
highest threshold such that long-horizon plans still looked physically plausible. Our total planning
procedure across a horizon of 16 took approximately 30 minutes.
7DoF Mobile Manipulator. In the 7DoF mobile manipulator experiments we made slight tweaks
to the approach. For VLM Planning, we used PaLM-E (Driess et al. (2023)) to generate scene
captions, and few-shot prompted PaLM (Chowdhery et al. (2022)) to generate plans following the
prompts in SayCan (Ahn et al. (2022)). The beam search has a beam width of 3. The video diffusion
model is the same as above, except that it has a different resolution for the base model (64 × 80) and
super resolution model (256 × 320), and is finetuned on RT-1 (Brohan et al. (2022)) data only. The
goal-conditioned policy is using the last frame of the generated video segment only.
14DoF Bi-Manual manipulation. We followed the same planning setup as in Language Table.
We set our heuristic function clipped threshold during planning to be 15.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1. Push the green cube into the        2. Push the green cube into     3. Push the green cube into the      4. Move the green star to the     5. Point your arm to the top of
 blue crescent                                 blue crescent                      yellow star                   left of the blue crescent             the red pentagon


    6. Push the red pentagon            7. Move red moon into the       8. Point your arm at the top of     9. Slide the red pentagon to the   10. Push the red pentagon into
     towards the green star                    green star                      the red pentagon               left side of the red crescent            the red moon


 1. Move the red circle to the left   2. Move the green circle closer   3. Point your arm at the green      4. Move the green star towards     5. Move the green star towards
     of the yellow hexagon                   to the red circle                       star                             the center                        the red star


     6. Move the green circle         7. Move the blue cube closer to   8. Slide the blue triangle to the   9. Push the blue cube into the     10. Move your arm towards the
      towards the green star                 the green circle                      green star                        green circle                        red circle


Figure XIV: Additional Long Horizon Video Plans. Additional long horizon video plans generated by VLP on
both simulated and real images. VLP is only given the initial image and language goal. Language subplans and
other image frames are directly synthesized.


                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Prompt: Consider a robot table with a red cube at [-0.1, 0.1], red pentagon at [0.1, 0.1], yellow cube at [-
    0.1, -0.1], yellow heart at [0.2, 0.2], green star at [0.3, 0.3], green pentagon at [-0.3, -0.3], blue cylinder at
    [0.4, 0.4], blue triangle at [0.5, 0.5]. The robot gripper is at [0, 0]. What is the resultant state of the world
    after the command, push the red pentagon next to the green star? The robot gripper must physically push
    blocks. Make sure to simulate the dynamics of gripper and block collision as well as block on block
    collision. List the state of all blocks and the robot gripper.

    Response: Simulating the dynamics of the gripper and block collisions, as well as block-on-block
    collisions, involves a series of steps. I'll describe the state of the world after the command "push the red
    pentagon next to the green star":

    Initial state:
    •Red cube at [-0.1, 0.1]
    •Red pentagon at [0.1, 0.1]
    •Yellow cube at [-0.1, -0.1]
    •Yellow heart at [0.2, 0.2]
    •Green star at [0.3, 0.3]
    •Green pentagon at [-0.3, -0.3]
    •Blue cylinder at [0.4, 0.4]
    •Blue triangle at [0.5, 0.5]
    •Robot gripper at [0, 0]

    Steps:
    1.The robot gripper moves to the red pentagon.
    2.The gripper picks up the red pentagon.
    3.The gripper moves towards the green star.
    4.The gripper releases the red pentagon next to the green star.

    Resultant state:
    •Red cube at [-0.1, 0.1]
    •Yellow cube at [-0.1, -0.1]
    •Yellow heart at [0.2, 0.2]
    •Green star at [0.3, 0.3]
    •Green pentagon at [-0.3, -0.3]
    •Blue cylinder at [0.4, 0.4]
    •Blue triangle at [0.5, 0.5]
    •Robot gripper at [0, 0]
    •Red pentagon at [0.45, 0.45] (approximately, based on gripper's release position)

    Note: The final position of the red pentagon next to the green star depends on the specific dynamics of the
    gripper and the release mechanism. The above description assumes a successful execution of the push
    command without any unexpected behavior or collisions that might alter the final positions.


Figure XV: Simulating Dynamics with GPT3.5. LLMs are unable to accurately simulate the visual dynamics
of a serialized image representation. In the above example, we provide a simple serialization of an image in
Language Table (representing each object as a single point). The LLM is unable to accurately preserve the object
in the scene, does not accurately simulate the movement of the gripper and does not simulate the collisions that
would happen when the red pentagon move to the green star (collision with the yellow heart).


                                                            18
