Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SKING B EFORE ACTING : G ATHER I NFORMATION
IN E MBODIED D ECISION -M AKING WITH L ANGUAGE
M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         With strong capabilities of reasoning and a broad understanding of the world,
         Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated immense potential in build-
         ing versatile embodied decision-making agents capable of executing a wide array
         of tasks. Nevertheless, when deployed in unfamiliar environments, we show that
         LLM agents encounter challenges in efficiently gathering essential information,
         leading to suboptimal performance. Conversely, human individuals often seek ad-
         ditional information from their peers prior to taking action, harnessing external
         knowledge to avoid unnecessary trial and error. Drawing inspiration from this
         behavior, we propose Asking Before Acting (ABA), a method that empowers the
         agent to proactively inquire with external sources for pertinent information using
         natural language during their interactions within the environment. In this way, the
         agent is able to enhance its efficiency and performance by circumventing poten-
         tially laborious steps and combating the difficulties associated with exploration
         in unfamiliar environments and vagueness of the instructions. We conduct ex-
         tensive experiments involving a spectrum of environments including text-based
         household everyday tasks, robot arm manipulation tasks, and real world open do-
         main image based embodied tasks. The experiments involve various models from
         Vicuna to GPT-4. The results demonstrate that, even with modest prompts modifi-
         cations, ABA exhibits substantial advantages on both performance and efficiency
         over baseline LLM agents. Further finetuning ABA with reformulated metadata
         (ABA-FT) faciliates learning the rationale for asking and allows for additional
         enhancements especially in tasks that baselines struggle to solve.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable abilities in lan-
guage comprehension, text generation, question answering, dialogue, reasoning, and can even ex-
hibit human-level performance on various benchmarks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023). Since LLMs have been trained on extensive and diverse text corpora,
they have captured a broad range of commonsense understanding about the world, enabling them to
adeptly handle a multitude of various and complex scenarios. Therefore, recently, researchers have
proposed to integrate LLMs in embodied decision-making (Huang et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2022; Ahn
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Singh et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Driess
et al., 2023; Carta et al., 2023), using LLMs either to do task planning or as autonomous agent.
LLM agents exhibit strong decision-making capabilities when presented with comprehensive infor-
mation, yet they may encounter difficulties when confronted with scenarios characterized by limited
or insufficient information, such as with underspecified instructions, or in unfamiliar environments.
In such cases, the agents may struggle to make informed decisions. To illustrate this, consider the
scenario depicted in Figure 1, where a robot is deployed in an office and tasked with packing items.
As shown in Figure 1 (c), act without asking may lead to suboptimal behaviors. The vagueness
present in the instruction leave the true reward function underspecified, and an arbitrary mapping
from instruction to actions might not yield desirable outcomes. Furthermore, when the robot lacks
specific prior knowledge like an object’s location, directly taking actions may result in a systematic
search strategy. Even though the robot may finally manages to locate the target object, this whole


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: ABA (as shown in (b)) allows the agent to seek clarification about the task as well as
efficiently gather necessary information. In contrast, acting without asking (as showin in (c)) may
lead to task misunderstanding or laborious exploration perid. Note (a) and (b) are key frames of
trajectories generated by ABA in experiments in Section 4.3.
process is conspicuously inefficient, let alone the possibility of suboptimal searching behavior which
may lead to failure.
In contrast, when confronted with such scenarios, we humans typically adopt a different approach.
When assigned with ambiguous tasks, it is more prudent to ask for clarification about the task before
taking actions, ensuring we have the tasks correctly understood. Besides, rather than resorting to
onerous trial and error, it is natural for us to actively query external information from our peers to
accelerate information gathering and guide decision making. As shown in Figure 1 (a) and (b), we
excerpt key frames and logs produced by our method (refer to Section 4.3 for details). Our policy
first seeks clarification about the task by inquiring about the human’s preferences. Then, instead of
searching every hole and corner, the agent opts to ask “Can you tell me where the notebook is?”
and directly proceeds to that location. The comparision builds us an intuition that, by posing a
few questions in natural language, the agent can enjoy an substantial enhancement in both policy
performance and efficiency.
Building upon this intuition, we focus on a novel setting where the agent can actively query for
additional information from external sources using natural language during their interactions with
environments. Though some existing works have explored scenarios involving human-in-the-loop
interactions to provide additional information, our setting is stands apart from these previous ones.
A majority of works (Nguyen & Daumé III, 2019; Nguyen et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2022b; Da Silva
et al., 2020) ask humans for oracle actions or action descriptions, Nguyen et al. (2022) ask for infor-
mation about current states and (sub-)goals. Liu et al. (2022) asks three-word-templated questions
to accelerate training, while Huang et al. (2022b) ask for scene, task, or preferences descriptions. In
contrast to existing works, our setting concentrates on designing a generic mechanism to gather in-
formation through natural language, which imposes fewer restrictions and aligns more closely with
human decision-making processes.
In this paper, we begin by introducing a novel theoretical framework termed Contextual MDP with
Human / External Information Sources in the Loop in Section 3.1, which integrates the informa-
tion querying into decision making process by incorporating human in the formulation. In Section
3.2, we propose Asking Before Acting (ABA), an efficient method that is able to accelerate infor-
mation gathering by actively querying in natural language while interacting with the environments.
ABA can learn to ask proper open-domain questions and effectively leverage the gained information
only with modest modifications on prompts and use pretrained (visual) language models out of the
box. To further improve the performance, we introduce ABA-FineTuning (ABA-FT). We propose
to reformulate the metadata associated with the question formulation as question-answering pro-
cess, which aids the model in understanding the rationale behind posing questions. Besides, we also
introduce a simple yet effective evluation method in Section 3.3.
To evaluate the capability of ABA and ABA-FT, we conduct extensive experiments in Section 4,
involving a spectrum of environments including text-based household everyday tasks, robot arm
manipulation tasks, and real world open domain image based embodied tasks. We also evaluate var-
ious models encompassing Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to test the scalbility of


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our method. The quantitative results demonstrate that, even with modest modifications on prompts,
ABA obtains consistent performance gains across almost all environments against baseline LLM
agents and classical imitation learning method. Further finetuning with a fraction of data enables
ABA-FT to achieve additional enhancements, especially in tasks that baselines struggle to solve. To
better understand the behavior and practical value of ABA, we conduct experiments on real world
open domains embodied tasks with image inputs in Section 4.3. The qualitative results provide ad-
ditional evidence that, when combined with a versatile controller, ABA is capable of formulating
open-domain questions grounded in the context of image observation to gather information. This
showcases the practical value of ABA and augurs a promising direction for future research.

2     P RELIMINARIES
To better formulate the information gathering procedure, we first introduce Contextual Markov De-
cision Processes (Contextual MDPs) (Hallak et al., 2015):
Definition 2.1 Contextual MDP is a tuple (S, A, C, M(c)). Here S and A stand for state space
and action space respectively. C is the context space. M is a function mapping context c ∈ C to a
specific T -horizon MDP M(c) = (S, A, p(·|s, a, c), r(s, a, c)).
Here, {M(c), ∀c ∈ C} represents a family of MDPs characterized by a shared state space S and
action space A, but with different transition function p(·|s, a, c) and reward function r(s, a, c) spec-
ified by c. The goal of the agent is to learn a policy π to maximize the accumulative rewards on the
target environment(s). Note that the context c varies across different environments, and oftentimes,
it remains unknown. Optionally, the agent will be additionally provided with a task instruction i,
which is usually a concise language description of the goal, providing extra information about the
context c. As shown in Defenition 2.1, when deployed to a new environment, understanding the
context c becomes a prerequisite for achieving high rewards since it indicating the transition and
reward functions. In light of this, one common approach is to gather information about the context
c through interactions with the environment by trial and error, i.e., infer the context from history
ĉ = fθ (i, s1 , a1 , r1 , · · · , st ) while trying to solve the task. However, efficiently gathering infor-
mation in various unknown environments with different contexts c can be challenging. Aside from
limited generalization capability Beck et al. (2023), existing methods often rely on dense rewards
and sufficiently small state space (Zintgraf et al., 2021), which may lead to catastrophic failure in
embodied decision-making where the environments often lack carefully crafted dense reward func-
tions and the state spaces are often large.
We argue that this is not, at least always, the case how humans deal with the task. Instead of
attempting to figure out c solely on our own, we typically seek clarification of tasks or assistance
from another human, often a more experienced senior, to obtain valuable information. This behavior
can significantly alleviate the exploration burden for c in many situations. The above insight urges
us to reconsider the process of embodied decision-making in unfamiliar evaluation environments:
What if the agent does not necessarily need to figure out everything on its own? While certain prior
research has studied scenarios involving human-in-the-loop interactions, our setting concentrates on
the development of a generic mechanism with fewer restrictions and better alignments with human
behavior (see Section 5 for a detailed survey) and we are the pioneers in addressing the challenge of
enabling information gathering for embodied decision-making with LLM agents.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we present our new problem formulation as well as the our algorithm.
3.1   C ONTEXTUAL MDP WITH H UMAN / E XTERNAL I NFORMATION S OURCE IN THE L OOP
To incorporate humans (or other external knowledge sources) in the loop of decision-making, we
opt to integrate the physical interactions with environment and language interactions with humans
as a unified interface:
Definition 3.1 Contextual MDP with Human / External information source in the loop based
on (S U , AU , C, H(c), M(c)). Here S U , AU are the augmented state space and action space:
S U = S ∪ Lans , AU = A ∪ Lask , where Lask and Lans include all possible questions and
answers in natural language. H(c) maps context c ∈ C to Hc , which is a model of human
(or other external information source) in context c that can map any questions to information.
M(c) = (S U , AU , Hc , pU (·|s, a, c, Hc ), r(s, a, c), γ)


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Like Contextual MDP, M(c) = (S U , AU , Hc , pU (·|s, a, c, Hc ), r(s, a, c), γ) has a transition func-
tion and a reward function parameterized by c. However, the state space S U and the action space AU
are augmented with answers and questions respectively, and the transition function pU (·|s, a, c, Hc )
can be factorized as:
                 pU (s′ |s, a, c, Hc ) = p(s′ |s, a, c) · 1a∈A + p(Hc (a) = s′ ) · 1a∈Lask          (1)
With the augmented action space, the agent can now query to gather information while interact-
ing with the environments. For instance, by simply asking “where is the kitchen?”, the agent can
omit tens of steps of exploration to find the kitchen. However, several challenges exist: First, when
deployed to unfamiliar environments, it is important for the agent to identify the key information
that is pertinent while filtering out the task-irrelevant ones. Sencondly, to better communicate with
humans, the agent should do reasoning to map between abstract natural language and specific object
in observation. This requires both grounded question proposing as well as grounded answer under-
standing. Furthermore, it is also desirable to ask only when necessary, i.e., when it cannot reason the
answers from historical information. To solve these challenges, we propose Asking Before Acting
(ABA), an effective method for the language agent to cleverly gather necessary information.
3.2     A LGORITHM
In this paper, we build our model based on pretrained (visual) language models, and we focus on the
setting where the task instruction i is provided . We define τt = concat(i, s1 , a1 , · · · , st ), which
is the concatenation of the instruction and the historical observations and actions. We describe our
methods in the following sections:
3.2.1    A SKING B EFORE ACTING
In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) can approximate a function approximator fˆ from
sequences of pairs (xi , f (xi ))i and allow to predictions fˆ(x′ ) on novel x′ . Recently, ICL draws a
lot of attention (Xie et al., 2021; Akyürek et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022) due to its superior efficiency
and the ability of generalization. Recent works on embodied planning (Huang et al., 2022a; Singh
et al., 2022a) propose use ICL to learn to output actions to interact with the environment given K
trajectories τ k = concat(ik , sk1 , ak1 , · · · , skT , akT ), where k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K} . However, directly
applying ICL may result in limited generalization and poor performance (Yao et al., 2022). Yao et al.
(2022); Ahn et al. (2022) propose to model the reasoning steps of actions via the Chain-of-Though
prompting (Wei et al., 2022) by explicitly expanding τ k to incorporate a “think” step.
Based on Yao et al. (2022); Ahn et al. (2022), we propose to learn the rationale for question asking
via ICL. Suppose there is a question at time t. Rather than directly mapping τt to the questions
at , we identify the corresponding context ct the question at is querying for (ct may correspond to
a partial of c). We term the identification procedure, i.e., why we posing such questions, as the
metadata of the questions. For instance, let at be a question asking “where is the notebook”. Instead
of directly learning to ask, we insert the metadata of at , which we denote as āt : “to finish the task,
we need to find the notebook. But I do not know its location, so I need to ask for it”. Since āt and
at are all manually labelled, it reveals the rationale for asking at of the labeller. By providing K
such trajectories, we learn through ICL to map from τt to human-like analysis of what context is
desirable yet unknown right now (if so), and from the analysis to human-like questions. To this end,
ABA aligns the agent with human asking habits. Denote τ̄ k as the augmented trajectories with āt
prepend before each question at , and Ã to be the augmented action space with Lask augment to
concatenation of [Lmeta , Lask ], the action is selcted by:
                                         |a|
                                         Y
                         ãt = arg max       πLLM (ei |τ̄ 1 , · · · , τ̄ K , τt , e1:i−1 )            (2)
                                   ã∈Ã   i=0
where ei is the i-th token of the action, and |a| refers to the number of tokens. Note āt is null when
at is not a question. We can derive final action at by dropping the potential āt in ãt if needed.

3.2.2    A SKING B EFORE ACTING WITH F INETUNING
In experiments, we find that ICL excels at scenarios when the the task time horizon is relatively short.
As the task horizon increases, due to the token limitations of (visual) language models, sometimes
we can only use 1 example which results in limited diversity and thus hampers the performance of
ICL. However, longer horizon usually corresponds to more complex policy which exacerbates the
need for samples. Therefore, a more proper treatment is needed especially when the horizon is long.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To this end, we propose ABA with finetuning (ABA-FT). We first describe how we collect two
datasets DQA and Dπ . We label N trajectories with expert policy where each trajectory consists
of input-output pairs for Ti timesteps as {(τ̄ti , āit , ait , nit )Tt=0
                                                                       i
                                                                          }N
                                                                           i=0 . To alleviate the distribution shift
problem (Ross et al., 2011), we intentionally corrupt the expert policy by randomly injecting noisy
actions with probability p and mark this as noise by setting nit = 1 in the dataset. Then, we can
reformulate these trajectories as two datasets.
For DQA , we convert the dataset to the form of question-answering for each āt . For instance,
when looking for a notebook, we provide the agent with τ̄t and ask “do you have ever seen the
notebook” and label the answer to “yes” nor “no” to indicate whether it is necessary to ask. We also
include the question “where have you seen the notebook” and its corresponding answer if previous
answer is yes. In this way, we hope the agent can learn to remember the key factors of inferring the
rationale for asking. As for the policy dataset Dπ , we do a modified version of imitation learning
by masking out all the corrupted actions, since we want the agent to learn to recover from mistakes
and we do not want it to learn to take wrong actions intentionally. For notation simplicity, we
denote DQA = {(xiQA , yQA  i
                                )}N              i
                                    i=0 , where xQA corresponds to the inputs as well as questions, and
                                      π

                                                                                                 j
  i
yQA   corresponds to the answer. We also denote Dπ = {(xiπ , yπi , ni )}N                 i
                                                                             i=0 where xπ = τt and
                                                                               π

         j    j
yπi = [āt , at ] for j ∈ {0, · · · , N }. To conclude, ABA-FT is trained to maximize the following
objectives:
                           NQA                                Nπ
                            X                                 X
                                             i
                  L=−             log πLLM (yQA |xiQA ) −           log πLLM (yπi |xiπ ) · 1ni =0               (3)
                            i=0                               i=0

3.3    H UMAN M ODEL
To minimize human involvement, during the evaluation phase, we propose a simple yet effective
method for open-domain human in the loop problems. We implement the model of human (or other
information sources) H via another language model which is instructed to respond to questions based
on the provided information. To incorporate prior knowledge about the environment, we extract
the information about the object placement from the simulator and transform it into a descriptive
paragraph. This paragraph is then fed to H. Whenever the agent poses a question, H is tasked
with providing an answer based on the paragraph. It’s worth noting that this design allows for the
straightforward replacement of the current language model with human or alternative information
sources for more appropriate answers. For more details, please refer to Appendix A.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we empirically evaluate ABA on a series of embodied decision-making tasks.
In Section 4.1, we evaluate our algorithm in three household embodied decision-making scenarios,
namely ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) and its variants, to demonstrate its capability to handle
high level embodied tasks. In Section 4.2, we extend our evaluation to control tasks to demonstrate
that ABA is able to build mappings between language questiosn and low level control tasks. Finally,
in Section 4.3, to further prove the effectiveness of ABA, we build 4 real world scenarios. We also
replace the human model by real humans to answer the questions and communicate with ABA. The
qualitative results showcase the practical value of ABA and augurs a promising direction for future
research.
4.1    T EXT- BASED H OUSEHOLD E VERYDAY TASK
ALFWorld ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) is an interactive text-based environment with
aligned embodied worlds, which contains six types of different everyday household tasks. As for
baselines, we select two representative baselines, BUTLER (Shridhar et al., 2021) and ReAct (Yao
et al., 2022). BUTLER (Shridhar et al., 2021) is an imitation learning based method without LLM.
It trains an independent model for each task, while each of the model uses a substantial dataset of
105 expert trajectories. For ReAct and ABA, we use K = 2 in-context examples. For more details,
please refer to Appendix B.
The results are presented in Table 1 and 2. The results of BUTLER are directly taken from Shridhar
et al. (2021) which reports the best performance across 8 different seeds. For ReAct and ABA, we
report the performance mean and standard deviation across 5 seeds for Vicuna-7B (Chiang et al.,


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Success rate on ALFWorld environments. ID and OOD refer to in distribution and out-of-
distribution evaluation set provided in Shridhar et al. (2020). V7B and G35 refers to Vicuna 7B and
GPT-3.5 API. Note that for BUTLER, we report the best success rates across 8 seeds to align with
the original paper, while for ReAct and ABA, we report mean success rates across 5 or 3 seeds.
                                Pick     Examine   Clean      Heat      Cool      Pick 2    All
           BUTLER        ID      61        39        44        81        60        29        40
           max of 8      OOD     46        22        39        74       100        24        37
           ReAct / V7B   ID     9±7       8±4       9±3       4±5       9±8       4±4      7±3
           mean of 5     OOD    3±3       6±3       5±3      10 ± 3     2±3       9±5      6±1
           ABA / V7B     ID    60 ± 6    52 ± 5    59 ± 6    46 ± 6    61 ± 3    61 ± 10   56 ± 3
           mean of 5     OOD   37 ± 5    53 ± 5    51 ± 2    52 ± 6    50 ± 15    41 ± 0   48 ± 2
           ReAct / G35   ID    62 ± 4    67 ± 1     67 ± 3   67 ± 2    55 ± 1    67 ± 1    64 ± 1
           mean of 3     OOD   67 ± 13   67 ± 2    75 ± 10   67 ± 7    54 ± 8    59 ± 0    65 ± 2
           ABA / G35     ID    86 ± 6    79 ± 7    79 ± 2     73 ± 4   81 ± 11   98 ± 2    84 ± 3
           mean of 3     OOD   83 ± 4    78 ± 6    92 ± 2    81 ± 14    85 ± 6   84 ± 7    85 ± 4
2023) and 3 seeds for GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022) API. The empirical results demonstrate that
ABA strongly outperforms other baselines, and also shows great efficiency in terms of parameters.
As shown in Tabel 1, with one unified model, ABA can suc-
                                                                 Table 2: Statistics on policy effi-
cessfully handle most scenarios. The mean performance of
                                                                 ciency in ALFWorld
ABA with GPT-3.5 is higher than the max performance of
BUTLER in 12 out of 14 scenarios, using only K = 2 in-                              ReAct       ABA
                                             5                     Length [Succ]  18.2 ± 9.7 11.5 ± 3.3
context examples and one model versus 10 expert trajecto-
ries and separate training according to BUTLER. ABA also            Length [All] 29.3 ± 17.1 16.9 ± 13.8
outperforms ReAct in all scenarios and better efficiency in          # Actions    13.1 ± 8.3  6.3 ± 2.6
terms of model parameters. When deployed with a relatively
smaller model such as Vicuna-7B, ABA achieves more than 40% performance gain compared to Re-
Act. This proves that our method can be efficiently deployed to scenarios with limited computational
resources. When the backbone is switched to GPT-3.5, both ReAct and ABA gain performance im-
provements, while ABA still outperforms ReAct by around 20% on average.
Besides the final performance, we also include statistics on policy efficiency in Table 2. We logged
the trajectories with GPT-3.5 backbone and report the averaged episode length of successful trails
and all trails. The episode length includes physical actions, thinking steps and asking steps. We also
report the number of physical actions taken to interact with the environment. It can be concluded
that, even with additional action type (i.e., asking), ABA still enjoys a shorter trajectory. What’s
more, ABA can finish the task by taking more than 50% less actions. This proves that ABA not only
have better final performance, but also enjoy better efficiency. We show example trajectories and
qualitative analysis in AppendixB. Since we use human models to reduce human involvement, we
also test the accuracy of the human model. For more details, refer to AppendixC.
To further assess the capabilities of ABA, we carefully design two variants of ALFWorld, namely
Ambiguous ALFWorld and Multiround ALFWorld. These modifications pose new challenges. For
Ambiguous ALFWorld, we adjust the task descriptions and reward functions to introduce ambigu-
ity, which deliberately left some aspects open-ended to necessitate the agent gathering additional
information. For Multiround ALFWorld, we assign a new task for the agent within the same room
once the previous task has completed, which allows us to test whether the agent can remember previ-
ously known information and avoid asking repeatedly. For more details about the two environments,
please refer to D. In this section, we compare ABA and ABA-FT with ReAct (Yao et al., 2022). For
ABA and ReAct, we utilize human-annotated examples, while for ABA-FT, we manually design an
expert policy to collect data. Additional details can be found in Appendix E.
The results are shown in Figure 2. Note that two environments correspond to different y-axis.
Though the two variants are more complex than original ALFWorld, we find that both ABA and
ABA-FT consistently exhibit superior performance, while ReAct fails to complete the task in most
scenarios. This again highlights the significance of actively questioning for necessary information,
and proves that taking consistent actions to gather necessary information in various complex envi-
ronments is challenging for current agent. For both of the environments, the ABA-FT outperforms
ABA, and the margin is significantly larger in Multiround ALFWorld. This observation aligns with
our analysis in Section 3.2.2 that ABA-FT may further improve performance especially when tra-
jectories are long. It is also worth noticing that, for ABA-FT, we only use 1500 and 500 trajectories
to finetune one model for all the tasks for each environment. When compared with classical Imi-
tation Learning method like BUTLER, this only accounts for 1.5% and 0.5% of one dataset (note


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                                                                                                         3.0
                     0.6


Ambiguous ALFWorld


                                                                                                                                                                                          Multiround ALFWorld
                                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         2.0
                     0.4
                     0.3                                                                                                                                                                 1.5

                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                 1.0

                     0.1                                                                                                                                                                 0.5

                     0.0                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                           Amb-Pick Amb-Examine Amb-Clean Amb-Heat Amb-Cool Amb-Pick 2   Amb-All       Mul-Pick Mul-Examine Mul-Clean   Mul-Heat   Mul-Cool       Mul-Pick 2   Mul-All
                                         ReAct ID            ReAct OOD              ABA ID                ABA OOD                ABA-FT ID               ABA-FT OOD
Figure 2: Performance on Ambiguous ALFWorld and Multiround ALFWorld. The prefixes of the
x-label Amb- and Mul- refer to Ambigous ALFWorld and multi-round ALFWorld, and two envi-
ronments correspond to different y-axis. The legend suffixes -ID and -OOD refer to performance
on in-distribution and out-of-distribution evaluation sets.
BUTLER needs to independently finetune for each task). This proves that even with ABA-FT, we
can effectively adapt to new scenarios at a relatively lower cost. Qualitative analysis can be found in
Appendix F and Appendix G. We provide example trajectories on Ambiguous ALFWorld and Mul-
tiround ALFWorld to demonstrate that, both ABA and ABA-FT are able to ask pertinent questions
to gather necessary information, while ReAct struggles to conduct consistent exploration. What’s
more, from Appendix G, we show that the agent is capable of recalling previously acquired infor-
mation and leveraging it in the following tasks.
4.2                        ROBOT A RM M ANIPULATION TASKS

                                                                                             Task 1                                      Task 2                                Task 3
                                                                                x=3           x=4              x=5          y=2           y=3           y=4               x = 4, y = 3
                                                                   ReAct           65              70            55            95            35               5                   30
                                                                    ABA           85               85            90          100            95            90                      90
Figure 3: Left: Visualization of an example task instance in Task 3. Right: Average success rates
across 20 trails on three manipulation tasks. Here, x and y refers to parameters in each task.
In this section, we further explore whether ABA is able to handle control tasks. Instead of text-based
observations and actions, we design the agent to operate on numerical level by directly outputs
coordinates of control commands. We consider it poses unique challenges since the asking and
answering are formulated in natural language, which is relatively abstract with respect to controlling.
Therefore, after proposing the questions, the agent needs to reason from answers to get the detailed
information to guide decision-making (e.g., from the answer “the second cube from the left”, the
agent should be able to reason which cube to move, and output corresponding numerical commands).
We design three different tasks with unique challenges (see Figure 3 for visualization of an exam-
ple task instance): (1) Task 1: the agent is instructed to move the red block into the green bowl.
However, there might be x such red blocks, but only one of them is the goal object and the task is
considered success when only the correct block is in the bowl. Furthermore, we restricted the human
model to answer in realtive position (e.g., “the second red block from the left”) when asked. There-
fore, the agent needs to reason to get the information according to the answer. (2) Task 2: the agent
is instructed to place some of the blocks on y corresponding bases. The bases refer to the fixed blue
blocks on the table, and each base block has a different corresponding color. The task is considered
success when all the bases have a corresponding color block placed on it. We make the agent to
only ask one piece of information at a time (e.g., it can only as for one color correspondance) and
restrict the total amount of questions to be y − 1. Therefore, the agent must inferred the last color
correspondance without asking to finish the task. (3) Task 3: the agent is instructed to finish the two
tasks above and query diverse information. For experiment details, please refer to Appendix J.
The results can be found in Figure 3. We compare our method with ReAct, and use GPT-4 API as
backbones for both of the method. For each trail, the placement of objects are randomly sampled.
We report the average success rate across 20 trails for each setting. The results demonstrate that ABA
outperforms ReAct in all the settings. In Task 1, we show ABA is able to reason the control actions
from the relative position language, while ReAct needs to try the block one-by-one (see Appendix
J for example trajectories). In Task 2 and Task 3, the performance gap is obvious especially when
y is relatively large. As y increases, ABA performances stay relatively stable and remain above
90%, while the baseline performance gradually deteriorates (from 95% when y = 2 to 5% when
y = 4). This proves that, under large exploration space, even current state-of-the-art LLMs like


                                                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Visualization of real-world open domain embodied tasks. We show four trajectories and
their corresponding instructions.

GPT-4 struggle to take consistently explore and gather the information. These findings provide
further evidence for the effectiveness of ABA.
4.3 R EAL -W ORLD O PEN D OMAIN E MBODIED TASKS WITH I MAGE I NPUTS
In this section, we carry out qualitative experiments to evaluate ABA in real-world scenarios with im-
age inputs and human involvement to examine its ability to handle open-domain embodied decision-
making tasks. We present the visualization in Figure 4. Real-world scenarios pose several chal-
lenges: First, real-world tasks and scenarios are more flexible and complex than a simulator, which
requires up to 19 steps and 7 question asking to solve in our case. The diversity and complexity force
us to test ABA in a zero-shot fashion since it is almost impossible to collect examples in advance.
Second, the involvement of humans allows open domain question asking compared with human
models, and it creates a more realistic scenario mimicking deploying ABA in practice.
However, the lack of a versatile embodied robot makes it hard to autonomously follow the plan
proposed by the algorithm. Therefore, we ablate the plan proposal and execution by asking a human
volunteer to strictly follow the proposed plan and interact with the world. In this way, we can solely
focus on testing whether ABA can propose grounded questions and feasible plans to finish the task.
We build four real-world scenarios including a laboratory, an office, a bedroom, and a dormitory
for evaluation. As for implementation, we use InstructBLIP (Liu et al., 2023) with Vicuna-13B
Chiang et al. (2023) as the caption model, and use GPT-4 API as our decision-making backbone.
We use K = 1 human labeled trajectory as in-context examples (Figure 4 (a)) and test ABA on three
different scenarios (Figure 4 (b-d)).
ABA successfully finished all three scenarios. We present the keyframes and instructions in Figure
4 and the full trajectories in Appendix K. The results qualitatively demonstrate that ABA is able to
propose open-domain grounded questions and feasible plans. To be more specific, here are some
excerpted questions. For (b), t = 1: “Besides the laptop, do you need to pack anything else?”
and for (d), t = 1: “What kind of activities do you prefer to relax? Do you want to read the
book, listen to music, or do something else?”, the agent is able to propose open-domain questions
by making suggestions while gathering the preference. For (c), t = 9: “Which pair of flip-flops
would you like me to take, the green and yellow ones or the blue and white ones?” the agent can ask
questions according to the image observations. Though the scenarios are rather limited, we believe
the trajectories can showcase the potential practical value of ABA and augurs a promising direction
for future research.
5     R ELATED W ORKS
5.1   L ANGUAGE AGENT
Natural language modeling pre-trained on large-scale unstructured text corpus has seen tremendous
success in a variety of applications, including downstream NLP tasks (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin
et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), logic reasoning (Zhao et al., 2023; Cobbe et al., 2021; Shen et al.,
2021), and human-AI coordination (Bubeck et al., 2023; Hu & Sadigh, 2023). The rich information
contained in LLMs as an implicit knowledge base also catalyzes the research on in-context learning
(Shin et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021) and prompting (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022) that prepend
instructions and a few examples to the input of LLMs. However, the time and memory complexity
for encoding the prompt is quadratic in the length of the interaction history, such as all the previ-


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ous trajectories in embodied decision-making, which can increase the burden of the self-attention
mechanism and even exceed the token limitations of LLMs. Despite the techniques introduced to
address this issue (Mu et al., 2023; Bulatov et al., 2023), the proposed ABA-IL is inspired by the
recent studies on fine-tuning LLMs (Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu & Sadigh, 2023; Lialin et al., 2023),
especially those that leverage decision-making signals to train language agents that satisfy certain
goals (Carta et al., 2023; Snell et al., 2022a;b). LLMs have also shown great potential for task plan-
ning (Huang et al., 2022b; Lin et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022;
Singh et al., 2022a; Carta et al., 2023). However, recent criticisms are made on the planning abili-
ties of LLMs (Bubeck et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2022; 2023). They show that LLMs can get
stuck in long-horizon decision-making tasks and the resulting search procedure often degrades to
exhaustive search over the large state and action spaces. While pure LLM planning remains a highly
challenging open problem, in this work, we investigate the capacity of LLM agents to actively gather
information with humans in the loop.
5.2   E MBODIED DECISION - MAKING WITH H UMAN - IN - THE -L OOP
Some existing works have also studied the scenarios with human-in-the-loop. They query humans
for extra information to guide decision-making. A majority of works (Nguyen & Daumé III, 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2022b; Da Silva et al., 2020) directly ask humans for oracle actions,
and most of the works focus on visual navigation (Gao et al., 2021; 2023). Unlike recent works in
visual navigation (Zhao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022), they either learn when to ask for oracle
actions (Da Silva et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2022b; Chi et al., 2020), query where the goal is in the
view Zhang et al. (2023), or learn to leverage language instructions (Nguyen & Daumé III, 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2019). Nguyen et al. (2022) asks for new descriptions of current states and (sub-)goals
in a POMDP. For asking and answering in language, Huang et al. (2022b) engages humans in active
scene description, allowing the LLM to consider human feedback of scene, task, and preferences
as inputs. Liu et al. (2022) asks 3-word-templated selected by an RL agent and calculate bi-gram
similarity. Yao et al. (2022) also mentions the engagement of humans. Still, it requires humans to
supervise and modify the model’s output in real-time , which is different from other HTIL settings.
Existing works include human-in-the-loop of decision-making either (1) directly asking for numeri-
cal vectors such as actions/states (Da Silva et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2022b; Nguyen et al., 2022), or
(2) inquiring humans to give exhaustive instruction and learn to convert them to actions (Nguyen &
Daumé III, 2019; Nguyen et al., 2019). Different from these works, we only put a minimal burden
on humans and ask them for natural language information rather than detailed action instructions.
Instead of considering human feedback as the scene (or task, preference) descriptor in the decision-
making pipeline (Huang et al., 2022b), we formulate the setting as Contextual MDP with Human /
External Information Sources in the Loop, which elaborates the effects of asking via context c and
allow the agent to query a broader range of information to gather information. Besides, unlike Liu
et al. (2022), we focus on zero-shot adaptation settings and propose more natural end-to-end meth-
ods to circumvent the needs of template and similarity designing. Concurrently, Ren et al. (2023)
proposes to use an explicit uncertainty module that helps decide when to trigger asking. However,
ABA allows for seamlessly integrate asking and acting in an end-to-end manner, and ABA-FT al-
lows better data scalbility.
6     C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we focus on the setting where the agent can actively query for additional pertinent
information from external sources using natural language while interacting in the environments. To
formalize this problem, we propose Contextual MDP with Human / External Information Sources
in the Loop. Then, we propose Asking Before Acting (ABA), a method that empowers the agent to
ask various questions to gather diverse information. We conduct extensive experiments involving a
spectrum of environments including text-based household everyday tasks, robot arm manipulation
tasks, and real world open domain image based embodied tasks on various models. The results
demonstrate that, ABA exhibits substantial advantages on both performance and efficiency over
baseline LLM agents. Further finetuning ABA with reformulated metadata (ABA-FT) promotes
learning the asking rationale and allows for additional enhancements. We believe our work serves
as one of the first papers in combining LLMs (VLMs) with human in the loop decision making,
and we hope ABA can be inspiring. However, in real world experiments, we currently use a perfect
controller. In the future, we believe it is important to further study how to combine our method with
real world robot to conduct more tasks.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Jacob Beck, Risto Vuorio, Evan Zheran Liu, Zheng Xiong, Luisa Zintgraf, Chelsea Finn, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. A survey of meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08028,
  2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, and Mikhail S Burtsev. Scaling transformer to 1m tokens and beyond
  with rmt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11062, 2023.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02662, 2023.
Jinyu Chen, Chen Gao, Erli Meng, Qiong Zhang, and Si Liu. Reinforced structured state-evolution
   for vision-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15450–15459, 2022.
Ta-Chung Chi, Minmin Shen, Mihail Eric, Seokhwan Kim, and Dilek Hakkani-tur. Just ask: An
  interactive learning framework for vision and language navigation. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 2459–2466, 2020.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Felipe Leno Da Silva, Pablo Hernandez-Leal, Bilal Kartal, and Matthew E Taylor. Uncertainty-
  aware action advising for deep reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI con-
  ference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 5792–5799, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Chen Gao, Jinyu Chen, Si Liu, Luting Wang, Qiong Zhang, and Qi Wu. Room-and-object aware
  knowledge reasoning for remote embodied referring expression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3064–3073, 2021.
Chen Gao, Xingyu Peng, Mi Yan, He Wang, Lirong Yang, Haibing Ren, Hongsheng Li, and Si Liu.
  Adaptive zone-aware hierarchical planner for vision-language navigation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14911–14920, 2023.
Google. Palm 2 technical report. 2023.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.
Hengyuan Hu and Dorsa Sadigh. Language instructed reinforcement learning for human-ai coordi-
  nation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07297, 2023.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-
  making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31199–31212, 2022.
Vladislav Lialin, Vijeta Deshpande, and Anna Rumshisky. Scaling down to scale up: A guide to
  parameter-efficient fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15647, 2023.
Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion:
  From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Iou-Jen Liu, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Alexander Schwing.
  Asking for knowledge (afk): Training rl agents to query external knowledge using language. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14073–14093. PMLR, 2022.
Jesse Mu, Xiang Lisa Li, and Noah Goodman. Learning to compress prompts with gist tokens.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08467, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Khanh Nguyen and Hal Daumé III. Help, anna! visual navigation with natural multimodal assistance
  via retrospective curiosity-encouraging imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01871,
  2019.
Khanh Nguyen, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Brockett, and Bill Dolan. Vision-based navigation with
  language-based assistance via imitation learning with indirect intervention. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12527–12537, 2019.
Khanh X Nguyen, Yonatan Bisk, and Hal Daumé Iii. A framework for learning to request rich and
  contextually useful information from humans. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 16553–16568. PMLR, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Allen Z Ren, Anushri Dixit, Alexandra Bodrova, Sumeet Singh, Stephen Tu, Noah Brown, Peng
  Xu, Leila Takayama, Fei Xia, Jake Varley, et al. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment
  for large language model planners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01928, 2023.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.
Jianhao Shen, Yichun Yin, Lin Li, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Ming Zhang, and Qun Liu. Generate &
   rank: A multi-task framework for math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03034, 2021.
Seongjin Shin, Sang-Woo Lee, Hwijeen Ahn, Sungdong Kim, HyoungSeok Kim, Boseop Kim,
  Kyunghyun Cho, Gichang Lee, Woomyoung Park, Jung-Woo Ha, et al. On the effect of
  pretraining corpora on in-context learning by a large-scale language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.13509, 2022.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11302, 2022a.
Kunal Pratap Singh, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Jonghyun Choi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and
  Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ask4help: Learning to leverage an expert for embodied tasks. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16221–16232, 2022b.
Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11871, 2022a.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Charlie Snell, Sherry Yang, Justin Fu, Yi Su, and Sergey Levine. Context-aware language modeling
  for goal-oriented dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10198, 2022b.
Karthik Valmeekam, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Large lan-
  guage models still can’t plan (a benchmark for llms on planning and reasoning about change).
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10498, 2022.
Karthik Valmeekam, Sarath Sreedharan, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, and Subbarao Kamb-
  hampati. On the planning abilities of large language models (a critical investigation with a pro-
  posed benchmark). arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06706, 2023.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, and Johnny Lee. Transporter
  networks: Rearranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. Conference on Robot Learning
  (CoRL), 2020.
Jenny Zhang, Samson Yu, Jiafei Duan, and Cheston Tan. Good time to ask: A learning framework
  for asking for help in embodied visual navigation. In 2023 20th International Conference on
  Ubiquitous Robots (UR), pp. 503–509. IEEE, 2023.
Hongyu Zhao, Kangrui Wang, Mo Yu, and Hongyuan Mei. Explicit planning helps language models
  in logical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15714, 2023.
Yusheng Zhao, Jinyu Chen, Chen Gao, Wenguan Wang, Lirong Yang, Haibing Ren, Huaxia Xia,
  and Si Liu. Target-driven structured transformer planner for vision-language navigation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 4194–4203, 2022.
Luisa M Zintgraf, Leo Feng, Cong Lu, Maximilian Igl, Kristian Hartikainen, Katja Hofmann, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Exploration in approximate hyper-state space for meta reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12991–13001. PMLR, 2021.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ESIGN AND D ETAILS ABOUT H UMAN M ODEL
In this section, we describe the design and details about the human model (or other information
sources) H. To minimize human involvement, during the evaluation phase, we implement H via an-
other language model which is instructed to respond to questions based on the provided information.
To incorporate prior knowledge about the current room, we extract the information about the object
placement from the simulator and transform it into a descriptive paragraph. This paragraph is then
fed to H. Specifically, we use Vicuna-7B (Chiang et al., 2023) to implement H. Using a pretrained
LLM as H allows for answering questions in free-form language based on the information provided,
which acts just like humans.
To better demonstrate, we provide an example for the ALFWorld experiment in Section 4.1. In
ALFWorld, the context c mainly refers to the initial mappings of the object placement. For different
rooms, the initial mappings are, therefore, different. We slightly abuse the notations about c here
since the agent may replace the objects. Under this mapping, we can directly get the ground truth
object locations from the simulator, which are unobservable to the agent. Then, we use a rule-based
conversion to convert that list to a string of ”A is in B”, where A refers to the object, while B refers
to the place containing the object.
Here is an example. After converting, we derive a descriptive paragraph like:

                bowl 2 is in diningtable 2. saltshaker 2 is in
         sidetable 1. spatula 1 is in countertop 1. pot
         1 is in stoveburner 4. spatula 2 is in drawer 1.
         dishsponge 3 is in diningtable 2. peppershaker 1 is
         in cabinet 2. tomato 4 is in sidetable 1. knife 1
         is in diningtable 3. cup 1 is in sidetable 1. bread
         2 is in diningtable 3. spatula 3 is in diningtable
         2. pan 1 is in cabinet 4. tomato 3 is in fridge
         1. potato 1 is in sinkbasin 1. peppershaker 3 is
         in diningtable 3. apple 1 is in fridge 1. saltshaker
         1 is in cabinet 4. fork 2 is in drawer 1. spoon 1 is
         in sidetable 1. egg 1 is in fridge 1. lettuce 1 is
         in sidetable 1. plate 1 is in diningtable 2.

Whenever the agent poses a question, H is tasked with providing an answer based on this paragraph.
For instance, the agent may learn to ask:

             Where can I find the dishsponge?

Then, in this example, the input to H will be (1) an instruction that tells the model to provide the
answers (in gray); (2) a descriptive paragraph (in black); (3) the question proposed by the agent (in
blue).

             Read the following paragraph and answer questions:
         bowl 2 is in diningtable 2. saltshaker 2 is in
         sidetable 1. spatula 1 is in countertop 1. pot
         1 is in stoveburner 4. spatula 2 is in drawer 1.
         dishsponge 3 is in diningtable 2. peppershaker 1 is
         in cabinet 2. tomato 4 is in sidetable 1. knife 1
         is in diningtable 3. cup 1 is in sidetable 1. bread
         2 is in diningtable 3. spatula 3 is in diningtable
         2. pan 1 is in cabinet 4. tomato 3 is in fridge
         1. potato 1 is in sinkbasin 1. peppershaker 3 is
         in diningtable 3. apple 1 is in fridge 1. saltshaker
         1 is in cabinet 4. fork 2 is in drawer 1. spoon 1 is
         in sidetable 1. egg 1 is in fridge 1. lettuce 1 is
         in sidetable 1. plate 1 is in diningtable 2.       The
         questions is: Where can I find the dishsponge?


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, the pretrained LLM (e.g., Vicuna-7B Chiang et al. (2023) in our case), H will provide the
answers since it can follow the instructions. In our case, the answer is:
            dishsponge 1 is in garbagecan 1, dishsponge 2 is in
         drawer 3, dishsponge 3 is in drawer 4.
To enhance the performance and improve the accuracy, we provide a few in-context examples and
use the prompting format as in Vicuna Chiang et al. (2023). Please refer to Appendix I for details.
It’s worth noting that, though we use a language model to simulate humans in our evaluation phase,
this design allows for the straightforward replacement of the current language model with human or
alternative information sources for more appropriate answers. The performance of our method will
be further improved if H can provide more accurate and meaningful answers.

B    D ETAILS , EXAMPLES AND Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS FOR ALFW ORLD
     E XPERIMENTS
For ALFWorld experiment, now we describe the benchmark and baselines in details.
ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) is an interactive text-based environment with aligned embodied
worlds, which contains six types of different everyday household tasks from ALFRED Shridhar
et al. (2020) encompassing activities such as picking and placing, examining in light, cleaning, etc.
In each episode, the agent is deployed in a new room and assigned specific tasks to accomplish. All
observations and actions are in natural language.
As for baselines, we select two representative baselines, BUTLER (Shridhar et al., 2021) and ReAct
(Yao et al., 2022). BUTLER (Shridhar et al., 2021) is an imitation learning based method without
LLM. It trains an independent model for each task, while each of the model uses a substantial dataset
of 105 expert trajectories. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) is an LLM-based method synergizing reasoning
and acting to take actions. It is worth noticing that, for ReAct(Yao et al., 2022) and ABA (we may
also use the term ABA interchangeably), we use the same general pretrained LLM across all tasks
with K = 2 in-context examples. As for the implementation, we try Vicuna-7B Chiang et al. (2023)
and GPT-3.5 OpenAI (2023) as backbones for both ReAct and our method, and we incorporate the
reasoning process when making decisions (Yao et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022). For a fair comparison,
we use the same scoring method to select actions for both our method and ReAct.
This section provides some examples and qualitative analysis for ALFWorld experiments in Section
4.1.
First, we provide an episode trajectory of our method (ABA-IC), which is randomly sampled from
the evaluation set:
            Obs 1:     You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a bed 1, a diningtable
         1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a
         garbagecan 1, a sidetable 2, and a sidetable 1. Your
         task is to: put a mug in sidetable.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a mug, then put it in sidetable. But where is
         the mug? Let me ask that person.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: ask: Where is the mug?
            Obs 3:        mug 1 is in diningtable 1, mug 3 is in
         diningtable 1, mug 2 is in diningtable 1.
            Act 3:   think: We can go to diningtable 1 and take
         the mug 1, then put it in sidetable.
            Obs 4: OK.
            Act 4: go to diningtable 1
            Obs 5: On the diningtable 1, you see a creditcard 3,
         a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a keychain 2, a mug 3,
         a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen 1, a pencil 3, and a
         pencil 1.

                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Act 5:   think: Now I find the mug 1. Next, I need
         to take it, then put it in sidetable.
            Obs 6: Ok.
            Act 6: take mug 1 from diningtable 1
            Obs 7: You pick up the mug 1 from the diningtable 1.
            Act 7: think: Now I take a mug 1. Next, I need to
         put it in sidetable.
            Obs 8: Ok.
            Act 8: go to sidetable 1
            Obs 9: On the sidetable 1, you see a keychain 1.
            Act 9: put mug 1 in/on sidetable 1
            Obs 10: You put the mug 1 in/on the sidetable 1.

It can be concluded that, for our method, the agent can identify the correct context that is related to
the task (i.e., the location of the mug) and then summarize the question and ask a pertinent question
(i.e., ”Where is the mug?”). After that, the agent can integrate the information in the answer (i.e.,
notice that mug 1 is in diningtable 1) and act according to that information (i.e., go to diningtable 1,
take the mug, and place it in the specific location).
For comparison, we provide the trajectory of the same episode of ReAct (Yao et al., 2022):

            Obs 1:      You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a bed 1, a diningtable
         1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a
         garbagecan 1, a sidetable 2, and a sidetable 1. Your
         task is to: put a mug in sidetable.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a mug, then put it in sidetable.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2:     think: First I need to find a mug. A mug
         is more likely to appear in drawer (1-4), sidetable
         (1-2). I can check one by one, starting with drawer
         1.
            Obs 3: OK.
            Act 3: go to drawer 1
            Obs 4: The drawer 1 is closed.
            Act 4: open drawer 1
            Obs 5: You open the drawer 1. The drawer 1 is open.
         In it, you see a cellphone 1.
            Act 5:   think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to take it.
            Obs 6: OK.
            Act 6: go to drawer 2
            Obs 7: The drawer 2 is closed.
            Act 7: open drawer 2
            Obs 8: You open the drawer 2. The drawer 2 is open.
         In it, you see a creditcard 1.
            Act 8:   think: Now I find a mug (2). Next, I need
         to take it.
            Obs 9: OK.
            Act 9: go to drawer 3
            Obs 10: On the drawer 3, you see a cellphone 2.
            Act 10: think: Now I find a mug (3). Next, I need
         to take it.
            Obs 11: OK.
            Act 11: go to drawer 4
            Obs 12: On the drawer 4, you see nothing.
            Act 12: think: Now I find a mug (4). Next, I need
         to take it.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Obs 13: OK.
           Act 13: go to sidetable 1
           Obs 14: On the sidetable 1, you see a keychain 1.
           Act 14: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it in sidetable 1.
           Obs 15: OK.
           Act 15: go to sidetable 2
           Obs 16: On the sidetable 2, you see a alarmclock 1,
        a cd 1, and a pencil 2.
           Act 16: think: Now I find a mug (2). Next, I need
        to put it in sidetable 2.
           Obs 17: OK.
           Act 17: go to drawer 1
           Obs 18:      The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a
        cellphone 1.
           Act 18: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it in drawer 1.
           Obs 19: OK.
           Act 19: go to drawer 2
           Obs 20:      The drawer 2 is open. In it, you see a
        creditcard 1.
           Act 20: think: Now I find a mug (2). Next, I need
        to put it in drawer 2.
           Obs 21: OK.
           Act 21: go to drawer 3
           Obs 22: On the drawer 3, you see a cellphone 2.
           Act 22: think: Now I find a mug (3). Next, I need
        to put it in drawer 3.
           Obs 23: OK.
           Act 23: go to drawer 4
           Obs 24: On the drawer 4, you see nothing.
           Act 24: think: Now I find a mug (4). Next, I need
        to put it in drawer 4.
           Obs 25: OK.
           Act 25: go to bed 1
           Obs 26: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 26: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it on bed 1.
           Obs 27: OK.
           Act 27: go to sidetable 1
           Obs 28: On the sidetable 1, you see a keychain 1.
           Act 28: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it on sidetable 1.
           Obs 29: OK.
           Act 29: go to sidetable 2
           Obs 30: On the sidetable 2, you see a alarmclock 1,
        a cd 1, and a pencil 2.
           Act 30: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it on sidetable 2.
           Obs 31: OK.
           Act 31: go to drawer 1
           Obs 32:      The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a
        cellphone 1.
           Act 32: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
        to put it in drawer 1.
           Obs 33: OK.
           Act 33: go to drawer 2

                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Obs 34:      The drawer 2 is open. In it, you see a
         creditcard 1.
            Act 34: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 2.
            Obs 35: OK.
            Act 35: go to drawer 3
            Obs 36: On the drawer 3, you see a cellphone 2.
            Act 36: think: Now I find a mug (2). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 3.
            Obs 37: OK.
            Act 37: go to drawer 4
            Obs 38: On the drawer 4, you see nothing.
            Act 38: think: Now I find a mug (3). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 4.
            Obs 39: OK.
            Act 39: go to bed 1
            Obs 40: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
         laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
            Act 40: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it on bed 1.
            Obs 41: OK.
            Act 41: go to sidetable 1
            Obs 42: On the sidetable 1, you see a keychain 1.
            Act 42: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it on sidetable 1.
            Obs 43: OK.
            Act 43: go to sidetable 2
            Obs 44: On the sidetable 2, you see a alarmclock 1,
         a cd 1, and a pencil 2.
            Act 44: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it on sidetable 2.
            Obs 45: OK.
            Act 45: go to drawer 1
            Obs 46:      The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a
         cellphone 1.
            Act 46: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 1.
            Obs 47: OK.
            Act 47: go to drawer 2
            Obs 48:      The drawer 2 is open. In it, you see a
         creditcard 1.
            Act 48: think: Now I find a mug (1). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 2.
            Obs 49: OK.
            Act 49: go to drawer 3
            Obs 50: On the drawer 3, you see a cellphone 2.
            Act 50: think: Now I find a mug (2). Next, I need
         to put it in drawer 3.
            Obs 51: OK.

It can be concluded that the agent failed to provide the right plan at first (i.e., Action 1,2), since none
of these locations has a mug. Moreover, even with the plans, it failed to yield coherent and correct
actions in later steps. For instance, in Action 5, 8, 10, 12, etc., the agent is constantly confused by
hallucination (it believes that ”Now I find a mug” while there wasn’t a mug actually). It also got
stuck in loops (it repeatedly visited drawer 1,2,3,4, sidetable 1,2, and bed 1). These together prevent
the agent from finishing the task.
To further understand the experiment results, we provide more examples for our method and ReAct.
For our method:

                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Obs 1:      You are in the middle of a room. Looking
        quickly around you, you see a bathtubbasin 1, a
        countertop 1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer
        2, a drawer 1, a dresser 1, a garbagecan 1,
        a handtowelholder 2, a handtowelholder 1, a
        shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a toilet 1, a
        toiletpaperhanger 1, and a towelholder 1. Your task
        is to: put some spraybottle on toilet.
           Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
        take a spraybottle, then put it on the toilet. But
        where is the spraybottle? Let me ask that person.
           Obs 2: OK.
           Act 2: ask: Where is the spraybottle?
           Obs 3: spraybottle 3 is in countertop 1, spraybottle
        4 is in dresser 1, spraybottle 2 is in shelf 1.
           Act 3:     think: We can go to countertop 1 and take
        the spraybottle 3, then put it on the toilet.
           Obs 4: OK.
           Act 4: go to countertop 1
           Obs 5:     On the countertop 1, you see a mirror 1, a
        soapbar 1, and a spraybottle 1.
           Act 5: think: Now I find the spraybottle 1. Next,
        I need to take it, then put it on the toilet.
           Obs 6: OK.
           Act 6: take spraybottle 1 from countertop 1
           Obs 7:         You pick up the spraybottle 1 from the
        countertop 1.
           Act 7: think: Now I take a spraybottle 1. Next, I
        need to put it on the toilet.
           Obs 8: OK.
           Act 8: go to toilet 1
           Obs 9:         On the toilet 1, you see a candle 1, a
        toiletpaper 2, and a toiletpaper 1.
           Act 9:     think: Now I put the spraybottle 1 on the
        toilet.
           Obs 10: OK.
           Act 10: put spraybottle 1 in/on toilet 1
           Obs 11:    You put the spraybottle 1 in/on the toilet
        1.

For ReAct:

           Obs 1:     You are in the middle of a room. Looking
        quickly around you, you see a bathtubbasin 1, a
        countertop 1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer
        2, a drawer 1, a dresser 1, a garbagecan 1,
        a handtowelholder 2, a handtowelholder 1, a
        shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a toilet 1, a
        toiletpaperhanger 1, and a towelholder 1. Your task
        is to: put some spraybottle on toilet.
           Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
        take a spraybottle, then put it on toilet.
           Obs 2: OK.
           Act 2:   think: First I need to find a spraybottle.
        A spraybottle is more likely to appear in drawer
        (1-4), dresser (1), sinkbasin (1), toilet (1), and
        towelholder (1). I can check one by one, starting
        with drawer 1.
           Obs 3: OK.


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Act 3: go to drawer 1
            Obs 4: The drawer 1 is closed.
            Act 4: open drawer 1
            Obs 5: You open the drawer 1. The drawer 1 is open.
         In it, you see nothing.
            Act 5:        think: Now I find a spraybottle (not).
         Next, I need to take it.
            Obs 6: OK.
            Act 6: go to drawer 2
            Obs 7: The drawer 2 is closed.
            Act 7: open drawer 2
            Obs 8: You open the drawer 2. The drawer 2 is open.
         In it, you see a candle 3.
            Act 8:        think: Now I find a spraybottle (not).
         Next, I need to take it.
            Obs 9: OK.
            Act 9: go to drawer 3
            Obs 10: The drawer 3 is closed.
            Act 10: open drawer 3
            Obs 11:       You open the drawer 3. The drawer 3 is
         open. In it, you see nothing.
            Act 11:       think: Now I find a spraybottle (not).
         Next, I need to take it.
            Obs 12: OK.
            Act 12: go to drawer 4
            Obs 13: The drawer 4 is closed.
            Act 13: open drawer 4
            Obs 14:       You open the drawer 4. The drawer 4 is
         open. In it, you see nothing.
            Act 14:       think: Now I find a spraybottle (not).
         Next, I need to take it.
            Obs 15: OK.
            Act 15: go to dresser 1
            Obs 16:       On the dresser 1, you see a candle 2, a
         soapbottle 3, a soapbottle 2, and a spraybottle 4.
            Act 16: take spraybottle 4 from dresser 1
            Obs 17:        You pick up the spraybottle 4 from the
         dresser 1.
            Act 17: think: Now I find a spraybottle (4). Next,
         I need to put it in/on toilet 1.
            Obs 18: OK.
            Act 18: go to toilet 1
            Obs 19:        On the toilet 1, you see a candle 1, a
         toiletpaper 2, and a toiletpaper 1.
            Act 19: put spraybottle 4 in/on toilet 1
            Obs 20:    You put the spraybottle 4 in/on the toilet
         1.

From the above examples, our method can ask proper questions and act accordingly. Though H
provides information with slight error (e.g., it mentions that spraybottle 3 is in countertop 1, but
only spraybottle 1 is in countertop 1), the agent is robust to such error and successfully adjust its
behavior after observing the objects on countertop 1 (i.e., action 5, 6, 7).
As for ReAct, it successfully visited four drawers and finally found the spraybottle at dresser 1.
However, first, it failed to list every possible container for the spraybottle (i.e., action 2, it omits
countertop, shelf, etc.). In the reasoning step, we observe an interesting pattern (i.e., in Action
5, 8, 11, 14): ”Now I find a spraybottle (not). Next, I need to take it”, which seems inconsistent
(though it does not affect the next step). Moreover, though the agent finally finds the spraybottle and


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


completes the task successfully, it is inefficient and slow to search every possible location: ReAct
takes 20 steps. In comparison, our method only takes 10 steps to finish the task.
Four above examples demonstrate that, first, it is challenging to learn a information-gathering policy
especially in unfamiliar environments, due to the complexity of the environment. Moreover, even
if the agent manage to follow this policy, the information-gathering phase can be inefficient, which
needs to exhaustively search every possible position. In contrast, our method succeeds in propos-
ing proper questions and then acting accordingly, which improve the success rate as well as the
efficiency. This proves our method’s efficacy.

C    ACCURACY OF H UMAN M ODEL
In this section, we test the accuracy of the human model. We test across 8 randomly sampled sce-
narios in ALFWorld with 5 questions each, and see whether the human model can answer correctly.
The correct rates as shown in the following table. The results of models implemented in Vicuna 7B:

                                                 Accuracy                          All
              Human Model       80    80    80    80    60   60    80    60    72.5 ± 9.7


D    D ETAILS ABOUT THE TWO ALFW ORLD VARIANTS : A MBIGUOUS
     ALFW ORLD AND M ULTIROUND ALFW ORLD
In Ambiguous ALFWorld, we manually adjusted the task descriptions and reward functions to in-
troduce ambiguity. Instead of providing precise task descriptions, we deliberately left some aspects
open-ended, thereby necessitating the agent to gather additional information for successful comple-
tion. For instance, in ALFWorld, the task ”put a mug on the shelf” is typically considered accom-
plished as long as any mug is placed on the shelf (there might be multiple mugs in the room). But
in this modified setting, the task is only deemed completed when a specific mug is put on the shelf.
To complete this task, one can either enumerate all possibilities accordingly until the correct one is
identified or directly ask for further clarification about the task.
To further test whether the agent is able to remember the previously known information and avoid
asking repeatedly, we introduce multiround ALFWorld. In previous experiments, the episode ends
as long as the current task is completed. subsequently, in the next episode, the environment will reset
to another room with a different layout. In Multiround ALFWorld, after one task is completed, we
randomly sample a new task for the agent to undertake within the same room for multiple rounds.
This adjustment enables the agent to familiarize itself with the object placement and provides an
opportunity to test its capability to remember and refrain from repetitive questioning. For instance,
suppose the agent has previously visited the sidetable to complete a previous task and happened to
see there is a mug, or the agent has previously ask about the location of the mug, when the agent is
tasked to bring a mug, it can directly go to the location without the need for further inquiries. In this
environment, instead of measuring the success rate as in previous experiments, we assign a reward
r = 1 upon the completion of each task and measure the total reward after T steps.

E    D ETAILS ABOUT THE DATA C OLLECTION
In this section, we provide details about how the data is collected and training as mentioned of two
ALFWorld variants described in Section 4.1.
As for in-context examples used in ABA-IC, we manually interact with the environment and try
to finish the tasks. We ask questions related to the tasks, and answer the questions ourselves by
checking the ground truth states in the simulator. Beside the questions, we also add reasoning steps
as in Yao et al. (2022) and select actions according to the information we have. Once completing
the task, we take down all the actions and observations and use them as in-context examples.
As for ABA-FT, we design a rule-based policy according to the PDDL planning trajectories provided
along with the environment. Specifically, we integrate the PDDL trajectories and the ground truth
states within the simulator to find out what we should do to finish the tasks. Then, we extract the
ground truth placements of the necessary objects from the simulator, and we write template-based


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


questions to query this information and provide corresponding answers as observations. We also
write chain-of-thought reasoning steps. As mentioned in Section 3.2.2, we manually inject noises
by randomly inserting noisy actions at probability p = 0.2. These noisy actions are randomly
sampled from the action space. The planning trajectories are also modified accordingly to correctly
finish the task. Finally, we organize these questions, reasoning, and interactive actions to get a list of
actions. When the actions belong to asking for reasoning, we use provided answers or simply ”OK.”
as observations. When the actions aim to interact with the environment, we use environmental
feedback as the observations. As for Ambiguous ALFWorld, we use K = 2 for ABA-IC and
collect 1500 trajectories for ABA-FT. As for Multiround ALFWorld, we use K = 1 for ABA-IC
and collect 500 trajectories for ABA-FT. As for training, we use LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) with r = 16
and a learning rate of 1e − 5. We train the model with 3000 steps for Ambiguous ALFWorld and
6000 steps for Multiround ALFWorld.

F    E XAMPLES AND Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS FOR ALFW ORLD WITH
     A MBIGUOUS TASKS
This section provides some examples and qualitative analysis for ALFWorld with Ambiguous Tasks
experiments in Section 4.1.
First, we provide an episode trajectory of ReAct, which is randomly sampled from the evaluation
set:

            Obs 1:      You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a cabinet 10, a cabinet
         9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a cabinet 6, a cabinet
         5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1,
         a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
         diningtable 2, a diningtable 1, a drawer 3, a drawer
         2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave
         1, a sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a
         stoveburner 2, a stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1. Your
         task is to: put a hot egg in diningtable.
            Act 1:     think: To finish the task, I need to find
         an egg, then heat it with microwave, then put it in/on
         diningtable.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: think: First I need to find an egg. An egg
         is more likely to appear in stoveburner 2, countertop
         1-3, diningtable 1, and cabinet 9-10. But I have
         checked stoveburner 2 and countertop 1-3. I can check
         the remaining places one by one, starting with cabinet
         9.
            Obs 3: OK.
            Act 3: go to cabinet 9
            Obs 4: The cabinet 9 is closed.
            Act 4: think: An egg does not appear in cabinet 9.
            Obs 5: OK.
            Act 5: go to cabinet 10
            Obs 6: The cabinet 10 is closed.
            Act 6: think: An egg does not appear in cabinet 10.
            Obs 7: OK.
            Act 7: go to diningtable 1
            Obs 8:     On the diningtable 1, you see a bread 2, a
         bread 1, a butterknife 2, a dishsponge 1, a fork 1, a
         potato 1, and a spatula 1.
            Act 8:       think: I have checked all the remaining
         places, and I have not found an egg. The task is not
         finished.
            Obs 9: OK.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 9: think: I have not found an egg. This is not
        a failure, just an unexpected result.
           Obs 10: OK.
           Act 10:   think: What should I do now? The task is
        not finished.
           Obs 11: OK.
           Act 11: think: I could try to find an egg again.
           Obs 12: OK.
           Act 12: go to stoveburner 1
           Obs 13: On the stoveburner 1, you see nothing.
           Act 13: go to countertop 1
           Obs 14:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 14: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 15: OK.
           Act 15: go to countertop 2
           Obs 16: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 16: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 17: OK.
           Act 17: go to countertop 1
           Obs 18:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 18: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 19: OK.
           Act 19: go to countertop 2
           Obs 20: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 20: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 21: OK.
           Act 21: go to countertop 1
           Obs 22:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 22: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 23: OK.
           Act 23: go to countertop 2
           Obs 24: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 24: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 25: OK.
           Act 25: go to countertop 1
           Obs 26:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 26: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 27: OK.
           Act 27: go to countertop 2
           Obs 28: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 28: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 29: OK.
           Act 29: go to countertop 1


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Obs 30:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 30: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 31: OK.
           Act 31: go to countertop 2
           Obs 32: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 32: think: It is possible that an egg is
           Obs 33: OK.
           Act 33: go to countertop 1
           Obs 34:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 34: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 35: OK.
           Act 35: go to countertop 2
           Obs 36: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 36: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one
           Obs 37: OK.
           Act 37: go to countertop 1
           Obs 38:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 38: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 39: OK.
           Act 39: go to countertop 2
           Obs 40: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 40: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 41: OK.
           Act 41: go to countertop 1
           Obs 42:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 42: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 43: OK.
           Act 43: go to countertop 2
           Obs 44: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 44: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 45: OK.
           Act 45: go to countertop 1
           Obs 46:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
        1, and a mug 1.
           Act 46: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 47: OK.
           Act 47: go to countertop 2
           Obs 48: On the countertop 2, you see a bowl 2, and a
        knife 1.
           Act 48: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
        under one of these objects.
           Obs 49: OK.
           Act 49: go to countertop 1


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Obs 50:   On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife
         1, and a mug 1.
            Act 50: think: It is possible that an egg is hidden
         under one of these objects.
            Obs 51: OK.

In this episode, the agent failed to find the egg. Initially, it failed to propose correct plans (i.e., action
2). It listed several locations where the eggs could be but not all (e.g., cabinet 1-8, diningtable 2,
fridge, etc). Then, it incorrectly thought it had checked some of these places, which suggested there
might be hallucinations. These two steps limit the searching range of the agent and prevent the agent
from finding the target object. In the following steps, it checked cabinet 9-10 (but without opening
the cabinets), stoveburner 1, countertop 1-2, and then got stuck by repeatedly visiting the countertop
1-2.
The episode of the same room setting for our method (ABA-FT) is:

            Obs 1:      You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a cabinet 10, a cabinet
         9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a cabinet 6, a cabinet
         5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1,
         a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a
         diningtable 2, a diningtable 1, a drawer 3, a drawer
         2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave
         1, a sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a
         stoveburner 2, a stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1. Your
         task is to: put a hot mug in cabinet.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a mug, then heat it with microwave, then put it
         in cabinet. But where is the mug? Let me ask that
         person.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: ask: Where is the mug?
            Obs 3:          mug 1 is in countertop 1, mug 2 is in
         microwave 1.
            Act 3:     think: There are multiple mug. I need to
         ask which mug should be taken.
            Obs 4: OK.
            Act 4: ask: Which mug do you prefer?
            Obs 5: I mean mug 1.
            Act 5: think: Now I understand the task. I can go
         to countertop 1 and take the mug 1, then heat it with
         microwave, then put it in cabinet.
            Obs 6: OK.
            Act 6: go to countertop 1
            Obs 7: On the countertop 1, you see a butterknife 1,
         and a mug 1.
            Act 7: take mug 1 from countertop 1
            Obs 8: You pick up the mug 1 from the countertop 1.
            Act 8:      think: Now I take a mug 1. Next, I need
         to go to microwave 1 and heat mug 1, then put it in
         cabinet.
            Obs 9: OK.
            Act 9: go to microwave 1
            Obs 10: The microwave 1 is closed.
            Act 10: heat mug 1 with microwave 1
            Obs 11: You heat the mug 1 using the microwave 1.
            Act 11:    think: Now I heat mug 1. Next, I need to
         put it in cabinet 1.
            Obs 12: OK.


                                                     25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Act 12: go to cabinet 1
             Obs 13: On the cabinet 1, you see nothing.
             Act 13: put mug 1 in/on cabinet 1

The above trajectory shows that, for our method (ABA-FT), the agent is able to identify the correct
object related to the task (i.e., mug) and propose a proper question (i.e., Action 2) to ask the position
of the mug, which is also shown in Appendix B. Moreover, when it realized that there were multiple
mugs in the room, it further asked for clarification about the task (i.e., Action 4) since in Ambiguous
ALFWorld, only the specified object is desirable. This demonstrates that it can ask diverse questions
to query various information. Finally, the agent is able to integrate the acquired information into the
following decision-making: it knows which object is needed, it can head for the correct mug, heat it,
and place it on the target location. In contrast to ReAct trajectory where the agent got stuck before
finding the mug, the effiency in qualitative examples further proves our method’s efficacy.
As a supplement, we show a typical failure case of our method:

            Obs 1:     You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a cabinet 27, a cabinet
         26, a cabinet 25, a cabinet 24, a cabinet 23, a
         cabinet 22, a cabinet 21, a cabinet 20, a cabinet 19,
         a cabinet 18, a cabinet 17, a cabinet 16, a cabinet
         15, a cabinet 14, a cabinet 13, a cabinet 12, a
         cabinet 11, a cabinet 10, a cabinet 9, a cabinet 8,
         a cabinet 7, a cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a
         cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a coffeemachine
         1, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a diningtable 1,
         a drawer 12, a drawer 11, a drawer 10, a drawer 9,
         a drawer 8, a drawer 7, a drawer 6, a drawer 5, a
         drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge
         1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a sinkbasin 1, a
         stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a
         stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1. Your task is to:
         clean some spatula and put it in drawer.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a spatula, then clean it with sinkbasin, then put
         it in drawer. But where is the spatula? Let me ask
         that person.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: ask: Where is the spatula?
            Obs 3: spatula 1 is in countertop 2, spatula 2 is in
         sinkbasin 1.
            Act 3:   think: There are multiple spatula. I need
         to ask which spatula should be taken.
            Obs 4: OK.
            Act 4: ask: Which spatula do you prefer?
            Obs 5: I mean, it depends on personal preference.
            Act 5: think: Now I understand the task better. I
         need to ask which spatula should be taken, then find
         and take it, then clean it with sinkbasin, then put it
         in drawer.
            Obs 6: OK.
            Act 6: ask: Which spatula do you prefer?
            Obs 7:       I am not sure. Could you remind me the
         information about each spatula?
            Act 7:   think: There are multiple spatula. Let me
         ask which spatula should be taken first.
            Obs 8: OK.
            Act 8: ask: Which spatula do you prefer?
            Obs 9:       I am not sure. Could you remind me the
         information about each spatula?


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Act 9: think: Now I understand the task better. I
         need to ask which spatula should be taken first, then
         find and take it, then clean it with sinkbasin, then
         put it in drawer.
            Obs 10: OK.
            Act 10: ask: Which spatula do you prefer?
            Obs 11:      I am not sure. Could you remind me the
         information about each spatula?
            Act 11: think: Now I understand the task better. I
         need to ask which spatula should be taken first, then
         find and take it, then clean it with sinkbasin, then
         put it in drawer.
            Obs 12: OK.
            Act 12: ask: Which spatula do you prefer?
            Obs 13: ...

Though H is instructed with the goal, namely which spatula it is looking for (see Appendix I for
more details), it fails to provide the correct answer (e.g., Obs 5,7,9,11). Therefore, we assume that
by providing more accurate H, the performance of our model will further enhance.
To provide deeper analysis on the proposed method, we append two excerptions from the failure
cases as show cases on the agent’s behavior:


Figure 5: A failure case where the agent wrongly assumes the eggs in the garbagecan cannot be used
to finish the task.


 Figure 6: A failure case where the agent wrongly assumes the safe needs a key or a code to open.

As shown in Figure 5, the agent wrongly assume that the eggs in the garbagecan cannot be used to
finish the task. Then, it proposes to buy some eggs and asks for the location of the store. As shown
in Figure 6, the agent wrongly assumes the safe needs to be opened with a key or a code. In fact,
it can directly open it. But it begins to looking for the key. These two trails thus failed since the
human model cannot correct the agent and it got stuck.
From the analysis above, we summarize two typical failures.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    D ETAILS ABOUT M ULTIROUND ALFW ORLD
In this section, we provide more details about data collection in Multiround ALFWorld. In Multi-
round ALFWorld, the main challenge is proposing the right questions. Specifically, the agent needs
to avoid repeatedly asking by identifying whether the information to query has already been col-
lected. This requires a specical treatment to the data and we explicitly implement this for clarity.
In our case, the agent first asks itself whether it has seen a specific object before asking a question.
Only when the answer is negative will it continue to ask. Otherwise, it may directly act based on its
memory.
For ABA-IC, we provide the agent with manually labeled trajectories, in which we manually identify
whether the agent needs to ask according to previous interactions, and only ask for more information
if needed. As for ABA-FT, we integrate this part in the reasoning step. To be specific, the reasoning
will include an explicit query about the target object. When the agent has never seen a particular
object, the reasoning step will be like:

             think: To solve the task, I need to find and take
         a mug, then put it in sidetable. First I need to find
         the locations of mug. ### query: mug > I have never
         seen mug before.

In the above example, the target object is the mug (i.e., ”query: mug”), and the agent believes it has
never seen the mug before (i.e., ”I have never seen mug before.”).
On the other hand, if the agent has ever seen the object (e.g., it has visited diningtable 1 and seen
pencil 1 and pencil 3 there), the query and the answer will be like:

                  think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a pencil, then put it in garbagecan. First I
         need to find the locations of pencil. ### query:
         pencil > pencil 3 is in diningtable 1, pencil 1 is
         in diningtable 1.

After querying itself about the target object, the will act according to the answers. If the agent
believes it has never seen the object, it will probably ask for more information. Otherwise, it will
directly make decisions depend on the information.
For ABA-FT, we make it clearer to split the reasoning into two steps. For the first step, we identify
the target object. For the second step, we identify whether and where we have seen this object
before. These two steps form two pairs of input/output training samples in the dataset. During
training, we use teacher forcing. We further augment the dataset by inserting several new queries
asking for another object which is randomly sampled from the object list in this environment.

H    E XAMPLES AND Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS FOR M ULTIROUND ALFW ORLD
In this section, we provide some examples and qualitative analysis for Multiround ALFWorld ex-
periments in Section 4.1.
We first provide an trajectory for ReAct, which is randomly sampled from the evaluation set:

            Obs 1:     You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a bed 1, a diningtable
         1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a
         garbagecan 1, a sidetable 2, and a sidetable 1. Your
         task is to: put a cellphone in diningtable.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a cellphone, then put it in diningtable.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: think: First I need to find a cellphone. A
         cellphone is more likely to appear in drawer 1-4. But
         there is no cellphone on drawer 1-2. I can check one
         by one, starting with drawer 3.


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Obs 3: OK.
             Act 3: go to drawer 3
             Obs 4: On the drawer 3, you see a cellphone 2.
             Act 4: take cellphone 2 from drawer 3
             Obs 5:   You pick up the cellphone 2 from the drawer
        3.
           Act 5:     think: Now I take a cellphone 2. Next, I
        need to put it in diningtable 1.
           Obs 6: OK.
           Act 6: go to diningtable 1
           Obs 7: On the diningtable 1, you see a creditcard 3,
        a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a keychain 2, a mug 3,
        a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen 1, a pencil 3, and a
        pencil 1.
           Act 7: put cellphone 2 in/on diningtable 1
           Obs 8: You put the cellphone 2 in/on the diningtable
        1. Your next task is to: put a pen in sidetable.
           Act 8: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
        take a pen and go to a sidetable.
           Obs 9: OK.
           Act 9: think: First I need to find a pen. A pen is
        more likely to appear in drawer 2, sidetable 2. But
        there is no pen on drawer 2, therefore I need to check
        sidetable 2.
           Obs 10: OK.
           Act 10: go to sidetable 2
           Obs 11: On the sidetable 2, you see a alarmclock 1,
        a cd 1, and a pencil 2.
           Act 11: think: Now I find a pencil 2. Next, I need
        to take it.
           Obs 12: OK.
           Act 12: take pencil 2 from sidetable 2
           Obs 13: You pick up the pencil 2 from the sidetable
        2.
           Act 13: think: Now I take a pencil 2.
           Obs 14: OK.
           Act 14: go to sidetable 1
           Obs 15: On the sidetable 1, you see a keychain 1.
           Act 15: put pencil 2 in/on sidetable 1
           Obs 16: You put the pencil 2 in/on the sidetable 1.
           Act 16: think: The task is complete.
           Obs 17: OK.
           Act 17: go to garbagecan 1
           Obs 18: On the garbagecan 1, you see nothing.
           Act 18:        think: I have finished to put all the
        objects in their places.
           Obs 19: OK.
           Act 19: go to bed 1
           Obs 20: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 20: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 21: OK.
           Act 21: go to diningtable 1
           Obs 22:     On the diningtable 1, you see a cellphone
        2, a creditcard 3, a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a
        keychain 2, a mug 3, a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen
        1, a pencil 3, and a pencil 1.
           Act 22: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 23: OK.


                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 23: go to bed 1
           Obs 24: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 24: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 25: OK.
           Act 25: go to garbagecan 1
           Obs 26: On the garbagecan 1, you see nothing.
           Act 26:        think: I have finished to put all the
        objects in their places.
           Obs 27: OK.
           Act 27: go to bed 1
           Obs 28: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 28: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 29: OK.
           Act 29: go to diningtable 1
           Obs 30:     On the diningtable 1, you see a cellphone
        2, a creditcard 3, a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a
        keychain 2, a mug 3, a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen
        1, a pencil 3, and a pencil 1.
           Act 30: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 31: OK.
           Act 31: go to bed 1
           Obs 32: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 32: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 33: OK.
           Act 33: go to garbagecan 1
           Obs 34: On the garbagecan 1, you see nothing.
           Act 34:        think: I have finished to put all the
        objects in their places.
           Obs 35: OK.
           Act 35: go to bed 1
           Obs 36: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 36: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 37: OK.
           Act 37: go to diningtable 1
           Obs 38:     On the diningtable 1, you see a cellphone
        2, a creditcard 3, a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a
        keychain 2, a mug 3, a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen
        1, a pencil 3, and a pencil 1.
           Act 38: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 39: OK.
           Act 39: go to bed 1
           Obs 40: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 40: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 41: OK.
           Act 41: go to garbagecan 1
           Obs 42: On the garbagecan 1, you see nothing.
           Act 42:        think: I have finished to put all the
        objects in their places.
           Obs 43: OK.
           Act 43: go to bed 1
           Obs 44: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
        laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
           Act 44: think: The room is clean.
           Obs 45: OK.

                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Act 45: go to diningtable 1
            Obs 46:     On the diningtable 1, you see a cellphone
         2, a creditcard 3, a creditcard 2, a keychain 3, a
         keychain 2, a mug 3, a mug 2, a mug 1, a pen 2, a pen
         1, a pencil 3, and a pencil 1.
            Act 46: think: The room is clean.
            Obs 47: OK.
            Act 47: go to bed 1
            Obs 48: On the bed 1, you see a book 2, a book 1, a
         laptop 2, a laptop 1, and a pillow 1.
            Act 48: think: The room is clean.
            Obs 49: OK.
            Act 49: go to garbagecan 1
            Obs 50: On the garbagecan 1, you see nothing.
            Act 50:        think: I have finished to put all the
         objects in their places.

We show that, in the above example, though the agent successfully located the cellphone after open-
ing drawer3, the initial planning (i.e., Action 2) seemed to contain hallucination (”There is no cell-
phone on drawer 1-2”), which makes the result a bit of a coincidence. After finishing the first task,
the agent again makes some erroneous claims that seem like hallucinations (i.e., Action 9, ”there is
no pen on drawer 2”). Then, the agent searched for the remaining locations and mistook the ”pencil”
for the ”pen” (i.e., Action 11), and got stuck after wrongly placing the pencil on the target location.
In comparison, we provide an episode trajectory of our method:

            Obs 1:     You are in the middle of a room. Looking
         quickly around you, you see a bathtubbasin 1, a
         countertop 1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer
         2, a drawer 1, a dresser 1, a garbagecan 1,
         a handtowelholder 2, a handtowelholder 1, a
         shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a toilet 1, a
         toiletpaperhanger 1, and a towelholder 1. Your task
         is to: put a toiletpaper in drawer.
            Act 1: think: To solve the task, I need to find and
         take a toiletpaper, then put it in drawer. First I
         need to find the locations of toiletpaper. ### query:
         toiletpaper > I have never seen toiletpaper before.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2:   think: I cannot locate toiletpaper, I need
         to ask the owner of this room.
            Obs 3: OK.
            Act 3: ask: Where is the toiletpaper?
            Obs 4:   toiletpaper 1 is in toilet 1, toiletpaper 2
         is in drawer 2.
            Act 4:     think: I can go to toilet 1 and take the
         toiletpaper, then put it in drawer.
            Obs 5: OK.
            Act 5: go to toilet 1
            Obs 6:        On the toilet 1, you see a candle 1, a
         toiletpaper 2, and a toiletpaper 1.
            Act 6: take toiletpaper 1 from toilet 1
            Obs 7: You pick up the toiletpaper 1 from the toilet
         1.
            Act 7: think: Now I take a toiletpaper 1. Next, I
         need to put it in drawer.
            Obs 8: OK.
            Act 8: go to drawer 1
            Obs 9: The drawer 1 is closed.


                                                  31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 9: open drawer 1
           Obs 10:       You open the drawer 1. The drawer 1 is
        open. In it, you see nothing.
           Act 10: put toiletpaper 1 in/on drawer 1
           Obs 11:   You put the toiletpaper 1 in/on the drawer
        1. Your next task is to: put some candle on shelf.
           Act 11:     think: To solve the task, I need to find
        and take a candle, then put it in shelf. First I need
        to find the locations of candle. ### query: candle >
        candle 1 is in toilet 1.
           Obs 12: OK.
           Act 12:     think: I can go to toilet 1 and take the
        candle, then put it in shelf.
           Obs 13: OK.
           Act 13: go to toilet 1
           Obs 14:   On the toilet 1, you see a candle 1, and a
        toiletpaper 2.
           Act 14: take candle 1 from toilet 1
           Obs 15: You pick up the candle 1 from the toilet 1.
           Act 15: think: Now I take a candle 1. Next, I need
        to put it in shelf.
           Obs 16: OK.
           Act 16: go to shelf 1
           Obs 17: On the shelf 1, you see a spraybottle 2.
           Act 17: put candle 1 in/on shelf 1
           Obs 18:          You put the candle 1 in/on the shelf
        1. Your next task is to: put some toiletpaper on
        garbagecan.
           Act 18:     think: To solve the task, I need to find
        and take a toiletpaper, then put it in garbagecan.
        First I need to find the locations of toiletpaper.
        ### query: toiletpaper > toiletpaper 1 is in drawer
        1, toiletpaper 2 is in drawer 2.
           Obs 19: OK.
           Act 19:     think: I can go to drawer 1 and take the
        toiletpaper, then put it in garbagecan.
           Obs 20: OK.
           Act 20: go to drawer 1
           Obs 21:       The drawer 1 is open. In it, you see a
        toiletpaper 1.
           Act 21: take toiletpaper 1 from drawer 1
           Obs 22:        You pick up the toiletpaper 1 from the
        drawer 1.
           Act 22: think: Now I take a toiletpaper 1. Next, I
        need to put it in garbagecan.
           Obs 23: OK.
           Act 23: go to garbagecan 1
           Obs 24:   On the garbagecan 1, you see a spraybottle
        3.
           Act 24: put toiletpaper 1 in/on garbagecan 1
           Obs 25:           You put the toiletpaper 1 in/on the
        garbagecan 1. Your next task is to: put some
        soapbottle on toilet.
           Act 25:     think: To solve the task, I need to find
        and take a soapbottle, then put it in toilet. First I
        need to find the locations of soapbottle. ### query:
        soapbottle > I have never seen soapbottle before.
           Obs 26: OK.


                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 26:   think: I cannot locate soapbottle, I need
        to ask the owner of this room.
           Obs 27: OK.
           Act 27: ask: Where is the soapbottle?
           Obs 28:   soapbottle 3 is in dresser 1, soapbottle 2
        is in dresser 1, soapbottle 1 is in shelf 2.
           Act 28:   think: I can go to dresser 1 and take the
        soapbottle, then put it in toilet.
           Obs 29: OK.
           Act 29: go to dresser 1
           Obs 30:       On the dresser 1, you see a candle 2, a
        soapbottle 3, a soapbottle 2, and a spraybottle 4.
           Act 30: take soapbottle 3 from dresser 1
           Obs 31:         You pick up the soapbottle 3 from the
        dresser 1.
           Act 31: think: Now I take a soapbottle 3. Next, I
        need to put it in toilet.
           Obs 32: OK.
           Act 32: go to toilet 1
           Obs 33: On the toilet 1, you see a toiletpaper 2.
           Act 33: put soapbottle 3 in/on toilet 1
           Obs 34: You put the soapbottle 3 in/on the toilet 1.
        Your next task is to: put some cloth on countertop.
           Act 34:     think: To solve the task, I need to find
        and take a cloth, then put it in countertop. First
        I need to find the locations of cloth. ### query:
        cloth > I have never seen cloth before.
           Obs 35: OK.
           Act 35: think: I cannot locate cloth, I need to ask
        the owner of this room.
           Obs 36: OK.
           Act 36: ask: Where is the cloth?
           Obs 37: cloth 1 is in bathtubbasin 1, cloth 2 is in
        dresser 1, cloth 3 is in drawer 2.
           Act 37: think: I can go to bathtubbasin 1 and take
        the cloth, then put it in countertop.
           Obs 38: OK.
           Act 38: go to bathtubbasin 1
           Obs 39: On the bathtubbasin 1, you see a cloth 3, a
        cloth 2, and a cloth 1.
           Act 39: take cloth 1 from bathtubbasin 1
           Obs 40:              You pick up the cloth 1 from the
        bathtubbasin 1.
           Act 40: think: Now I take a cloth 1. Next, I need
        to put it in countertop.
           Obs 41: OK.
           Act 41: go to countertop 1
           Obs 42:   On the countertop 1, you see a mirror 1, a
        soapbar 1, and a spraybottle 1.
           Act 42: put cloth 1 in/on countertop 1
           Obs 43: You put the cloth 1 in/on the countertop 1.
        Your next task is to: put some toiletpaper on shelf.
           Act 43:     think: To solve the task, I need to find
        and take a toiletpaper, then put it in shelf. First
        I need to find the locations of toiletpaper. ###
        query: toiletpaper > toiletpaper 1 is in garbagecan
        1, toiletpaper 2 is in drawer 2.
           Obs 44: OK.


                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Act 44:     think: I can go to garbagecan 1 and take
         the toiletpaper, then put it in shelf.
            Obs 45: OK.
            Act 45: go to garbagecan 1
            Obs 46:   On the garbagecan 1, you see a spraybottle
         3, and a toiletpaper 1.
            Act 46: take toiletpaper 1 from garbagecan 1
            Obs 47:        You pick up the toiletpaper 1 from the
         garbagecan 1.
            Act 47: think: Now I take a toiletpaper 1. Next, I
         need to put it in shelf.
            Obs 48: OK.
            Act 48: go to shelf 1
            Obs 49:     On the shelf 1, you see a candle 1, and a
         spraybottle 2.
            Act 49: put toiletpaper 1 in/on shelf 1

In the above example, the agent can correctly reason whether the information has been collected
before. For instance, at the beginning (i.e., Action 1), the agent knows that it has never seen the
toiletpaper before, so it decides to ask for more information (i.e., Action 2,3). Moreover, when the
information has been collected, it can omit the asking. Since it has seen the candle before (i.e., in
Obs 6), when it is tasked to replace the candle, it recalls this information (i.e., Action 11) and directly
acts upon it. Action 18, 25, 34, and 43 also successfully identify whether the required information
has been collected. The above examples demonstrate that our method can ask proper questions and
can avoid repeatedly asking for acquired information. With this ability, it is able to solve more
challenging tasks and can achieve better performance.

I   E XAMPLES PROVIDED FOR H UMAN M ODEL
In this section, we provide more details about the human model examples. As mentioned in Ap-
pendix A, we use Vicuna prompts (Chiang et al., 2023) to help organize these examples (i.e., ”A
chat between a curious human and an artificial intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful,
detailed, and polite answers to the human’s questions.”). For ALFWorld experiments in Section 4.1,
and the multiround ALFWorld experiments in Section ??, the in-context examples are:

               A chat between a curious human and an artificial
         intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful,
         detailed, and polite answers to the human’s questions.
         ### Human: Read the following paragraph and answer
         questions: dishsponge 2 is in drawer 3. spatula 1
         is in diningtable 1. spoon 1 is in diningtable 1.
         cup 1 is in fridge 1. dishsponge 1 is in garbagecan
         1. butterknife 2 is in diningtable 1. fork 3 is in
         diningtable 1. saltshaker 1 is in diningtable 1. pot
         2 is in stoveburner 3. lettuce 2 is in diningtable
         1. tomato 2 is in countertop 2. spatula 2 is in
         diningtable 1. bowl 3 is in cabinet 16. egg 2 is
         in countertop 1. bowl 2 is in cabinet 6. fork 1 is
         in countertop 2. pan 1 is in fridge 1. cup 2 is in
         cabinet 16. papertowelroll 1 is in diningtable 1.
         butterknife 3 is in drawer 5. soapbottle 1 is in
         cabinet 9. apple 1 is in diningtable 1. kettle 2
         is in cabinet 12. knife 1 is in countertop 2. cup
         3 is in microwave 1. butterknife 1 is in drawer 3.
         tomato 1 is in sinkbasin 1. peppershaker 1 is in
         countertop 2. potato 1 is in fridge 1. bread 2 is
         in diningtable 1. pot 1 is in cabinet 10. dishsponge
         3 is in drawer 4. soapbottle 2 is in countertop 1.
         kettle 1 is in countertop 2. houseplant 1 is in


                                                    34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        diningtable 1. pot 3 is in stoveburner 4. fork 2
        is in drawer 2. mug 1 is in sinkbasin 1. lettuce
        1 is in countertop 2. bread 1 is in countertop
        2. peppershaker 2 is in countertop 2. plate 1
        is in countertop 2. potato 2 is in sinkbasin 1.
        egg 1 is in countertop 2. bowl 1 is in cabinet 1.
        peppershaker 3 is in countertop 2. The questions
        is: Where can I find the dishsponge? ### Assistant:
        dishsponge 1 is in garbagecan 1, dishsponge 2 is in
        drawer 3, dishsponge 3 is in drawer 4. ### Human:
        Read the following paragraph and answer questions:
        plate 1 is in cabinet 4. soapbottle 1 is in shelf 2.
        spoon 2 is in diningtable 1. egg 1 is in sinkbasin 1.
        knife 3 is in diningtable 1. bowl 1 is in diningtable
        1. butterknife 2 is in countertop 1. spatula 3 is in
        diningtable 1. apple 2 is in countertop 1. tomato 1
        is in garbagecan 1. pan 1 is in stoveburner 2. mug
        2 is in cabinet 7. lettuce 1 is in fridge 1. tomato
        2 is in sinkbasin 1. bread 1 is in diningtable 1.
        ladle 2 is in countertop 1. fork 1 is in countertop
        1. saltshaker 1 is in countertop 1. soapbottle 3
        is in diningtable 1. spoon 1 is in diningtable 1.
        butterknife 1 is in countertop 1. spatula 2 is in
        diningtable 1. ladle 1 is in countertop 1. spatula
        1 is in diningtable 1. plate 3 is in diningtable
        1. peppershaker 3 is in cabinet 13. cup 1 is
        in diningtable 1. dishsponge 1 is in cabinet 7.
        winebottle 1 is in countertop 1. butterknife 3 is
        in countertop 1. peppershaker 1 is in countertop
        1. potato 2 is in fridge 1. peppershaker 2 is in
        diningtable 1. mug 3 is in diningtable 1. apple
        1 is in microwave 1. potato 1 is in garbagecan 1.
        mug 1 is in cabinet 5. pot 1 is in diningtable 1.
        saltshaker 3 is in diningtable 1. knife 1 is in
        countertop 1. pan 1 is in stoveburner 1. knife 2
        is in diningtable 1. saltshaker 2 is in countertop 1.
        soapbottle 2 is in diningtable 1. The questions is:
        Where is the soapbottle? ### Assistant: soapbottle
        1 is in shelf 2, soapbottle 2 is in diningtable
        1, soapbottle 3 is in diningtable 1. ### Human:
        Read the following paragraph and answer questions:
        remotecontrol 1 is in coffeetable 1. pillow 1 is
        in sofa 1. book 1 is in dresser 1. creditcard 2
        is in coffeetable 1. pen 1 is in coffeetable 1.
        pen 2 is in sidetable 2. statue 2 is in sidetable
        2. creditcard 1 is in dresser 1. cellphone 1 is in
        dresser 1. creditcard 3 is in armchair 1. pencil 1
        is in coffeetable 1. tissuebox 2 is in coffeetable
        1. tissuebox 3 is in sidetable 2. houseplant 1
        is in sidetable 1. remotecontrol 2 is in armchair
        1. book 2 is in coffeetable 1. tissuebox 1 is in
        coffeetable 1. laptop 1 is in sofa 1. television 1
        is in dresser 1. statue 1 is in coffeetable 1. box 1
        is in coffeetable 1. The questions is: Where can I
        find the pen? ### Assistant: pen 1 is in coffeetable
        1, pen 2 is in sidetable 2. ### Human: Read the
        following paragraph and answer questions: bowl 2
        is in diningtable 2. potato 2 is in sidetable 1.
        tomato 1 is in sidetable 1. bread 1 is in diningtable


                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        3. fork 1 is in sidetable 1. dishsponge 1 is in
        countertop 1. peppershaker 2 is in cabinet 2.
        lettuce 2 is in garbagecan 1. spoon 2 is in drawer
        1. bowl 1 is in cabinet 1. cup 2 is in diningtable
        2. soapbottle 2 is in diningtable 2. egg 2 is in
        sidetable 1. mug 2 is in sinkbasin 1. mug 1 is
        in coffeemachine 1. plate 2 is in diningtable 3.
        tomato 2 is in sinkbasin 1. spoon 3 is in drawer
        1. saltshaker 2 is in sidetable 1. spatula 1 is in
        countertop 1. pot 1 is in stoveburner 4. spatula
        2 is in drawer 1. dishsponge 3 is in diningtable
        2. peppershaker 1 is in cabinet 2. tomato 4 is
        in sidetable 1. knife 1 is in diningtable 3. cup
        1 is in sidetable 1. bread 2 is in diningtable 3.
        spatula 3 is in diningtable 2. pan 1 is in cabinet
        4. tomato 3 is in fridge 1. potato 1 is in sinkbasin
        1. peppershaker 3 is in diningtable 3. apple 1 is in
        fridge 1. saltshaker 1 is in cabinet 4. butterknife
        2 is in countertop 1. soapbottle 1 is in cabinet 4.
        fork 2 is in drawer 1. spoon 1 is in sidetable 1.
        egg 1 is in fridge 1. lettuce 1 is in sidetable 1.
        plate 1 is in diningtable 2. egg 3 is in diningtable
        2. dishsponge 2 is in diningtable 3. The questions
        is: Where is the apple? ### Assistant: apple 1 is
        in fridge 1.

For ambiguous AFLWorld experiments in Section 4.1, besides the basic information about the object
placements, we further assign the specific object the task is looking for. The in-context examples
are:

              A chat between a curious human and an artificial
        intelligence assistant. The assistant gives helpful,
        detailed, and polite answers to the human’s questions.
        ### Human: Read the following paragraph and answer
        questions: dishsponge 2 is in drawer 3. spatula 1
        is in diningtable 1. spoon 1 is in diningtable 1.
        cup 1 is in fridge 1. dishsponge 1 is in garbagecan
        1. saltshaker 1 is in diningtable 1. fork 1 is in
        countertop 2. pan 1 is in fridge 1. soapbottle 1 is
        in cabinet 9. apple 1 is in diningtable 1. knife 1
        is in countertop 2. butterknife 1 is in drawer 3.
        tomato 1 is in sinkbasin 1. peppershaker 1 is in
        countertop 2. potato 1 is in fridge 1. dishsponge
        3 is in drawer 4. kettle 1 is in countertop 2.
        houseplant 1 is in diningtable 1. mug 1 is in
        sinkbasin 1. You are looking for dishsponge 1.
        The questions is: Where can I find the dishsponge?
        ### Assistant: dishsponge 1 is in garbagecan 1,
        dishsponge 2 is in drawer 3, dishsponge 3 is in drawer
        4. ### Human: Another question is: Which dishsponge
        do you prefer? ### Assistant: I mean dishsponge 1.
        ### Human: Read the following paragraph and answer
        questions: plate 1 is in cabinet 4. soapbottle 1 is
        in shelf 2. tomato 1 is in garbagecan 1. pan 1 is
        in stoveburner 2. mug 2 is in cabinet 7. lettuce
        1 is in fridge 1. ladle 2 is in countertop 1.
        soapbottle 3 is in diningtable 1. butterknife 1 is in
        countertop 1. spatula 2 is in diningtable 1. ladle
        1 is in countertop 1. cup 1 is in diningtable 1.


                                               36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        winebottle 1 is in countertop 1. peppershaker 1 is in
        countertop 1. potato 2 is in fridge 1. peppershaker
        2 is in diningtable 1. mug 3 is in diningtable 1.
        apple 1 is in microwave 1. mug 1 is in cabinet 5.
        saltshaker 2 is in countertop 1. soapbottle 2 is
        in diningtable 1. You are looking for soapbottle 1,
        soapbottle 2. The questions is: Where can I find
        the soapbottle? ### Assistant: soapbottle 1 is in
        shelf 2, soapbottle 2 is in diningtable 1, soapbottle
        3 is in diningtable 1. ### Human: Another question
        is: Which soapbottle do you prefer? ### Assistant:
        I mean soapbottle 1 and soapbottle 2. ### Human:
        Read the following paragraph and answer questions:
        remotecontrol 1 is in coffeetable 1. pillow 1 is
        in sofa 1. book 1 is in dresser 1. creditcard 2
        is in coffeetable 1. pen 1 is in coffeetable 1.
        pen 2 is in sidetable 2. statue 2 is in sidetable
        2. creditcard 1 is in dresser 1. cellphone 1 is in
        dresser 1. creditcard 3 is in armchair 1. pencil 1
        is in coffeetable 1. tissuebox 2 is in coffeetable
        1. tissuebox 3 is in sidetable 2. houseplant 1
        is in sidetable 1. remotecontrol 2 is in armchair
        1. book 2 is in coffeetable 1. tissuebox 1 is in
        coffeetable 1. laptop 1 is in sofa 1. television 1
        is in dresser 1. statue 1 is in coffeetable 1. box
        1 is in coffeetable 1. You are looking for pen 2.
        The questions is: Where can I find the pen? ###
        Assistant: pen 1 is in coffeetable 1, pen 2 is in
        sidetable 2. ### Human: Another question is: Which
        pen do you prefer? ### Assistant: I mean pen 2.
        ### Human: Read the following paragraph and answer
        questions: bowl 2 is in diningtable 2. saltshaker
        2 is in sidetable 1. spatula 1 is in countertop 1.
        pot 1 is in stoveburner 4. spatula 2 is in drawer 1.
        dishsponge 3 is in diningtable 2. peppershaker 1 is
        in cabinet 2. tomato 4 is in sidetable 1. knife 1
        is in diningtable 3. cup 1 is in sidetable 1. bread
        2 is in diningtable 3. spatula 3 is in diningtable
        2. pan 1 is in cabinet 4. tomato 3 is in fridge
        1. potato 1 is in sinkbasin 1. peppershaker 3 is
        in diningtable 3. apple 1 is in fridge 1. saltshaker
        1 is in cabinet 4. fork 2 is in drawer 1. spoon 1
        is in sidetable 1. egg 1 is in fridge 1. lettuce
        1 is in sidetable 1. plate 1 is in diningtable 2.
        You are looking for spatula 1. The questions is:
        Where is the spatula? ### Assistant: spatula 1 is
        in countertop 1, spatula 2 is in drawer 1. ### Human:
        Another question is: Which spatula do you prefer?
        ### Assistant I mean spatula 1.

J   D ETAILS , E XAMPLES AND Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS FOR ROBOT A RM
    M ANIPULATION TASKS
We build our environment based on Ravens (Zeng et al., 2020) and using a Universal Robot UR5e
with a suction gripper. As for observation, we use image with a hand designed captioning module.
Currently the module can access the simulator information and label the object type and its ground
truth coordinates. As discussed in Huang et al. (2023), this module can be implemented through
the depth image and a combination of object detection model, a object segmentation model, and a
video tracker. But we temporally leave this module hand-designed since it is not the key point of


                                               37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our work. Similar to Zeng et al. (2020); Shridhar et al. (2022), we use the pick-and-place primitive
action, which is parameterized by coordinates of the object to pick and the coordinates to place.
Below we provide an example trajectory of the ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) algorithm, which fails to
reach the target object:

            Init                 targ block ((0.5531250000000001,
         0.34687500000000004, 0.02), (0.0, -0.0,
         0.7562194010878065, -0.6543181316595157))
            Obs 1:     A green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). A brown
         bowl is in (0.57, 0.1). A yellow bowl is in (0.62,
         -0.26). A red block is in (0.6, -0.43). A blue bowl
         is in (0.46, -0.35). A red block is in (0.47, 0.22).
         A red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A blue bowl is in
         (0.33, 0.32). A red block is in (0.65, -0.45). A red
         block is in (0.32, -0.17). A red block is in (0.55,
         0.35). A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04). A purple bowl
         is in (0.58, 0.23). You task is: Move the red block
         into the green bowl.
            Act 1: think: Let me try to move a red block in the
         green bowl.
            Obs 2: OK.
            Act 2: move to(0.47, 0.22, 0.49, -0.06)
            Obs 3:         A red block is in (0.55, 0.35). A red
         block is in (0.5, -0.06). A yellow bowl is in (0.62,
         -0.26). A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04). A blue bowl
         is in (0.46, -0.35). A red block is in (0.32, -0.17).
         A brown bowl is in (0.57, 0.1). A red block is in
         (0.6, -0.43). A purple bowl is in (0.58, 0.23). A
         red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A green bowl is in
         (0.49, -0.06). A red block is in (0.65, -0.45). A
         blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32).     Act 3:   think: After
         the move, the red block is in (0.5, -0.06), and the
         green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). The red block is in
         the green bowl, but the task has not finished yet. So
         I might have placed the wrong block. Let me first
         remove this red block and try to put another one in
         the bowl.
            Obs 4: OK.
            Act 4: move to(0.5, -0.06, 0.1, 0.0)
            Obs 5:   A red block is in (0.6, -0.43). A red bowl
         is in (0.67, -0.04). A red block is in (0.38, -0.29).
         A red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A brown bowl is in
         (0.57, 0.1). A purple bowl is in (0.58, 0.23). A
         yellow bowl is in (0.62, -0.26). A red block is in
         (0.65, -0.45). A green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06).
         A red block is in (0.35, -0.2). A blue bowl is in
         (0.46, -0.35). A red block is in (0.55, 0.35). A
         blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32).
            Act 5: move to(0.6, -0.43, 0.49, -0.06)
            Obs 6:      A yellow bowl is in (0.62, -0.26). A red
         block is in (0.48, -0.21). A red block is in (0.55,
         0.35). A brown bowl is in (0.57, 0.1). A red block
         is in (0.69, -0.46). A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04).
         A red block is in (0.35, -0.2). A green bowl is in
         (0.49, -0.06). A blue bowl is in (0.46, -0.35). A
         red block is in (0.5, -0.06). A red block is in
         (0.39, -0.29). A blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32). A
         purple bowl is in (0.58, 0.23). Act 6: think: After


                                                38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        the move, the red block is in (0.5, -0.06), and the
        green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). The red block is in
        the green bowl, but the task has not finished yet. So
        I might have placed the wrong block. Let me first
        remove this red block and try to put another one in
        the bowl.
           Obs 7: OK.
           Act 7: move to(0.5, -0.06, 0.2, 0.0)
           Obs 8: A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04). A red block
        is in (0.62, -0.23). A blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32).
        A green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). A yellow bowl is
        in (0.65, -0.23). A purple bowl is in (0.58, 0.23).
        A red block is in (0.35, -0.2). A brown bowl is in
        (0.57, 0.1). A red block is in (0.55, 0.35). A red
        block is in (0.69, -0.46). A red block is in (0.48,
        -0.21). A red block is in (0.39, -0.29). A blue bowl
        is in (0.46, -0.35).
           Act 8: move to(0.48, -0.21, 0.49, -0.06)
           Obs 9:     A blue bowl is in (0.46, -0.35). A yellow
        bowl is in (0.65, -0.23). A purple bowl is in (0.58,
        0.23). A red block is in (0.69, -0.46). A red block
        is in (0.35, -0.2). A red block is in (0.39, -0.29).
        A green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). A blue bowl is
        in (0.33, 0.32). A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04).
        A brown bowl is in (0.57, 0.1). A red block is in
        (0.18, -0.04). A red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A
        red block is in (0.55, 0.35).
           Act 9:   think: After the move, the red block is in
        (0.48, -0.21), and the green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06).
        I made a mistake in placing the red block. Let me
        remove it and try again.
           Obs 10: OK.
           Act 10: move to(0.48, -0.21, 0.3, 0.0)
           Obs 11:        A red bowl is in (0.67, -0.04). A red
        block is in (0.39, -0.29). A purple bowl is in (0.58,
        0.23). A blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32). A red block
        is in (0.55, 0.35). A brown bowl is in (0.57, 0.1).
        A yellow bowl is in (0.65, -0.23). A red block is
        in (0.35, -0.2). A red block is in (0.69, -0.46). A
        green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). A red block is in
        (0.18, -0.04). A red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A
        blue bowl is in (0.46, -0.35).
           Act 11: move to(0.39, -0.29, 0.49, -0.06)
           Obs 12:       A red block is in (0.39, -0.29). A red
        block is in (0.69, -0.46). A red bowl is in (0.67,
        -0.04). A blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32). A purple
        bowl is in (0.58, 0.23). A yellow bowl is in (0.65,
        -0.23). A green bowl is in (0.49, -0.06). A red
        block is in (0.18, -0.04). A brown bowl is in (0.57,
        0.1). A red block is in (0.35, -0.2). A red block is
        in (0.55, 0.35). A red block is in (0.48, -0.21). A
        blue bowl is in (0.46, -0.35).
           Act 12: think: I made a mistake in placing the red
        block again. Let me remove it and try another red
        block.
           Obs 13: OK.
           Act 13: move to(0.39, -0.29, 0.4, 0.0)
           Obs 14:    A red block is in (0.39, -0.29). A yellow
        bowl is in (0.65, -0.23). A red bowl is in (0.67,


                                             39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        -0.04). A blue bowl is in (0.33, 0.32). A purple
        bowl is in (0.58, 0.23). A red block is in (0.35,
        -0.2). A red block is in (0.18, -0.04). A red block
        is in (0.69, -0.46). A blue bowl is in (0.46, -0.35).
        A brown bowl is in (0.57, 0.1). A green bowl is in
        (0.49, -0.06). A red block is in (0.55, 0.35). A red
        block is in (0.48, -0.21).
           Act 14: move to(0.35, -0.2, 0.49, -0.06)
           Obs 15: No function call detected.
Besides, a successful example of ABA is provided below:

           Init     targ block ((0.703125, 0.22812500000000002,
        0.02), (0.0, 0.0, 0.8304996576879589,
        0.557019136637318))
           Obs 1:     A red block is in (0.67, -0.29). A orange
        bowl is in (0.44, -0.12). A blue bowl is in (0.56,
        -0.28). A gray bowl is in (0.6, -0.12). A red block
        is in (0.7, 0.23). A red block is in (0.68, 0.34).
        A red block is in (0.29, 0.39). A red block is in
        (0.51, 0.25). A green bowl is in (0.65, 0.03). A
        brown bowl is in (0.4, 0.22). A purple bowl is in
        (0.39, -0.3). A yellow bowl is in (0.41, 0.07). A
        pink bowl is in (0.52, 0.38). You task is: Move the
        red block into the green bowl.
           Act 1: think: I find four red blocks in the scene.
        Let me ask which red block should I move.
           Obs 2: OK.
           Act 2: ask: Which red block should I move?
           Obs 3: The second red block from the left.
           Act 3:     think: The second dimension refers to the
        horizontal axis, and the smaller the value is, the
        closer to the left. I can sort the second dimensions
        of the four red blocks: -0.29 < 0.23 < 0.25 < 0.34.
        Therefore, the second one from the left is 0.23 and
        its coordinate is (0.7, 0.23). I can move it to the
        green bowl.
           Obs 4: OK.
           Act 4: move to(0.7, 0.23, 0.65, 0.03)
           Obs 5: A gray bowl is in (0.6, -0.12). A pink bowl
        is in (0.52, 0.38). A red block is in (0.68, 0.34).
        A orange bowl is in (0.44, -0.12). A purple bowl is
        in (0.39, -0.3). A green bowl is in (0.65, 0.03).
        A brown bowl is in (0.4, 0.22). A red block is in
        (0.51, 0.25). A red block is in (0.66, 0.03). A
        yellow bowl is in (0.41, 0.07). A red block is in
        (0.29, 0.39). A blue bowl is in (0.56, -0.28). A red
        block is in (0.67, -0.29).

Below is the example trajectory of ReAct in task 2:
           Init [(’is’, ’yellow’, 0), (’is’, ’blue’, 1), (’is’,
        ’orange’, 2)]    Obs 1:       The # 1 base is in (0.37,
        -0.26). The # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3
        base is in (0.45, -0.31). A orange block is in (0.69,
        0.28). A yellow block is in (0.61, 0.13). A blue
        block is in (0.31, 0.34). A yellow block is in (0.71,
        0.37). A blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue block
        is in (0.34, 0.15). You task is: Place the blocks on
        the corresponding bases.


                                                40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 2:       think: There are three bases and three
        kinds of blocks. We need to put different colors on
        different blocks. Let me try to move an orange block
        on the # 1 base, a yellow block on the # 2 base, and a
        blue block on the # 3 base first.
           Obs 3:  OK.
           Act 4:  move to(0.69, 0.28, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 7:   The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The # 2
        base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.45, -0.31). A blue
        block is in (0.34, 0.15). A yellow block is in (0.71,
        0.37). A orange block is in (0.37, -0.26). A blue
        block is in (0.67, 0.19). A yellow block is in (0.41,
        -0.28).
           Act 8:        think: Now the orange block is on # 1
        base, the yellow block is on # 2 base, and the blue
        block is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished
        yet. So I might have placed the blocks in a wrong
        order. We need to put different colors on different
        blocks, so let me move a blue block on the # 1 base, a
        yellow block on the # 2 base, and an orange block on
        the # 3 base. But first, I need to remove the blocks
        from the bases.
           Obs 9:  OK.
           Act 10:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.31, 0.34)
           Obs 13:       The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in
        (0.45, -0.31). A blue block is in (0.34, 0.15). A
        blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue block is in
        (0.31, 0.34). A yellow block is in (0.71, 0.37). A
        orange block is in (0.7, 0.37). A yellow block is in
        (0.67, 0.19).
           Act 14:  think: Now I can try to move a blue block
        on the # 1 base, a yellow block on the # 2 base, and
        an orange block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 15:  OK.
           Act 16:  move to(0.34, 0.15, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 19:     The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A yellow block is in (0.45, -0.31). A orange
        block is in (0.41, -0.28). A blue block is in (0.31,
        0.34). A yellow block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue
        block is in (0.37, -0.26). A blue block is in (0.67,
        0.19).
           Act 20:  think: Now the blue block is on # 1 base,
        the orange block is on # 2 base, and the yellow block
        is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished yet. So
        I might have placed the blocks in a wrong order. We
        need to put different colors on different blocks, so
        let me move a yellow block on the # 1 base, an orange
        block on the # 2 base, and a blue block on the # 3
        base. But first, I need to remove the blocks from the
        bases.
           Obs 21:  OK.
           Act 22:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.71, 0.37)
           Obs 25:       The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in
        (0.45, -0.31). A orange block is in (0.71, 0.37).
        A yellow block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue block is


                                             41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        in (0.31, 0.34). A blue block is in (0.34, 0.15). A
        blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A yellow block is in
        (0.71, 0.37).
           Act 26:      think: Now I can try to move a yellow
        block on the # 1 base, an orange block on the # 2
        base, and a blue block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 27:  OK.
           Act 28:  move to(0.67, 0.19, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 31:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A yellow block is in (0.37, -0.25). A yellow
        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A orange
        block is in (0.41, -0.28). A blue block is in (0.34,
        0.15).
           Act 32:      think: Now the yellow block is on # 1
        base, the orange block is on # 2 base, and the blue
        block is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished
        yet. So I might have placed the blocks in a wrong
        order. We need to put different colors on different
        blocks, so let me move a blue block on the # 1 base, a
        yellow block on the # 2 base, and an orange block on
        the # 3 base. But first, I need to remove the blocks
        from the bases.
           Obs 33:  OK.
           Act 34:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.31, 0.34)
           Obs 37:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.34, 0.15). A orange
        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A yellow block is in (0.67,
        0.19). A blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A yellow
        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in (0.31,
        0.34).
           Act 38:  think: Now I can try to move a blue block
        on the # 1 base, a yellow block on the # 2 base, and
        an orange block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 39:  OK.
           Act 40:  move to(0.34, 0.15, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 43:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A yellow block is in (0.41, -0.28). A blue
        block is in (0.67, 0.19). A yellow block is in (0.71,
        0.37). A orange block is in (0.45, -0.31). A blue
        block is in (0.37, -0.26). A blue block is in (0.31,
        0.34).
           Act 44:  think: Now the blue block is on # 1 base,
        the yellow block is on # 2 base, and the orange block
        is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished yet. So
        I might have placed the blocks in a wrong order. We
        need to put different colors on different blocks, so
        let me move an orange block on the # 1 base, a blue
        block on the # 2 base, and a yellow block on the # 3
        base. But first, I need to remove the blocks from the
        bases.
           Obs 45:  OK.
           Act 46:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.71, 0.37)
           Obs 49:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A orange


                                             42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A yellow block is in (0.71,
        0.37). A yellow block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue
        block is in (0.34, 0.15). A blue block is in (0.31,
        0.34).
           Act 50:      think: Now I can try to move an orange
        block on the # 1 base, a blue block on the # 2 base,
        and a yellow block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 51:  OK.
           Act 52:  move to(0.71, 0.37, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 55:       The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in
        (0.45, -0.31). A yellow block is in (0.41, -0.28).
        A blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A orange block is
        in (0.37, -0.25). A blue block is in (0.67, 0.19). A
        blue block is in (0.45, -0.31). A yellow block is in
        (0.71, 0.37).
           Act 56:       think: Now the orange block is on # 1
        base, the yellow block is on # 2 base, and the blue
        block is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished
        yet. So I might have placed the blocks in a wrong
        order. We need to put different colors on different
        blocks, so let me move a yellow block on the # 1 base,
        a blue block on the # 2 base, and an orange block on
        the # 3 base. But first, I need to remove the blocks
        from the bases.
           Obs 57:  OK.
           Act 58:  move to(0.41, -0.28, 0.71, 0.37)
           Obs 61:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A yellow
        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in (0.67,
        0.19). A yellow block is in (0.71, 0.37). A orange
        block is in (0.67, 0.19). A blue block is in (0.34,
        0.15).
           Act 62:       think: Now I can try to move a yellow
        block on the # 1 base, a blue block on the # 2 base,
        and an orange block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 63:  OK.
           Act 64:  move to(0.71, 0.37, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 67:    The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The #
        2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in (0.45,
        -0.31). A blue block is in (0.45, -0.31). A yellow
        block is in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in (0.31,
        0.34). A yellow block is in (0.37, -0.25). A orange
        block is in (0.41, -0.28). A blue block is in (0.71,
        0.2).
           Act 68:       think: Now the yellow block is on # 1
        base, the orange block is on # 2 base, and the blue
        block is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished
        yet. So I might have placed the blocks in a wrong
        order. We need to put different colors on different
        blocks, so let me move a blue block on the # 1 base,
        an orange block on the # 2 base, and a yellow block on
        the # 3 base. But first, I need to remove the blocks
        from the bases.
           Obs 69:  OK.
           Act 70:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.31, 0.34)
           Obs 73:       The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in


                                             43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (0.45, -0.31). A blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A
        orange block is in (0.71, 0.37). A yellow block is
        in (0.74, 0.05). A blue block is in (0.69, 0.2). A
        yellow block is in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in
        (0.31, 0.34).
           Act 74:  think: Now I can try to move a blue block
        on the # 1 base, an orange block on the # 2 base, and
        a yellow block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 75:  OK.
           Act 76:  move to(0.31, 0.34, 0.37, -0.26)
           Obs 79:      The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in
        (0.45, -0.31). A yellow block is in (0.71, 0.37).
        A blue block is in (0.45, -0.31). A blue block is
        in (0.31, 0.34). A blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A
        orange block is in (0.41, -0.28). A yellow block is
        in (0.18, -0.13).
           Act 80:  think: Now the blue block is on # 1 base,
        the orange block is on # 2 base, and the yellow block
        is on # 3 base, but the task has not finished yet. So
        I might have placed the blocks in a wrong order. We
        need to put different colors on different blocks, so
        let me move a yellow block on the # 1 base, a blue
        block on the # 2 base, and an orange block on the # 3
        base. But first, I need to remove the blocks from the
        bases.
           Obs 81:  OK.
           Act 82:  move to(0.45, -0.31, 0.74, 0.05)
           Obs 85:      The # 1 base is in (0.37, -0.26). The
        # 2 base is in (0.41, -0.28). The # 3 base is in
        (0.45, -0.31). A blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A
        orange block is in (0.71, 0.37). A yellow block is
        in (0.71, 0.37). A blue block is in (0.74, 0.05). A
        blue block is in (0.31, 0.34). A yellow block is in
        (0.18, -0.13).
           Act 86:      think: Now I can try to move a yellow
        block on the # 1 base, a blue block on the # 2 base,
        and an orange block on the # 3 base.
           Obs 87:  OK.

A successful example for ABA in task 2 is:

           Obs 1:    The # 1 base is in (0.28, 0.21). The # 2
        base is in (0.33, 0.22). The # 3 base is in (0.38,
        0.23). The # 4 base is in (0.43, 0.23). A purple
        block is in (0.35, 0.06). A blue block is in (0.46,
        -0.06). A orange block is in (0.55, -0.15). A purple
        block is in (0.43, -0.13). A green block is in (0.7,
        0.3). A blue block is in (0.67, -0.01). You task is:
        Place the blocks on the corresponding bases.
           Act 2:        think: There are four bases and four
        kinds of blocks. We need to put different colors on
        different bases. Let me ask which color should be put
        in the # 1 base.
           Obs 3:  OK.
           Act 4:   ask: Which color should be put on the # 1
        base?
           Obs 5:   You should put the purple block on the # 1
        base.


                                             44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Act 6:  move to(0.35, 0.06, 0.28, 0.21)
           Obs 7:    The # 1 base is in (0.28, 0.21). The # 2
        base is in (0.33, 0.22). The # 3 base is in (0.38,
        0.23). The # 4 base is in (0.43, 0.23). A blue block
        is in (0.67, -0.01). A orange block is in (0.55,
        -0.15). A purple block is in (0.28, 0.21). A purple
        block is in (0.42, -0.13). A green block is in (0.7,
        0.3). A blue block is in (0.46, -0.06).
           Act 8:   think: Now there is a purple block on the
        # 1 base. Let me ask which color should be put on the
        # 2 base.
           Obs 9:  OK.
           Act 10:  ask: Which color should be put on the # 2
        base?
           Obs 11:  You should put the orange block on the # 2
        base.
           Act 12:  move to(0.55, -0.15, 0.33, 0.22)
           Obs 13:   The # 1 base is in (0.28, 0.21). The # 2
        base is in (0.33, 0.22). The # 3 base is in (0.38,
        0.23). The # 4 base is in (0.43, 0.23). A green
        block is in (0.7, 0.3). A orange block is in (0.33,
        0.22). A blue block is in (0.46, -0.06). A purple
        block is in (0.42, -0.13). A blue block is in (0.67,
        -0.01). A purple block is in (0.28, 0.21).
           Act 14:  think: Now there is a purple block on the
        # 1 base and an orange block on the # 2 base. Let me
        ask which color should be put on the # 3 base.
           Obs 15:  OK.
           Act 16:  ask: Which color should be put on the # 3
        base?
           Obs 17:     You should put the blue block on the # 3
        base.
           Act 18:     think: Now I have put a purple block on
        the # 1 base, an orange block on the # 2 base, and I
        know that I should put a blue block on the # 3 base.
        Since we need to put different colors on different
        bases, I should put a green block on the # 4 base.
        So, I should put a blue block on the # 3 base, and put
        a green block on the # 4 base.
           Obs 19:  OK.
           Act 20:  move to(0.46, -0.06, 0.38, 0.23)
           Obs 22:      The # 1 base is in (0.28, 0.21). The #
        2 base is in (0.33, 0.22). The # 3 base is in (0.38,
        0.23). The # 4 base is in (0.43, 0.23). A blue block
        is in (0.67, -0.01). A purple block is in (0.42,
        -0.13). A green block is in (0.43, 0.23). A blue
        block is in (0.38, 0.23). A orange block is in (0.33,
        0.22). A purple block is in (0.28, 0.21).

K    T RAJECTORIES OF THE R EAL W ORLD O PEN D OMAIN E MBODIED TASKS
     E NVIRONMENTS
Below is the prompt we use, this correspond to Figure 4 (a):

           Instruction and Observation 1:   I have just arrived
        at the lab. Can you help me to prepare for today’s
        work? Observation: a desk with a computer monitor,
        keyboard and mouse Think 2:    To prepare for the work,
        first, let’s get the computer ready. Let me make sure


                                                45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        whether the human needs to work with a computer or
        laptop.
           Observation 3: OK.
           Ask 4:        Do you need to work with a computer or
        laptop? I can help you prepare with that.
           Observation 5:       Yes. Please help me connect the
        laptop to the monitor.
           Think 6:    Now I need to find a laptop, connect the
        laptop to the monitor, and turn on the laptop. But I
        don’t know where is the laptop. Let me ask for that.
           Observation 7: OK.
           Ask 8: Can you tell me where is the laptop?
           Observation 9: The laptop is on the desk next to me.
           Think 10:    Now I need to go to the next desk, take
        the laptop and bring it back. Then, I need to connect
        the laptop to the monitor.
           Observation 11: OK.
           Action 12: go to the next desk.
           Observation 13: a laptop computer sitting on a desk
        in an office
           Action 14: take the laptop.
           Observation 15: you take the laptop.
           Action 16: go to the original desk.
           Observation 17:       a desk with a computer monitor,
        keyboard and mouse
           Action 18: connect the laptop to the monitor.
           Observation 19:         you connect the laptop to the
        monitor.
           Think 20:   Now I have finished the task. Then, let
        me ask what else does the human need.
           Observation 21: OK.
           Ask 22:       Do you need anything else? I can help
        prepare them for you.
           Observation 23:       No, I only need to work with my
        laptop.
           Think 24:   To help create a better mood for work, I
        can bring the human something to drink. Let me ask
        for the preference.
           Observation 25: OK.
           Ask 26: Do you want something to drink? If so, what
        do you want?
           Observation 27:     Yes, please bring me something to
        drink from the pantry.
           Think 28: Let me go to the pantry, take something to
        drink, and bring it back.
           Observation 29: OK.
           Action 30: go to the pantry.
           Observation 31:       a kitchen sink with two bottles
        sitting on it
           Action 32: take a bottle of water.
           Observation 33: you take a bottle of water.
           Action 34: go back to the original table.
           Observation 35:       a desk with a computer monitor,
        laptop, keyboard and mouse
           Action 36: put the bottle on the table
           Observation 37: you put the bottle on the table
           Think 38: Now I have helped prepare the computer and
        the drinks. Let me ask whether there is anything else
        I can do.


                                             46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Observation 39: OK.
             Ask 40: Is there anything else I can do for you?
             Observation 41: No. Thank you.

Here is the evaluation result corresponds to Figure 4 (b):

            Instruction and Observation 1:         I’m leaving my
         office. Can you help me pack up? Observation: The
         image features a laptop computer placed on a desk
         or table, along with a water bottle and a backpack.
         There are two chairs in the scene, one closer to the
         laptop and the other further away. A mouse can also
         be seen on the desk, possibly connected to the laptop.
         Think 2: To help pack up, first, let’s disconnect the
         laptop and put it inside the backpack. Let me make
         sure whether the human needs to pack anything else.
            Observation 3: OK.
            Ask 4:       Besides the laptop, do you need to pack
         anything else?
            Observation 5: Yes, I need my mouse, and please fill
         up the water bottle.
            Think 6:   Now I need to disconnect the laptop, pack
         the laptop, mouse, and fill up the water bottle.
            Observation 7: OK.
            Action 8: disconnect the laptop.
            Observation 9: You disconnect the laptop.
            Action 10: put the laptop and mouse in the backpack.
            Observation 11: You put the laptop and mouse in the
         backpack.
            Think 12:    Now I need to fill up the water bottle.
         Let me go to the kitchen sink and fill it up.
            Observation 13: OK.
            Action 14:     go to the kitchen sink with the water
         bottle.
            Observation 15:        The image features a stainless
         steel kitchen sink placed in the center of the room,
         surrounded by various appliances and utensils.
            Action 16: fill up the water bottle.
            Observation 17: You fill up the water bottle.
            Action 18: go back to the original table.
            Observation 19: You go back to the original table.
            Action 20:         put the filled water bottle in the
         backpack.
            Observation 21:    You put the filled water bottle in
         the backpack.
            Think 22:      Now I have helped pack up the laptop,
         mouse, and filled water bottle. Let me ask whether
         there is anything else I can do.
            Observation 23: OK.
            Ask 24:      Is there anything else I can do for you
         before you leave?
            Observation 25:          Oh, yes, please bring me the
         notebook.
            Think 26: Now I need to find the notebook and bring
         it. Let me ask where the notebook is.
            Observation 27: OK.
            Ask 28: Can you tell me where the notebook is?
            Observation 29: It’s on the sofa.


                                                 47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Think 30:     Now I need to go to the sofa, take the
         notebook, and bring it back.
            Observation 31: OK.
            Action 32: go to the sofa.
            Observation 33:      The image features a couch with
         a black book placed on top of one of the cushions.
         The couch is situated in the middle of the room
         and appears to be the focal point of the space. In
         addition to the couch, there are several yellow and
         gray ottomans scattered around the room. Some of
         these ottomans are located near the couch, while
         others are positioned closer to the edges of the room.
         Overall, the furniture creates a cozy and inviting
         atmosphere in the space.
            Action 34: take the notebook.
            Observation 35: You take the notebook.
            Action 36: go back to the original table.
            Observation 37: You go back to the original table.
            Action 38: hand the notebook to the human.
            Observation 39: Thank you.
            Ask 40: Is there anything else I can do for you?
            Observation 41: No. Thank you.

Here is the evaluation result corresponds to Figure 4 (c):

            Instruction and Observation 1:     Instruction: I’m
         going swimming. Can you help me prepare my things
         and put them in this bag? Observation: The image
         features a white mesh bag placed on a wooden floor.
         The bag has blue straps attached to it, which can be
         seen draped over the side of the bag. Think 2: To help
         the human prepare their things for swimming, I might
         need to gather items like a swimsuit, towel, goggles,
         swimming cap, and flip-flops. Let me ask for their
         preferences.
            Observation 3: OK.
            Ask 4:     What items do you need for swimming? For
         example, a swimsuit, towel, goggles, swimming cap, and
         flip-flops?
            Observation 5: Yes, these are enough.
            Think 6: Now I need to find these items and put them
         in the bag. Let me ask where I can find these items.
            Observation 7: OK.
            Ask 8:          Can you tell me where I can find the
         swimsuit, towel, goggles, swimming cap, and
         flip-flops?
            Observation 9:      The towel is already in the bag.
         The swimsuit and goggles are on the counter. The
         flip-flops are next to the door.
            Think 10:   First, I’ll go to the counter to get the
         swimsuit and goggles. Then, I’ll go to the door to
         get the flip-flops. Finally, I’ll put everything in
         the bag.
            Observation 11: OK.
            Action 12: go to the counter.
            Observation 13: The image features a laid-out outfit
         consisting of a pair of swim trunks and a pair of
         goggles. The swim trunks are placed on the right side


                                                 48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         of the image, while the goggles are positioned on the
         left side.
            Action 14: take the swimsuit and goggles.
            Observation 15: You take the swimsuit and goggles.
            Action 16: go to the door.
            Observation 17:      The image features two pairs of
         colorful flip-flops placed side by side on a wooden
         floor.
            Ask 18:   Which pair of flip-flops would you like me
         to take, the green and yellow ones or the blue and
         white ones?
            Observation 19: The blue and white one.
            Action 20: take the blue and white flip-flops.
            Observation 21:          You take the blue and white
         flip-flops.
            Action 22: go back to the bag.
            Observation 23: You go back to the bag.
            Action 24    put the swimsuit, goggles, and blue and
         white flip-flops in the bag.
            Observation 25:   You put the swimsuit, goggles, and
         blue and white flip-flops in the bag.
            Think 26:    Now I have helped prepare the items for
         swimming. Let me ask whether there is anything else I
         can do.
            Observation 27: OK.
            Ask 28: Is there anything else I can do for you?
            Observation 29: No. Thank you.

Here is the evaluation result corresponds to Figure 4 (d):

            Instruction and Observation 1:     Instruction: Now
         I have ended a day’s work. Can you help me relax?
         Observation: The image features a desk with a laptop
         and a book placed on it. The laptop is positioned
         towards the left side of the desk, while the book is
         closer to the right side. There are two clocks on
         the desk, one located near the laptop and the other
         closer to the center of the desk. A mouse can also
         be seen on the desk, close to the laptop. In addition
         to these objects, there is a pen in the scene as well.
         Think 2:    To help the human relax, I can suggest some
         activities. But first, let me ask for preferences to
         better understand the needs.
            Observation 3: OK.
            Ask 4:      What kind of activities do you prefer to
         relax? Do you want to read the book, listen to music,
         or do something else?
            Observation 5:   Listen to music. Please also bring
         me something to drink.
            Think 6:     I need to find a music player and bring
         something to drink. Let me ask for their locations.
            Observation 7: OK.
            Ask 8:    Where can I find the music player and what
         would you like to drink?
            Observation 9:        You can play the music via the
         laptop. Do you have any suggestions for the drinks?
            Think 10: Let me suggest some options for drinks to
         help the human decide.
            Observation 11: OK.


                                                 49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Ask 12:    Do you prefer a hot or cold drink? I can
        suggest coffee, tea, or a cold beverage like water or
        juice.
           Observation 13: Please bring me some tea.
           Think 14:   Now I need to go to the kitchen, prepare
        the tea, and bring it back. But first, let me play
        the music.
           Observation 15: OK.
           Action 16: play music on the laptop.
           Observation 17: Please specify the music to play.
           Ask 18:      What type of music would you like me to
        play?
           Observation 19:     As long as it’s relaxing, can you
        list some of them?
           Ask 20:      Sure, do you prefer classical, jazz, or
        ambient music?
           Observation 21: jazz.
           Action 22: play relaxing jazz music on the laptop.
           Observation 23: you play relaxing jazz music on the
        laptop.
           Think 24    Now I need to go to the kitchen, prepare
        the tea, and bring it back.
           Observation 25: OK.
           Action 26: go to the kitchen.
           Observation 27: Invalid action, there is no kitchen.
           Ask 28: Where can I find the tea making supplies?
           Observation 29:       There is a bottle of tea on the
        shelf.
           Ask 29: take the bottle of tea from the shelf.
           Observation 30:           The image features a wooden
        shelf with two bottles placed on it. One bottle
        is closer to the left side of the shelf, while the
        other is closer to the right side. Both bottles are
        positioned near the top of the shelf. In addition to
        the bottles, there is a teapot on the shelf, located
        between the two bottles. The teapot is positioned
        closer to the left side of the shelf.
           Action 31: take the bottle of tea and the teapot.
           Observation 32:   You take the bottle of tea and the
        teapot.
           Ask 33: go back to the original table.
           Observation 34: You go back to the original table.
           Ask 34: put the tea and teapot on the table.
           Observation 35:     You put the tea and teapot on the
        table.
           Think 36:       Now I have helped the human relax by
        playing music and bringing tea. Let me ask whether
        there is anything else I can do.
           Observation 37: OK.
           Ask 38: Is there anything else I can do for you?
           Observation 39: No. Thank you.

L   S TATISTICS ON ASKING IN ALFW ORLD


                                             50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              # Questions
                                     ALFWorld                      1.1
                          ALFWorld with ambiguous tasks           1.39
                               Multiround ALFWorld                2.53

Table 3: Statistics data on the average number of questions asked in successful episodes on all the 3
tasks reported in the paper with V7B model.


                                                 51
