Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EAVE -O NE -O UT D ISTINGUISHABILITY
IN M ACHINE L EARNING

 Jiayuan Ye† , Anastasia Borovykh‡ , Soufiane Hayou† , and Reza Shokri† ∗
 †
   National University of Singapore, ‡ Imperial College London



                                                 A BSTRACT

              We introduce an analytical framework to quantify the changes in a machine learn-
              ing algorithm’s output distribution following the inclusion of a few data points in
              its training set, a notion we define as leave-one-out distinguishability (LOOD).
              This is key to measuring data memorization and information leakage as well as
              the influence of training data points in machine learning. We illustrate how our
              method broadens and refines existing empirical measures of memorization and pri-
              vacy risks associated with training data. We use Gaussian processes to model the
              randomness of machine learning algorithms, and validate LOOD with extensive
              empirical analysis of leakage using membership inference attacks. Our analytical
              framework enables us to investigate the causes of leakage and where the leakage is
              high. For example, we analyze the influence of activation functions, on data mem-
              orization. Additionally, our method allows us to identify queries that disclose the
              most information about the training data in the leave-one-out setting. We illustrate
              how optimal queries can be used for accurate reconstruction of training data.1


1        I NTRODUCTION
A key question in interpreting a model involves identifying which members of the training set have
influenced the model’s predictions for a particular query (Koh & Liang, 2017; Koh et al., 2019;
Pruthi et al., 2020). Our goal is to understand the impact of the presence of a specific data point in
the training set of a model on its predictions. This becomes important, for example, when model’s
prediction on a data point is primarily due to its own presence (or that of points similar to it) in the
training set - a phenomenon referred to as memorization (Feldman, 2020) and can cause leakage of
sensitive information about the training data. This enables an adversary to infer which data points
were included in the training set (using membership inference attacks), by observing the model’s
predictions (Shokri et al., 2017; Zarifzadeh et al., 2023). One way to measure such influence,
memorization, and information leakage, and thus addressing related questions, is by (re)training
models with various combinations of data points. This empirical approach, however, is computa-
tionally expensive (Feldman & Zhang, 2020), and does not enable efficient analysis of, for example,
what data points are influential, which queries they influence the most, and what properties of model
(architectures) can impact their influence. These limitations demand an efficient and constructive
modeling approach to influence and leakage analysis. This is the focus of the current paper.
We generalize the above-mentioned closely-related concepts (Section 2), and unify them as the
statistical divergence between the output distribution of models, trained using (stochastic) machine
learning algorithms, when one or more data points are added to (or removed from) the training set.
We refer to this measure as leave-one-out distinguishability (LOOD). A larger LOOD of a training
data S in relation to query data Q suggests a larger potential for information leakage about S, when
an adversary observes the prediction of models trained on S and queried at Q. As a special variant
of LOOD, if we measure the gap between the mean of prediction distributions over leave-one-out
models on a query, the resultant mean distance LOOD recovers existing definitions for influence
(function) (Steinhardt et al., 2017; Koh & Liang, 2017; Koh et al., 2019) and memorization (self-
influence) (Feldman & Zhang, 2020; Feldman, 2020) (i.e., a greater mean distance LOOD suggests
a larger influence of training data S on query data Q).
     ∗
         Authors AB, SH and RS are ordered alphabetically.
     1
         The code is available through this link.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We propose an analytical method that estimates LOOD accurately and efficiently (Section 3), by
using Gaussian Processes (GPs) to model the output distribution of neural networks in response to
querying on any data point(s).2 We empirically validate that LOOD under NNGP models correlates
well with the performance of membership inference attacks (Ye et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2023)
against neural networks in the leave-one-out setting for benchmark datasets (Figure 1b). We also
experimentally show that mean distance LOOD under NNGP agrees with the prediction differences
under leave-one-out retraining (Figure 1c)of deep neural networks. This demonstrates that our ap-
proach allows an accurate assessment of information leakage and memorization (self-influence) for
deep neural networks, while significantly reducing the required computation time (by more than two
orders of magnitude - Footnote 6) as we compute LOOD analytically.
Our method offers theoretical explanations as well as efficient algorithms (Section 4) to examine
which query points are most influenced by any training data S (i.e., to quantify the leakage of mod-
els in black-box settings). This further allows one to gauge the severity of this leakage by examining
to what extent the most-influenced query can help reconstruct the training data. We prove that,
for GPs under weak regularity conditions (Theorem 4.1), the differing data itself is a stationary point
of LOOD. Experiments on image datasets further show that, LOOD under NNGP model is maxi-
mized when the query equals the differing datapoint (4b). These conclusions (for NNGP models)
experimentally generalize to deep neural networks trained via SGD, where the empirical leakage is
maximized when query data is within a small perturbation of the differing data (Figure 4c). Addi-
tionally, LOOD under NNGP remains almost unchanged even as the number of queries increases,
even when the queries are optimized to have high LOOD (Appendix E.1). In other words, for NNGP
models, all the information related to the differing point in the leave-one-out setting is contained
within the model’s prediction distribution solely on that differing point. We show how to exploit this
to reconstruct training data in the leave-one-out or leave-one group-out settings. We present samples
of reconstructed images in Figure 10 and 15-19, which strikingly resemble the training data, even
when our optimization lands on sub-optimal queries.
Finally, the analytical structure of LOOD guides us in theoretically understanding how the model
architecture can affect information leakage. In Section 6, we investigate how the analytical LOOD
for Neural Network Gaussian Processes (NNGPs) is affected by activation functions. We prove that
a low-rank kernel matrix implies low LOOD (Proposition 6.1) while existing literature (Proposi-
tion G.1) prove that the NNGP kernel for fully connected networks is closer to a low-rank matrix
under ReLU activation (thus lead to less leakage) compared to smooth activation functions such
as GeLU. Thus, smooth activation functions induce higher LOOD (information leakage) than non-
smooth activation functions in deep neural networks. We validate that this conclusion aligns with
empirical experiments for both NNGPs and for deep neural network trained via SGD (Figure 5).

2       LOOD D EFINITION AND ITS C ONNECTIONS TO R ELATED C ONCEPTS
Definition 2.1 (LOOD). Let D and D′ be two training datasets that only differ in the set S.3 Let
fD (Q) be the distribution of model predictions given training dataset D and query dataset Q, where
the probability is taken over the randomness of the training algorithm. We define leave-one-out
distinguishability (LOOD) as the statistical distance between fD (Q) and fD′ (Q):
                              LOOD(Q; D, D′ ) := dist(fD (Q), fD′ (Q))                                     (1)

In the paper, we mainly measure LOOD using the KL divergence Kullback & Leibler (1951) to
capture information leakage. However, as we explain below, different choices of dist() and f ()
allow us to recover established definitions of memorization, information leakage, and influence.

Information Leakage as LOOD. Information Leakage refers to how much a model’s predictions can
reveal information about specific data records in its training set, which would not be extractable if
those entries were removed from the training set. In the black-box setting, where adversary observes
model’s prediction (distribution) at a query set Q, this is exactly LOOD. This is closely related
    2
     NNGPs are widely used in the literature as standalone models (Neal, 2012), as modeling tools for different
types of neural networks (Lee et al., 2017; Novak et al., 2018; Hron et al., 2020; Yang, 2019), and as building
blocks for model architecture search (Park et al., 2020) or data distillation (Loo et al., 2022).
   3
     S = D \ D′ and D′ ⊂ D.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) — LOOD measures privacy loss in a black-box
setting, for specific datasets, and DP determines the maximum (white-box) privacy loss across all
possible datasets. 4 In this paper, we measure LOOD using KL divergence, which is different from
Hocky-stick divergence used for equivalent definitions of (ε, δ)-DP (Balle et al., 2018). The closest
DP definition to LOOD is Rényi DP (Mironov, 2017) (consider Rényi divergence with order α → 1).
LOOD gives useful information about leakage in DP ML algorithms. DP guarantees that the pre-
diction distributions cannot change beyond a certain bound under the change of any training data.
However, such a guarantee reflects the worst-case scenario and the same bound holds for any possi-
ble training data and query. DP bound does not help measure the privacy risk of specific data points
in certain training sets and queries. LOOD, however, helps compute this risk and explore how in-
formation leakage varies with different predictions, which prediction leads to the most leakage, and
how leakage evolves with more predictions (See Figure 4, Section 4, and Appendix E.1).
LOOD controls the leakage quantified by inference attacks. One established method for empiri-
cally assessing information leakage is through the performance of a membership inference attack
(MIA) (Shokri et al., 2017), where an attacker attempts to guess whether a specific data point S was
part of the model’s training dataset. The power of any MIA (true positive rate given a fixed false
positive rate) is controlled by the likelihood ratio test of observing the prediction given D versus D′
as the training set (Neyman & Pearson, 1933). Thus, the leakage as quantified by MIA is upper
bounded by statistical distance relates to likelihood ratio, e.g., KL divergence (Dong et al., 2019). 5
See Figure 1a for the high correlation between LOOD and MIA performance, and see Appendix C
for why KL divergence is better suited than mean distance for measuring information leakage.

Influence (Function) as (Derivatives of) Mean Distance LOOD. The problem of influence estima-
tion arises in the context of explaining machine learning predictions (Koh & Liang, 2017) and ana-
lyzing the robustness of a training algorithm against adversarial data (Steinhardt et al., 2017), where
the influence of an (adversarial) training data z ∈ D on the trained model’s loss at test data ztest is
defined as Iloss (z, ztest ) = L(θ̂−z ; ztest ) − L(θ̂; ztest ), where θ̂ = arg min L(θ; D) on dataset D
and θ̂−z = arg minθ L(θ; D \ {z}). This quantity is thus the change of a trained model’s loss on the
test point ztest due to the removal of one point z from the training dataset (when z = ztest , it reflects
self-influence of z). This is exactly LOOD given by mean distance (Definition C.1) between loss
distributions, for an (idealized) training algorithm that outputs the optimal model given the training
dataset. Estimating influence incurs computational difficulties, as it requires leave-one-out retraining
and exact minimizers. Koh & Liang (2017) approximately compute this influence without retrain-
ing for small perturbation of training data, via a first-order Taylor approximation. They compute
Ipert,loss (z, ztest ) = ∇δ L(θ̂zδ ,−z ; ztest ) where θ̂zδ ,−z = arg minθ L(θ; D) − L(θ; z) + L(θ; zδ ) via
non-exact estimations of the Hessian (as exact Hessian computation is computationally expensive
for large model). For simple models such as linear model and shallow CNN, the influence function
approximation correlate well with leave-one-out retraining. However, for deep neural networks, the
influence function approximation worsens significantly ((Koh & Liang, 2017, Figure 2) and Fig-
ure 1c). By contrast, we propose an analytical method for computing mean distance LOOD that
shows high correlation to leave-one-out retraining even for deep neural networks (Figure 1c).

Memorization as LOOD. Memorization, as defined in (Feldman, 2020, page 5), is given
by mem(A, D, S) = P rh∼A(D) (h(xS ) = yS ) − P rh∼A(D\S) (h(xS ) = yS ); this measures the
change of prediction probability on training data S after removing it from the training dataset D,
given training algorithm A. To avoid training many models on D and D \ S for each pair of training
data and dataset, one approach is to resort to boosting-like techniques (Feldman & Zhang, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2021) to reduce the number of retrained models (at a drop of estimation quality), which
still requires training hundreds or thousands of models. The memorization measure is exactly mean
distance LOOD Definition C.1 when query equals the differing data (i.e., self-influence) and output
function f is the prediction accuracy. Thus, we can analytically compute and reason about memo-
rization in ML using LOOD.

   4
      DP guarantee certainly applies to black-box setting too, but its primary analysis is done for the stronger
white-box threat model, where adversary observes the model parameters (or parameter updates during training).
    5
      KL divergence (and thus LOOD) can also be used for semantically measuring the advantage of reconstruc-
tion attacks and attribute inference attacks. See (Guo et al., 2022, Section 5.2) for a concrete example.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            1


                                      AUC score of MIA (under NN models)
                                                                           0.8


                                                                           0.6


                                                                           0.4
                                                                                 0.4   0.5   0.6     0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                                                                       AUC score of MIA (under NNGP)


                                      (b) MIA performance on NNGP
                                      and NN models matches, for
(a) High correlation between the      90 random training data records,
LOOD and MIA performance. The         each represented by a dot. For                                                        (c) Mean distance LOOD matches the
leave-one-out dataset D is a class-   MIA on NNs, we evaluate over                                                          prediction difference after leave-one-
balanced subset of CIFAR-10 with      50 models on D and 50 models                                                          out retraining of NN models, for 90
size 1000, and D′ = D ∪ S for         on D′ . For MIA on NNGP, we                                                           randomly chosen differing data (each
a differing record S. We evaluate     compute the prediction mean and                                                       represented by a dot). Dataset and
over 200 randomly chosen S (from      variance of NNGP (on the differ-                                                      model setups are the same as Fig-
CIFAR-10 or uniform distribution      ing data) given D and D′ , and                                                        ure 1b. As comparison, we plot the
over the pixel domain). This indi-    evaluate MIA over 5000 sam-                                                           influence function estimates (Koh and
cate that LOOD faithfully captures    ples from the two Gaussian dis-                                                       Liang [10]) and TracIn scores (Pruthi
information leakage under MIA.        tributions. Models are trained on                                                     et al.[18]). We normalize all esti-
See Appendix C.3 for more discus-     ‘car‘ and ‘plane‘ images from CI-                                                     mates to [0, 1]. We report Pearson’s
sions on this correlation curve.      FAR10.                                                                                correlation and p-value in the legends.

Figure 1: Validation of our analytical framework (based on LOOD and mean distance LOOD for
NNGP), according to information leakage measure (the performance of membership inference at-
tacks) and influence definition (prediction difference under leave-one-out retraining).

3    O UR A NALYTICAL F RAMEWORK FOR E STIMATING LOOD

Prior approaches for estimating leakage and memorization are heavily based on experiments, thus
suffering from (a) approximation error (e.g., first-order Taylor expansion and non-exact Hessian
approximation); (b) modelling error (e.g., suboptimal MIAs for quantifying leakage); (c) high com-
putation cost (e.g., training many models for accurate estimation of memorization); and (d) experi-
mental instability. To address this, we propose an analytical method that estimates LOOD accurately
and efficiently, by modelling the prediction distribution of neural networks as Gaussian process.

Gaussian process. To analytically capture the randomness of machine learning on model out-
puts we use Gaussian Process (GP). A GP f ∼ GP (µ, K) is specified by its mean function
µ(x) = Ef [f (x)] and covariance kernel function K(x, x′ ) = Ef [(f (x) − µ(x))(f (x′ ) − µ(x′ ))]
for any inputs x and x′ (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006).                The mean function is typi-
cally set to zero, under which the kernel function K completely captures the structure of
a GP. Some commonly used kernel functions are isotropic kernels and correlation kernels
(Appendix D.2). Given training data D with noisy labels yD = f (D) + N (0, σ 2 I),
the posterior prediction distribution of GP on a query data Q follows multivariate Gaussian
fD,σ2 (Q) ∼ N (µD,σ2 (Q), ΣD,σ2 (Q)) with analytical mean µD,σ2 (Q) = KQD (KDD + σ 2 I)−1 yD
and covariance matrix ΣD,σ2 (Q) = KQQ − KQD (KDD + σ 2 I)−1 KDQ (by GP regression). Here
for brevity, we denote KXZ = (K(xi , zj ))xi ∈D,zj ∈Z as the kernel matrix between X and Z.

Neural Network Gaussian process and connections to NN training. Prior works (Lee et al., 2017;
Schoenholz et al., 2017; 2016) have shown that the output of neural networks on a query converges
to a Gaussian process, at initialization as the width of the NN tends to infinity. The kernel function
of the neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) is given by K(x, x′ ) = Eθ∼prior [⟨fθ (x), fθ (x′ )⟩],
where θ refers to the neural network weights (sampled from the prior distribution), and fθ refers to
the prediction function of the model with weights θ. In this case, instead of the usual gradient-based
training, we can analytically compute the Gaussian Process regression posterior distribution of the
network prediction given the training data and query inputs. See Appendix B for more discussions
on the connections between NNGP and the training of its corresponding neural networks.


                                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LOOD for NNGP effectively captures leakage in practical NN training. Under Gaussian process
(GP) modelling, we can analytically compute and analyze LOOD on the GP models associated
with a given neural network (i.e., NNGP). For the underlying NNGP models, we first investigate
whether the LOOD accurately reflects the level of information leakage in the idealized leave-one-
out membership inference attack (Ye et al., 2022, Section 4.5). Specifically, the leave-one-out MIA
distinguish between two prediction distributions and of models trained on leave-one-out datasets
that only differs in one record S. In Figure 1a, we indeed observe a strong correlation between
LOOD and MIA performance. This concludes that LOOD effectively reflects information leakage
in NNGP. We also empirically validate whether the leakage under NNGP models accurately reflects
the leakage in neural networks trained using SGD. In Figure 1b, we observe a strong correlation
between the MIA performance on NNGP models and the MIA performance on neural network
models. This suggests that NNGP captures the leakage in the corresponding neural networks.

Mean distance LOOD for NNGP agrees with memorization in practical NN training. We further
investigates whether our analytical framework allows accurate estimates for memorization (self-
influence). In Figure 1c, we show the estimates given by different methods (y-axis), and compare
it with the actual prediction difference (x-axis) between 100 NN models trained on each of the
leave-one-out datasets, over 50 randomly chosen differing data. That is, the x-axis is exactly the
memorization or self-influence as defined by (Feldman, 2020, Page 5) and (Feldman & Zhang,
2020, Equation 1), and serves as a ground-truth baseline that should be matched by good influence
estimations. In the y-axis, we show the normalized mean distance LOOD (under NNGP), influence
function (Koh & Liang, 2017) and TracIn estimates (Pruthi et al., 2020). We observe that mean
distance LOOD has the highest correlation to the actual prediction difference among all methods.

Analytical LOOD allows improved computational efficiency. One significant advantage of our
method is the efficiency of computing analytic expressions. In Figure 1b- 1c, we observed over 140×
speed up for estimating leakage and influence using our framework versus empirically measuring it
over retrained models as it is performed in the literature (Ye et al., 2022; Feldman & Zhang, 2020).6
This allows us to efficiently answer many advanced questions (that are previously computationally
expensive or infeasible to answer via experimental approaches), such as: Where, i.e., at which query
Q, does the model exhibit the most information leakage or influence of its training data? How do
different model architectures impact influence? We discuss these questions in Section 4-6.

4    O PTIMIZING LOOD TO I DENTIFY Q UERY WITH MAXIMUM LEAKAGE
LOOD (6) measures the information leakage of a model about its training data S when queried on
a query data point Q. For assessing the maximum possible leakage, we need to understand which
query Q should the attacker use to extract the highest possible amount of information about S. This
question is closely related to the open problem of constructing a worst-case query data for tight
privacy auditing via MIAs (Steinke et al., 2024; Jagielski et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2021; Wen et al.,
2022; Nasr et al., 2023). However, evaluating leakage via MIAs can be computationally expensive
due to the associated costs of retraining many models on a fixed pair of leave-one-out datasets.
To address this, we will show that estimating LOOD under GPs offers an efficient alternative for
answering this question. In this section, we consider single query (|Q| = 1) and single differing
point (|S| = 1) setting and analyze the most influenced point by maximizing the LOOD:
                     arg max LOOD(Q; D, D′ ) := dist(fD,σ2 (Q), fD′ ,σ2 (Q)),                           (2)
                           Q

We theoretically analyze and empirical solve the LOOD optimization problem (2). Our analysis also
extends to the multi-query (|Q| > 1) and a group of differing data (|S| > 1) setting (Appendix E).

Analysis: querying the differing data itself incurs stationary LOOD (information leakage). We
first prove that for a wide class of kernel functions, the differing point is a stationary solution for (2),
i.e., satisfies the first-order optimality condition. In the following theorem, we prove that if the
kernel function satisfies certain regularity conditions, the gradient of LOOD at the differint point is
zero, i.e., querying the differing incurs stationary LOOD over its local neighborhood.
   6
     Evaluating the MIA and prediction difference under leave-one-out retraining in Figure 1b took 100 GPU
hours for training 50 × 90 FC networks. For the same setting, estimating LOOD only took 40 GPU minutes.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.1. Let the kernel function be K. Assume that (i) K(x, x) = 1 for all training data x, i.e.,
                                                                        ′
all training data are normalized under kernel function K; (ii) ∂K(x,x
                                                                    ∂x
                                                                          )
                                                                            |x′ =x = 0 for all training
                                                                    ′
data x, i.e., the kernel distance between two data records x and x is stable when they are equal.
Then, the differing data is a stationary point for LOOD as a function of query data, as follows
                             ∇Q LOOD(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) |Q=S = 0,
                                                                                 ′

where by definition we have that ∇Q LOOD(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) = 1 − ΣΣ(Q)        (Q)
                                                                                         ·∇Q ΣΣ(Q)
                                                                                               ′ (Q)   +
                  ′     2
                            ′    −1                ′   2       ′   −1
∇Q ∥µ(Q) − µ (Q)∥2 Σ (Q) + ∥µ(Q) − µ (Q)∥2 ∇Q (Σ (Q) )
The full proof is deferred in Appendix D.1. Theorem 4.1 proves that as long as the kernel function K
satisfies weak regularity conditions (which hold for commonly used RBF kernel and NNGP kernel
on a sphere as shown in Appendix D.2), the first-order stationary condition of LOOD is satisfied
when the query equals differing data. This stationarity is a necessary condition for maximal leakage,
and suggests that the differing point itself could be the query that incurs maximal leakage.


                                                                                            200


                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                            100

                                                                                              0
                                                                                               0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075
                                                                                 (c) Prediction similarity in KL
                                                                                 (Balle et al., 2022, Section V.B.)
      (a) Exact reconstruction            (b) Color-flipped reconstruction       between differ data & opt query.

Figure 2: Examples of optimized query after LOOD optimization, given all ‘car’ and ‘plane’ images
from CIFAR10 as training dataset, under NNGP for 10-layer FC network with ReLU activation. We
show in (a) the optimized query gets close to the differing point in LOOD; and in (b) the optimized
query converges to a query with significantly lower LOOD than the differing data, yet they visually
resemble each other. In (c) we further statistically check the prediction similarity between query
and differing data in KL divergence (Balle et al., 2022, Section V.B.) across 500 runs with randomly
chosen differing data (see Figures 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 for all the images for these runs).

Experimentally Optimizing LOOD enables a Data Reconstruction Attack. To further understand
what query Q induce maximal leakage about training data S, we run Adam on the non-convex ob-
jective (2). Interestingly, we observe that the optimized query by (2) generally recovers the differing
data with high visual precision across random experiments: see Figure 2a, Appendix D.3 and Fig-
ure 14-19 for examples under RBF and NNGP kernels. 7 The optimized query also tends to have
very similar LOOD to the differing data itself (see Figure 2c), even when there are more than one
differing data, i.e., leave-one-group-out setting (see Figure 3 – only in its right-most column does
the optimized single query have slightly higher LOOD than the differing record that it recovers).
We remark that, possibly due to the nonconvex structure of LOOD, cases exist where the optimized
query has significantly lower LOOD than the differing data (Figure 2b). Noteworthy is that even in
this case the query still resembles the shape of the differing data. This shows the significant amount
of information leaked through the model’s prediction on the differing data itself. Such results show
that LOOD can be leveraged for a data reconstruction attack in a setting where the adversary has
access to the prediction distribution of models trained on leave-one-out datasets. This setting aligns
with prior works (Balle et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2022) that focus on reconstruction attacks under the
assumption that the adversary possesses knowledge of all data points except for one.
Our reconstruction via optimizing LOOD methodology extends to the group setting. Figure 3
demonstrates that even when the attacker does not know a group of data points, they can successfully
     7
       We tried several image similarity metrics in the reconstruction literature, e.g., per-pixel distance (Carlini
et al., 2023, Section 5.1), SSIM (Haim et al., 2022, Figure 1) and LPIPS (Balle et al., 2022, Section V.B) –
but they do not reflect the visual similarity in our setting. This is possibly because LOOD optimization only
recovers the highest amount of information about the differing data which need not be the exact RGB values.
It is an open problem to design better image similarity metrics for such reconstructions beyond RGB values.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Query optimization (data reconstruction) by leave-one-group-out distinguishability, when
there are three differing records (the three leftmost images). Above each differing record, we show
whether it is predicted correctly by the NNGP model trained without it. The three middle images are
the optimal queries in the multi-query setting, and the rightmost image is the optimal single query;
each row presents the results for a different random query initialization. Observe that differing
images with highest LOOD (and for certain initialization even all differing images) can be recovered.


reconstruct the whole group with high visual similarity. Additionally, by examining the frequency
of LOOD optimization converging to a query close to each data point in the differing group (across
optimized queries in multiple runs), we can assess which S’s are most vulnerable to reconstruction
(Appendix E.2). Reconstruction under the leave-one-group-out setting mimics a practical real world
adversary that aims to reconstruct more than one training data. In the limit of large group size that
equals the size of the training dataset, such leave-one-group-out setting recovers one of the difficult
reconstruction attack scenario studied in (Haim et al., 2022), where the adversary does not have exact
knowledge about any training data. Therefore, extending our results within the leave-one-group-out
setting to practical reconstruction attacks presents a promising open problem for future exploration.

Experimental maximality of leakage when query equals differing data for NNGPs and NNs. To
complement Theorem 4.1 and explain the success of our reconstruction attack, we experimentally
investigate whether querying on differing point itself incurs maximal LOOD. We observe many em-
pirical evidences that support this hypothesis, e.g., for a one-dimensional toy dataset in Figure 4a.
In Figure 4b and its caption, we further observe that querying on differing data S itself consistently
incurs larger LOOD than querying on random perturbations of S for CIFAR10 under NNGP. Ap-
pendix E also support this empirical maximality of LOOD under multiple queries and a group of
differing data (Appendix E). Finally, Figure 4c and its caption show that MIA performance on NN
models is generally the highest when queries are near the differing data. On the other hand, we note
that in practice data-dependent normalization is often used prior to training. In such a setting there
exists optimized query with higher LOOD than the differing data itself – see Appendix D.4.

5   O PTIMIZING LOOD TO I DENTIFY THE M OST I NFLUENCED P OINT
Mean distance LOOD (Definition C.1) measures the influence of training data S on the prediction at
query Q. Thus we can use mean distance LOOD to efficiently analyze where (at which Q) the model
is most influenced by the change of one train data S. This question shed light on the fundamental
question of which prediction is influenced the most by (adversarial) training data (Koh & Liang,
2017) (and from there connections to robustness against data poisoning Steinhardt et al. (2017)).
We now use mean distance LOOD for a more fine-grained analysis of influence and memorization
within our framework. In Proposition 5.1, we analyze the different behaviors of mean distance
LOOD, based on where the differing point is located with respect to the rest of the training set.
Proposition 5.1 (First-order optimality condition for influence). Consider a dataset D, a differing
point S, and a kernel function K satisfying the same conditions of Theorem 4.1. Then, we have that
                                     −1                 −1             −1
      ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S = −α−2 (1 − KSD MD  KDS )(yS − KSD MD  yD )2 K̊SD MD  KDS ,


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       0.6               Training dataset D
       0.5               differ S = -2.5
                         differ S = 0
LOOD   0.4               differ S = 2.5
       0.3
       0.2
       0.1
       0.0
                 5        0         5
                     Qeury data Q

             (a) LOOD under RBF               (b) LOOD under NNGP         (c) MIA performance on NNs

Figure 4: Empirical maximality of information leakage when query equals differing data. Figure
(a) uses a toy dataset D = (x, y) with x ∈ [−5, 5], y = sin(x), and computes LOOD for all queries
in the data domain. Figure (b), (c) use ’car’ and ’plane’ images in CIFAR-10, and evaluate leakage
on perturbation queries {Q = S + x · R : x ∈ [−50, 50]} of the differing data S along a random
direction R ∈ L∞ unit ball. For five randomly chosen differing data, we show in (b) and (c) that
LOOD and MIA performance are visually maximal around x = 0. For statistical pattern, we repeat
the experiment for 70 randomly chosen differing data, and observe the scale of perturbation with
maximal information leakage is x = 0.000 ± 0.000 for NNGPs, and x = −2.375 ± 5.978 for NNs.
where M (Q) is the mean distance LOOD in C.1, KSD , KDS , KDD are kernel matrices as defined
                      ∂                                                  −1
in Section 2, K̊SD = ∂Q KQD |Q=S , MD = KDD + σ 2 I, and α = 1 − KSD MD     KDS + σ 2 .

Proposition 5.1 proves that when S is far from the dataset D (i.e., KSD ≈ 0) or close to the dataset D
                      −1
(i.e., yS ≈ KSD MD       yD , that is S is perfectly predicted by models trained on D), the mean distance
LOOD gradient ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S is close to 0 (i.e., the differing data S has stationary influence on
itself). When S is far from the remaining training dataset D and the data labels are bounded (which
is the case in a classification task), we further analyze the Hessian of mean distance LOOD and prove
that differing data S has locally maximal influence on itself (Lemma F.4). Between the two cases,
when the differing data is neither too close nor too far from the remaining dataset, Proposition 5.1
proves that ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S ̸= 0, i.e., the differing data S does not incur maximal influence on itself.
To give an intuition, we can think of the Mean LOOD as the result of an interaction of two forces,
a force due to the training points, and another force due to the differing point. When the differing
point is neither too far nor too close to the training data, the synergy of the two forces creates a
region that does not include the differing point where the LOOD is maximal. See Figures 11, 12 and
13 for more experimental illustrations of the behaviors of mean distance LOOD.

6            E XPLAINING THE E FFECT OF ACTIVATION F UNCTIONS ON LOOD

LOOD under NNGP enjoys analytical dependence on model architectures, thus enabling us to effi-
ciently investigate questions such as: how does the choice of activation function affect the magnitute
of information leakage? Answers to such questions would provide guidance for how to train models
in a more privacy-preserving manner. To theoretically analyze how the choice of activation function
affect the magnitude of LOOD, we will leverage Proposition G.1 in the Appendix; it shows that for
the same depth, smooth activations such that GeLU are associated with kernels that are farther away
from a low rank all-constant matrix (more expressive) than kernel obtained with non-smooth acti-
vations, e.g. ReLU. Therefore to understand the effect of activation, it suffices to analyze how the
low-rank property of kernel matrix affects the magnitude of LOOD. Thus, we establish the following
proposition, which shows that LOOD is small if the NNGP kernel matrix has low rank property.
Proposition 6.1 (Informal: Low rank kernel matrix implies low LOOD). Let D and D′ = D ∪ S be
an arbitrarily fixed pair of leave-one-out datasets, where D contains n records. Define the function
h(α) = supx,x′ ∈D′ |K(x, x′ ) − α|. Let αmin = argminα∈R+ h(α), and thus h(αmin ) quantifies
how close the kernel matrix is to a low rank all-constant matrix. Assume that αmin > 0. Then, there
exist constants An , B > 0 such that
                            max LOOD(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) ≤ An h(αmin ) + B n−1 .
                              Q

Thus the smaller h(αmin ) is, the smaller LOOD could be. See G for formal statement and proof.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 6.1 proves that the LOOD (leakage) over worst-case query is upper bounded by a term
h(αmin ) that is small if the kernel matrix is close to a low-rank all-constant matrix. Intuitively, this
happens because the network output forgets most of the information about the input dataset under
low rank kernel matrix. By combining Proposition G.1 and Proposition 6.1, we conclude that smooth
activations induce higher leakage than non-smooth activations. This is consistent with the intuition
that smooth activations allow deeper information propagation, thus inducing more expressive kernels
and more memorization of the training data. Interestingly, recent work (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021)
also showed that GeLU enables better model performance than ReLU even in modern architectures
such as ViT. Our results thus suggest there is a privacy-accuracy tradeoffs by activation choices.

Experimental results on NNGP validates that GeLU activa-
tion induces higher LOOD than ReLU activation. We now
empirically investigate how the activation function affects
the LOOD under NNGP. We evaluate NNGP for fully con-
nected neural networks with varying depths {2, 4, · · · , 10},
trained on ’plane’ and ’car’ images from CIFAR10. We com-
pute LOOD over 500 randomly chosen differing data, and
observe under fixed depth, the LOOD under ReLU is more
than 1.1× higher than LOOD under GeLU in 95% cases. We
visualize randomly chosen 20 differing data in Figure 5. For
each fixed differing data, we also observe that the gap be-
                                                                 Figure 5: Empirical validation of
tween LOOD under ReLU and LOOD under GeLU grows
                                                                 our analytical results in of Section 6
with the depth. This is consistent with the pattern predicted
                                                                 that per-record information leakage
by our analysis in Proposition G.1, i.e., GeLU gives rise to
                                                                 is higher under GELU activation
higher leakage in LOOD than ReLU activation, and their gap
                                                                 than under ReLU, for both NNGPs
increases with depth. It is worth noting that our experiments
                                                                 and NN models. We evaluate per-
for the LOOD optimization are done without constraining
                                                                 record leakage with membership in-
the query data norm. Therefore, our experiments shows that
                                                                 ference attack performance on mod-
Proposition G.1 could be valid in more general settings.
                                                                 els trained on leave-one-out datasets.
                                                                 Dataset contains ‘car’ and ‘plane’
Experimental results on NNs validate the effect of activa- images from CIFAR-10. The NN
tion choice on leakage. We further investigate whether model is fully connected network
leakage (measured by MIA performance on leave-one-out with depth 10 and width 1024.
retrained models) for deep neural networks are similarly af-
fected by activation choice. Figure 5 shows that DNNs with GeLU activation incurs higher per-
record leakage (MIA performance in AUC score) compared to DNNs with ReLU activation, for 20
randomly chosen differing data. This is consistent with our analytical results (Proposition G.1 and
6.1), and aligns with prior empirical observations Wei et al. (2020); Haim et al. (2022); Shamsabadi
et al. (2023) that data reconstruction is harder under ReLU activation (than its smooth counterparts).


7    C ONCLUSIONS

We show that the estimations of information leakage, influence, and memorization are intrinsically
the same problem of estimating leave-one-out distinguishability (LOOD). We propose one analyt-
ical framework for accurately and efficiently computing LOOD in machine learning via Gaussian
process modeling. This framework facilitates more efficient and interpretable answers to existing
questions and enables us to explore new questions about how a data point influences model predic-
tions. Notably, the analytical nature of LOOD enables performing optimization to identify predic-
tions that leak the most information about each training data record (Section 4), which enables exact
reconstruction of each training data.

Future Works. An interesting direction is to use LOOD to analyze how other factors affect infor-
mation leakage, such as the training data (distribution) and architecture choices. It is also interesting
to extend our framework for estimating other concepts closely related to leave-one-out distinguisha-
bility, such as Shapley value (Shapley et al., 1953) in the literature of data valuation. 8
   8
     Shapley value is a linear combination of LOOD on all subsets of the training dataset. Thus, in certain
scenarios e.g., submodular utility, LOOD regarding the complete dataset is a lower bound for Shapley value.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Martin Strobel for the help in reproducing influence function, and
to thank Yao Tong, Tuan-Duy H. Nguyen and Yaxi Hu for helpful feedback on earlier drafts of the
paper. The work of Reza Shokri was supported by the Asian Young Scientist Fellowship 2023, and
the Ministry of Education, Singapore, Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 1.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Borja Balle, Gilles Barthe, and Marco Gaboardi. Privacy amplification by subsampling: Tight
  analyses via couplings and divergences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Borja Balle, Giovanni Cherubin, and Jamie Hayes. Reconstructing training data with informed
  adversaries. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1138–1156. IEEE,
  2022.
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13188, 2023.
Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J Su.           Gaussian differential privacy.   arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1905.02383, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found.
  Trends Theor. Comput. Sci., 9(3-4):211–407, 2014.
Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In Proceedings
  of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 954–959, 2020.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the
  long tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–
  2891, 2020.
Chuan Guo, Brian Karrer, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Laurens van der Maaten. Bounding training
  data reconstruction in private (deep) learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8056–8071. PMLR, 2022.
Niv Haim, Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, Ohad Shamir, and Michal Irani. Reconstructing training data
  from trained neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07758, 2022.
Soufiane Hayou, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith Rousseau. On the impact of the activation function on
  deep neural networks training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Soufiane Hayou, Eugenio Clerico, Bobby He, George Deligiannidis, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith
  Rousseau. Stable resnet. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.), Proceedings of The
  24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 130 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1324–1332. PMLR, 13–15 Apr 2021.
Jiri Hron, Yasaman Bahri, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Roman Novak. Infinite attention: Nngp and
   ntk for deep attention networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4376–
   4386. PMLR, 2020.
Matthew Jagielski, Jonathan Ullman, and Alina Oprea. Auditing differentially private machine
 learning: How private is private sgd? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 22205–22216, 2020.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Pang Wei W Koh, Kai-Siang Ang, Hubert Teo, and Percy S Liang. On the accuracy of influence
  functions for measuring group effects. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathe-
  matical statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Noel Loo, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, and Daniela Rus. Efficient dataset distillation using
  random feature approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12067, 2022.
Yizhang Lou, Chris E Mingard, and Soufiane Hayou. Feature learning and signal propagation in
  deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14248–14282.
  PMLR, 2022.
Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security foundations sympo-
   sium (CSF), pp. 263–275. IEEE, 2017.
Milad Nasr, Shuang Songi, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Nicholas Carlin. Adversary
 instantiation: Lower bounds for differentially private machine learning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
 on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 866–882. IEEE, 2021.
Milad Nasr, Jamie Hayes, Thomas Steinke, Borja Balle, Florian Tramèr, Matthew Jagielski,
 Nicholas Carlini, and Andreas Terzis. Tight auditing of differentially private machine learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07956, 2023.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Jerzy Neyman and Egon Sharpe Pearson. Ix. on the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical
   hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
   Papers of a Mathematical or Physical Character, 231(694-706):289–337, 1933.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Greg Yang, Jiri Hron, Daniel A Abolafia,
  Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Bayesian deep convolutional networks with many
  channels are gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05148, 2018.
Daniel S. Park, Jaehoon Lee, Daiyi Peng, Yuan Cao, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Towards nngp-
  guided neural architecture search, 2020.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  19920–19930, 2020.
Samuel S Schoenholz, Justin Gilmer, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information
  propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01232, 2016.
S.S. Schoenholz, J. Gilmer, S. Ganguli, and J. Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information propagation. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Ali Shahin Shamsabadi, Jamie Hayes, Borja Balle, and Adrian Weller. Mnemonist: locating model
  parameters that memorize training examples. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1879–
  1888. PMLR, 2023.
Lloyd S Shapley et al. A value for n-person games. 1953.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP),
  pp. 3–18. IEEE, 2017.
Jacob Steinhardt, Pang Wei W Koh, and Percy S Liang. Certified defenses for data poisoning attacks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Thomas Steinke, Milad Nasr, and Matthew Jagielski. Privacy auditing with one (1) training run.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenqi Wei, Ling Liu, Margaret Loper, Ka-Ho Chow, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, Stacey Truex, and
 Yanzhao Wu. A framework for evaluating gradient leakage attacks in federated learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.10397, 2020.
Yuxin Wen, Arpit Bansal, Hamid Kazemi, Eitan Borgnia, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and
  Tom Goldstein. Canary in a coalmine: Better membership inference with ensembled adversarial
  queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10750, 2022.
Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning.
  MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.
Greg Yang. Wide feedforward or recurrent neural networks of any architecture are gaussian pro-
  cesses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Greg Yang and Etai Littwin. Tensor programs ivb: Adaptive optimization in the infinite-width limit.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01814, 2023.
Jiayuan Ye, Aadyaa Maddi, Sasi Kumar Murakonda, Vincent Bindschaedler, and Reza Shokri. En-
   hanced membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In Proceedings of the
   2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 3093–3106,
   2022.
Sajjad Zarifzadeh, Philippe Liu, and Reza Shokri. Low-cost high-power membership inference
  attacks. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2312, 2023.
Chiyuan Zhang, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Matthew Jagielski, Florian Tramèr, and
  Nicholas Carlini. Counterfactual memorization in neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.12938, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                  1


2   LOOD Definition and its Connections to Related Concepts                                       2


3   Our Analytical Framework for Estimating LOOD                                                  4


4   Optimizing LOOD to Identify Query with maximum leakage                                        5


5   Optimizing LOOD to Identify the Most Influenced Point                                         7


6   Explaining the Effect of Activation Functions on LOOD                                         8


7   Conclusions                                                                                   9


A Table of Notations                                                                             15


B Additional discussion on the connections between NNGP and NN training                          15


C Deferred details for Section 2                                                                 15
    C.1 Mean Distance LOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    C.2 KL Divergence LOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
    C.3 Comparison between Mean Distance LOOD and KL Divergence LOOD . . . . . .                 17


D Deferred proofs and experiments for Section 4                                                  19
    D.1 Deferred proof for Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
    D.2 Proofs for regularity conditions of commonly used kernel functions . . . . . . . .       21
    D.3 More examples for query optimization under NNGP kernel functions . . . . . . . .         23
    D.4 When the differing point is not the optimal query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23


E Analyzing LOOD for Multiple Queries and Leave-one-group-out Setting                            24
    E.1 LOOD under multiple queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
    E.2 Leave-one-group out distinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25


F Optimal query under mean distance and deferred proofs for Section 5                            25
    F.1   Differing point is in general not optimal for Mean Distance LOOD . . . . . . . . .     25
    F.2   Differing point is optimal in Mean Distance LOOD when it is far from the dataset .     27
    F.3   The optimal query for Mean Distance LOOD on image datasets . . . . . . . . . .         29


G Deferred proofs for Section 6                                                                  29


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     TABLE OF N OTATIONS
                                        Table 1: Symbol reference


 Symbol                                          Meaning
 D                                               Leave-one-out dataset
 D′                                              Leave-one-out dataset combined with the differing data
 S                                               Differing data record(s)
 s                                               number of differing data records
 Q                                               Queried data record (s)
 q                                               number of queries
 d                                               dimension of the data
 K(x, x′ )                                       Kernel function
 K(X, Z) ∈ Rp×k , for two finite
 collections of vectors X = (x1 , . . . , xp )   (K(xi , zj )) 1≤i≤p
 and Z = (z1 , . . . , zk )                                  1≤j≤k

 KXZ ∈ Rp×k                                      Abbreviation for K(X, Z)
 MD                                              Abbreviation for KDD + σ 2 I
 MD ′                                            Abbreviation for KD′ D′ + σ 2 I
                                                 Abbreviation for mean distance LOOD under query Q
 M (Q)
                                                 and leave-one-out datasets D and D′
 MIA                                             Abbreviation for membership inference attack


B     A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION ON THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN NNGP AND
      NN TRAINING

Note that in general, there is a performance gap between a trained NN and its equivalent NNGP
model. However, they are fundamentally connected even when there is a performance gap: the
NNGP describes the (geometric) information flow in a randomly initialized NN and therefore cap-
tures the early training stages of SGD-trained NNs. In a highly non-convex problem such as NN
training, the initialization is crucial and its impact on different quantities (including performance) is
well-documented Schoenholz et al. (2016). Moreover, it is also well-known that the bulk of feature
learning occurs during the first few epochs of training (see (Lou et al., 2022, Figure 2)), which makes
the initial training stages even more crucial. Hence, it should be expected that properties of NNGP
transfer (at least partially) to trained NNs. More advanced tools such as Tensor Programs Yang &
Littwin (2023) try to capture the covariance kernel during training, but such dynamics are generally
intractable in closed-form.


C     D EFERRED DETAILS FOR S ECTION 2

C.1    M EAN D ISTANCE LOOD

The simplest way of quantifying the LOOD is by using the distance between the means of the two
distributions formed by coupled Gaussian processes:
Definition C.1 (Mean distance LOOD). By computing the distance between the mean of coupled
Gaussian processes on query set Q, we obtain the following mean distance LOOD.
                         1
          M (Q; D, D′ ) = ∥µD,σ2 (Q) − µD′ ,σ2 (Q)∥22                                                (3)
                         2
                         1
                        = ||KQD (KDD + σ 2 I)−1 yD − KQD′ (KD′ D′ + σ 2 )−1 yD′ ||22 .               (4)
                         2
where Q is a query data record, and µD,σ2 (Q) and µD′ ,σ2 (Q) are the mean of the prediction function
for GP trained on D and D′ respectively, as defined in Section 2. When the context is clear, we
abbreviate D and D′ in the notation and use M (Q) under differing data S to denote M (Q; D, D′ )
where D′ = D ∪ S.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Correlation between the LOOD and MIA success. The leave-one-out dataset D is a class-
balanced subset of CIFAR-10 with size 1000, and D′ = D∪S for a randomly chosen differing record
S. We evaluate over 200 random choices of the differing data record (sampled from the CIFAR-10
dataset or uniform distribution over pixel domain [255].) We also evaluate under different LOOD
metrics (mean distance and KL divergence) and different kernel functions (RBF kernel or NNGP
kernel for fully connected network with depth 1). We observe that the correlation between KL and
AUC (right figures) is consistently stronger and more consistent than the correlation between mean
distance LOOD and auc (left figures).


Example C.2 (Mean distance LOOD is not well-correlated with MIA success). We show the corre-
lations between Mean distance LOOD and the success of leave-one-out membership inference attack
(MIA) 9 in Figure 6 (left). We observe that low mean distance and high AUC score occur at the same
time, i.e., low Mean distance LOOD does not imply low attack success. This occurs especially when
the differing point is sampled from a uniform distribution over the pixel domain [0, 255].

Another downside of the mean distance LOOD metric is that solelyP     first-order information is in-
                                                                        m
corporated; this results in it being additive in the queries: M (Q) = i=1 M (Qi ). That is, Mean
distance LOOD does not allow to incorporate the impact of correlations between multiple queries.
Moreover, the mean distance LOOD has a less clear interpretation under certain kernel functions.
For example, under the NNGP kernel, a query with large ℓ2 norm will also have high Mean Distance
LOOD (despite normalized query being the same), due to the homogeneity of NNGP kernel. By
contrast, as we show below, KL divergence (relative entropy) LOOD mitigates these limitations.

C.2      KL D IVERGENCE LOOD

To mitigate the downsides of Mean distance LOOD and incorporate higher-order information, we
use KL divergence (relative entropy) LOOD.
Definition C.3 (KL Divergence LOOD). Let Q ∈ Rd×q be the set of queried data points, where d
is the data feature dimension and q is the number of queries. Let D, D′ be a pair of leave-one-out
datasets such that D′ = D ∪ S where S is the differing data point. Let fD,σ2 and fD′ ,σ2 as coupled
Gaussian processes given D and D′ . Then the Leave-one-out KL distinguishability between fD,σ2

   9
       This is measured by the AUC of the attacker’s false positive rate (FPR) versus his true positive rate (TPR).


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and fD′ ,σ2 on queries Q is as follows,
                                          1      |Σ′ (Q)|
          KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) =        log          − q + Tr(Σ′ (Q)−1 Σ(Q))                   (5)
                                          2       |Σ(Q)|

                                          + (µ(Q) − µ′ (Q))⊤ Σ′ (Q)−1 (µ(Q) − µ′ (Q))               (6)

where for brevity, we denote µ(Q) = µD,σ2 (Q), µ′ (Q) = µD′ ,σ2 (Q), Σ(Q) = ΣD,σ2 (Q), and
Σ′ (Q) = ΣD′ ,σ2 (Q) as defined in Section 2.
Example C.4 (KL divergence is better correlated with MIA success). We show correlations between
KL Divergence LOOD and AUC score of the MIA in Figure 6 (right). We observe that KL Divergence
LOOD and AUC score are well-correlated with each other.

On the assymmetry of KL divergence. In this paper we restrict our discussions to the case when
the base distribution in KL divergence is specified by the predictions on the larger dataset D′ , which
is a reasonable upper bound on the KL divergence with base distribution specified by predictions on
the smaller dataset. This is due to the following observations:

      1. In numerical experiments (e.g., the middle figure in Figure 7) that Σ(Q)/Σ′ (Q) ≥ 1 across
         varying single query Q. This is aligned with the intuition that the added information in the
         larger dataset D reduce its prediction uncertainty (variance).
      2. If Σ(Q)/Σ′ (Q) ≥ 1, then we have that
                          KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) ≥ KL(fD′ ,σ2 (Q)∥fD,σ2 (Q))

         Proof. Denote r = Σ(Q)/Σ′ (Q) ≥ 1, then by Equation (6), for single query Q, we have
         that
                                             1
                                                − log r − 1 + r + 2M (Q)Σ′ (Q)−1

                 KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) =                                              (7)
                                             2
         where M (Q) is the abbreviation for mean distance LOOD as defined in Definition C.1.
         Similarly, when the base distribution of KL divergence changes, we have that

                                                   1              1                −1
                    KL(fD′ ,σ2 (Q)∥fD,σ2 (Q)) =        log r − 1 + + 2M (Q)Σ(Q)           (8)
                                                   2              r
         Therefore, we have that
                           KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) − KL(fD′ ,σ2 (Q)∥fD,σ2 (Q))

                           1      1
                         =     r − − 2 log r + 2M (Q)Σ(Q)−1 (r − 1)
                           2      r
         For r ≥ 1, we have that r − 1r − 2 log r ≥ 0 and M (Q)Σ(Q)−1 (r − 1) ≥ 1. Therefore,
         we have that KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) − KL(fD′ ,σ2 (Q)∥fD,σ2 (Q)) ≥ 0 as long as
         r = Σ(Q)/Σ′ (Q) ≥ 1.

         Therefore, the KL divergence with base prediction distribution specified by the larger
         dataset is an upper bound for the worst-case KL divergence between prediction distribu-
         tions on leave-one-out datasets.

C.3   C OMPARISON BETWEEN M EAN D ISTANCE LOOD AND KL D IVERGENCE LOOD

KL Divergence LOOD is better correlated with attack performance. As observed from Figure 6,
KL divergence LOOD exhibits strong correlation to attack performances in terms of AUC score of
the corresponding leave-one-out MIA. By contrast, Mean distance LOOD is not well-correlated with
MIA AUC score. For example, there exist points that incur small mean distance LOOD while ex-
hibiting high privacy risk in terms of AUC score under leave-one-out MIA. Moreover, from Figure 6
(right), empirically there exists a general threshold of KL Divergence LOOD that implies small AUC
(that persists under different choices of kernel function, and dataset distribution). This is reasonable


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     4
            0.6   M(Q) with S *                                          log( (Q)/ (Q))                    KL(Q) with S *
                  S * = argmaxS|| QM(Q) Q = S||                                                       40   S * 3.9
            0.5                                                      3     (Q)
                  Q * = argmaxQM(Q)                                                                        Q * 4.3


                                                  variance (ratio)
            0.4                                                            (Q)                        30


                                                                                              KL(Q)
                                                                     2
     M(Q)
            0.3                                                                                       20
            0.2
                                                                     1                                10
            0.1
            0.0                                                      0                                0
                   5        0          5                                  5         0     5                 5         0     5
                            Q                                                       Q                                 Q


Figure 7: An example on a one-dimensional toy sine training dataset generated as Appendix F.1,
where each training data is shown as a red dot. We denote S ∗ as a crafted differing data record that
incurs maximum gradient for the mean distance LOOD objective, which is constructed following
the instructions in Algorithm 1. In the left plot, we observe that the optimal query Q∗ for mean
distance LOOD does not equal the differing point S ∗ . On the contrary, the optimal query for KL
LOOD (which incurs maximal information leakage) is the differing point S ∗ (right plot). This shows
the discrepancy between mean distance LOOD and KL LOOD, and shows the inadequacy of using
mean distance LOOD to capture information leakage.


since KL divergence is the mean of negative log-likelihood ratio, and is thus closely related to the
power of log-likelihood ratio membership inference attack.

Why the mean is (not) informative for leakage. To understand when and why there are discrep-
ancies between the mean distance LOOD and KL LOOD, we numerically investigate the optimal
query Q∗ that incurs maximal mean distance LOOD. In Figure 7, we observe that although Q∗ in-
deed incurs the largest mean distance among all possible query data, the ratio log(Σ(Q)/Σ′ (Q))
between prediction variance of GP trained on D and that of GP trained on D′ , is also significantly
smaller at query Q∗ when compared to the differing point S. Consequently, after incorporating the
second-order variance information, the KL divergence at query Q∗ is significantly lower than the
KL divergence at the differing point S ∗ , despite of the fact that Q∗ incurs maximal mean distance
LOOD. A closer look at Figure 7 middle indicates that the variance ratio peaks at the differing point
S ∗ , and drops rapidly as the query becomes farther away from the differing data and the training
dataset. Intuitively, this is because Σ′ (Q), i.e., the variance at the larger dataset, is extremely small
at the differing data point S. As the query gets further away from the larger training dataset, Σ′ (Q)
then increases rapidly. By contrast, the variance on the smaller dataset Σ(Q) is large at the differing
data point S, but does not change a lot around its neighborhood, thus contributing to low variance ra-
tio. This shows that there exist settings where the second order information contributes significantly
to the information leakage, which is not captured by mean distance LOOD (as it only incorporates
first-order information).
As another example case of when the variance of prediction distribution is non-negligible for faith-
fully capturing information leakage, we investigate under kernel functions that are homogeneous
with regard to their input data. Specifically, for a homogeneous kernel function K that satisfifes
K(λx, x′ ) = K(x, λx′ ) = λα K(x, x′ ) for any real number λ ∈ R, we have that
                                                  ΣD,σ2 (λQ) = λ2α ΣD,σ2 (Q)
                                                  µD,σ2 (λQ) = λα µD,σ2 (Q),
where σ 2 > 0 denotes the variance of the label noise. Therefore, for any λ ∈ R, we have that
                                     M (λQ; D, D′ ) = λα M (Q; D, D′ )                                                           (9)
                         KL(fD,σ2 (λQ)∥fD′ ,σ2 (λQ)) = KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q))                                                (10)
Consequently, the query that maximizes Mean distance LOOD explodes to infinity for data with
unbounded domain. On the contrary, the KL Divergence LOOD is scale-invariant and remains
stable as the query scales linearly (because it takes the variance into account, which also grows with
the query scale). In this case, the mean distance is not indicative of the actual information leakage
as the variance is not a constant and is non-negligible.
In summary, KL LOOD is a metric that is better-suited for the purpose of measuring information
leakage, compared to mean distance LOOD. This is because KL LOOD captures the correlation
between multiple queries, and incorporates the second-order information of prediction distribution.


                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     D EFERRED PROOFS AND EXPERIMENTS FOR S ECTION 4
D.1    D EFERRED PROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.1

In this section, we prove that the differing data record is the stationary point for optimizing the
LOOD objective. We will need the following lemma.
Lemma D.1. For A ∈ Rn×n , b ∈ Rn and c ∈ R, we have that
                             −1   −1
                                      A + α−1 A−1 bb⊤ A−1 −α−1 A−1 b

                      A b
                                 =                                                             (11)
                      b⊤ c                  −α−1 b⊤ A−1               α−1
where α = c − b⊤ A−1 b.

We now proceed to prove Theorem 4.1
Theorem 4.1. Let the kernel function be K. Assume that (i) K(x, x) = 1 for all training data x,
                                                                            ′
i.e., all training data are normalized under kernel function K; (ii) ∂K(x,x
                                                                        ∂x
                                                                              )
                                                                                |x′ =x = 0 for all training
                                                                      ′
data x, i.e., the kernel distance between two data records x and x is stable when they are equal.
Then, the differing data is a stationary point for LOOD as a function of query data, as follows
                             ∇Q LOOD(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) |Q=S = 0.

Proof. In this statement, LOOD refers to KL LOOD Definition C.3, therefore by analytical differ-
entiation of Definition C.3, we have that
                ∂                                ∂
                  LOOD(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) =    KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q))                          (12)
               ∂Q                               ∂Q
                                                      Σ′ (Q)

                                                                  ∂   Σ(Q)
                                              = 1−             ·
                                                      Σ(Q)       ∂Q Σ′ (Q)
                                                   ∂∥µ(Q) − µ′ (Q)∥22 ′
                                                +                    Σ (Q)−1
                                                           ∂Q
                                                                    ∂Σ′ (Q)−1
                                                + ∥µ(Q) − µ′ (Q)∥22           ,                       (13)
                                                                       ∂Q
Note that here Σ(Q) and Σ′ (Q) are both scalars, as we consider single query. We denote the three
terms by F1 (Q), F2 (Q), and F3 (Q). We will show that F1 (S) = 0 and F2 (S) = −F3 (S) which is
sufficient to conclude. Let us start with the first term.

      1. F1 (S) = 0: Recall from the Gaussian process definition in Section 2 that
                                                         −1
                                       Σ(Q) = KQQ − KQD MD  KDQ .
         where MD = KDD + σ 2 I. Therefore,
                                        ∂           ∂KQD −1
                                          Σ(Q) = −2     MD KDQ ,
                                       ∂Q            ∂Q
                 ∂K
         where ∂Q   QD
                       ∈ Rd×n (d is the dimension of Q and n is the number of datapoints in the
                                                       ∂
         training set D). A similar formula holds for ∂Q Σ′ (Q).
         From Lemma D.1, and by using the kernel assumption that K(S, S) = 1, we have that

                                                      −1
                       −1       KDD + σ 2 I KDS
                      MD ′ =                                                                          (14)
                                  KSD         1 + σ2
                                 −1           −1          −1                     −1
                                MD + α−1 MD                              −α−1 MD

                                                 KDS KSD MD                         KDS
                             =             −1        −1                         −1                    (15)
                                      −α KSD MD                               α
                                  −1
         where α = 1 + σ 2 − KSD MD  KDS = σ 2 + Σ(S).


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Using the fact that MD′ en+1 = KD′ S + σ 2 en+1 where en+1 = (0, . . . , 0, 1)⊤ ∈ Rn+1 ,
        simple calculations yield
                                                           −1
                                        Σ′ (S) = 1 − KSD′ MD ′ KD ′ S

                                                                     −1
                                                = σ 2 (1 − σ 2 e⊤
                                                                n+1 MD ′ en+1 )
                                                = σ 2 (1 − σ 2 α−1 ).

        We now have all the ingredients for the first term. To alleviate the notation, we denote by
                ∂
        K̊SD = ∂Q KQD |Q=S .
        We obtain

                                                         −1                    −1
                  ∂       Σ(Q)                  −2K̊SD MD   KDS   2Σ(S)K̊SD′ MD ′ KD ′ S
                                       |Q=S =                   +                        .
                 ∂Q       Σ′ (Q)                      ′
                                                     Σ (S)                ′
                                                                         Σ (S)2



        A key observation here is the fact that the last entry of K̊SD′ is 0 by assumption. Using the
                            −1
        formula above for MD  ′ , we obtain


                                     −1             2        −1
                              K̊SD′ MD ′ KD ′ S = −σ K̊SD ′ MD ′ en+1

                                                                        −1
                                                     = −σ 2 K̊SD (−α−1 MD  KDS )
                                                                     −1
                                                     = α−1 σ 2 K̊SD MD  KDS ).



        Now observe that α−1 σ 2 Σ(S)Σ′ (S)−1 = α−1 σ 2 (α − σ 2 )σ −2 (1 − σ 2 α−1 )−1 = 1, which
        concludes the proof for the first term.
     2. F2 (S) + F3 (S) = 0:
                                                    ∂∥µ(Q)−µ′ (Q)∥22
        Let us start by simplifying F2 (S) =              ∂Q            |Q=S Σ′ (S)−1 . The derivative here
        is that of M (Q), and we have
             ∂∥µ(Q) − µ′ (Q)∥22                               −1             −1
                                |Q=S = 2(µ(S) − µ′ (S))(K̊SD MD  yD − K̊SD′ MD ′ yD ′ ).
                   ∂Q
                              −1
        Using the formula of MD ′ and observe that the last entry of K̊SD is zero, we obtain


         ∂∥µ(Q) − µ′ (Q)∥22                                       −1          −1
                            |Q=S = 2α−1 (µ(S) − µ′ (S)) yS − KSD MD

                                                                     yD K̊SD MD  KDS .
               ∂Q
        Moreover, we have that
                                    −1            −1
                µ(S) − µ′ (S) =KSD MD  yD − KSD′ MD ′ yD ′                                            (16)
                                            −1                           −1
                                   =KSD MD     yD − e⊤              2
                                                     n+1 (MD ′ − σ I)MD ′ yD ′                        (17)
                                            −1                       −1
                                   =KSD MD     yD − yS + σ 2 e⊤
                                                              n+1 MD ′ yD ′                           (18)
                                            −1                              −1
                                   =KSD MD     yD − yS + σ 2 (−α−1 KSD MD      yD + α−1 yS )          (19)
                                                                −1
                                   =(σ 2 α−1 − 1)(yS − KSD MD      yD ).                              (20)

        Therefore
                                                          −1
                                                                                  2         −1
            F2 (S) = 2α−1 (σ 2 α−1 − 1)Σ′ (S)−1 yS − KSD MD  yD                       K̊SD MD  KDS    (21)

                                                                   ′    −1
        Let us now deal with F3 (S) = (µ(S) − µ′ (S))2 ∂Σ ∂Q
                                                          (Q)
                                                                             |Q=S . We have that


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             ∂Σ′ (Q)−1                         −1
                                       |Q=S = 2Σ′ (S)−2 K̊SD′ MD ′ KD ′ S
                                ∂Q
                                                                        −1
                                                = −2σ 2 Σ′ (S)−2 K̊SD′ MD ′ en+1

                                                                             −1
                                                = −2σ 2 Σ′ (S)−2 K̊SD (−α−1 MD  KDS )
                                                                          −1
                                                = 2α−1 σ 2 Σ′ (S)−2 K̊SD MD  KDS .                       (22)

                                                                                   ′     −1
            By plugging Equation (22) and 20 into F3 (S) = (µ(S)−µ′ (S))2 ∂Σ ∂Q
                                                                             (Q)
                                                                                              |Q=S , we prove
            that


                                                                     −1
                                                                                2             −1
                 F3 (S) = 2α−1 σ 2 (σ 2 α−1 − 1)2 Σ′ (S)−2 yS − KSD MD  yD             K̊SD′ MD  KDS .
            We conclude by observing that σ 2 (σ 2 α−1 − 1)Σ′ (S)−1 = σ 2 (σ 2 α−1 − 1)σ −2 (1 −
            σ 2 α−1 )−1 = −1.



D.2      P ROOFS FOR REGULARITY CONDITIONS OF COMMONLY USED KERNEL FUNCTIONS

We first show that both the isotropic kernel and the correlation kernel satisfies the condition of
Theorem 4.1. We then show that the RBF kernel, resp. the NNGP kernel on a sphere, is an isotropic
kernel, resp. a correlation kernel.
Proposition D.2 (Isotropic kernels satisfy conditions in Theorem 4.1). Assume that the kernel func-
tion K is isotropic, i.e. there exists a continuously differentiable function g such that K(x, y) =
g(∥x − y∥) for all x, y. Assume that g satisfies z −1 g ′ (z) is bounded10 and g(0) = 1. Then, K
satisfies the conditions of Theorem 4.1.

Proof. It is straightforward that K(x, x) = 1 for all x. Simple calculations yield
                                      ∂K(x, y)   g ′ (∥x − y∥)
                                               =               (x − y).
                                        ∂x           ∥x − y∥
                               ′
By assumption, the term g ∥x−y∥
                          (∥x−y∥)
                                  is bounded for all x ̸= y and also in the limit x → y. Therefore,
it is easy to see that
                                       ∂K(x, y)
                                                 |x=y = 0.
                                         ∂x
                                                                                                   ′
More rigorously, the partial derivative above exists by continuation of the function z → g z(z) z near
0+ .
Proposition D.3 (Correlation kernels satisfy conditions in Theorem 4.1). Assume that      the kernel

                                                                                          ⟨x,y⟩
function K is a correlation kernel, i.e. there exists a function g such that K(x, y) = g ∥x∥∥y∥   for
all x, y ̸= 0. Assume that g(1) = 1. Then, K satisfies the conditions of Theorem 4.1.

Proof. The first condition is satisfied by assumption on g. For the second condition, observe that

                       ∂K(x, y)           1         ⟨x, y⟩      ′   ⟨x, y⟩
                                   =             y−        x  g              ,
                           ∂x          ∥x∥∥y∥        ∥x∥2          ∥x∥∥y∥

which yields ∂K(x,y)
               ∂x    |x=y = 0.

We have the following result for the NNGP kernel.
  10
       Actually, only the boundedness near zero is needed.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition D.4 (NNGP kernel on the sphere satisfies conditions in Theorem Theorem 4.1). The
NNGP kernel function is similar to the correlation kernel. For ReLU activation function, it has the
form

                                                        ⟨x, y⟩
                               K(x, y) = ∥x∥∥y∥g                 .
                                                       ∥x∥∥y∥
This kernel function does not satisfy the conditions of Theorem 4.1 and therefore we cannot conclude
that the differing point is a stationary point. Besides, in practice, NNGP is used with normalized
data in order to avoid any numerical issues; the datapoints are normalized to have ∥x∥ = r for some
fixed r > 0. With this formulation, we can actually show that the kernel K restricted to the sphere
satisfies the conditions of Theorem 4.1. However, as one might guess, it is not straightforward to
compute a "derivative on the sphere" as this requires a generalized definition of the derivative on
manifolds (the coordinates are not free). To avoid dealing with unnecessary complications, we can
bypass this problem by considering the spherical coordinates instead. For x ∈ Rd , there exists a
unique set of parameters (r, φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φd−1 ) ∈ Rd s.t.
                       
                       
                         x1 = r cos(φ1 )
                       
                       x2 = r sin(φ1 ) cos(φ2 )
                       
                       
                       
                       x3 = r sin(φ1 ) sin(φ2 ) cos(φ3 )
                       
                         ..
                       
                       
                         .
                       
                       
                       
                       
                         xd−1 = r sin(φ1 ) sin(φ2 ) . . . sin(φd−2 ) cos(φd−1 )
                         xd = r sin(φ1 ) sin(φ2 ) . . . sin(φd−2 ) sin(φd−1 ).
                       

This is a generalization of the polar coordinates in 2D.

Without loss of generality, let us assume that r = 1 and let φ = (φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φd−1 ). In this case,
the NNGP kernel, evaluated at (φ, φ′ ) is given by
                                                                                               
                       d−1 i−1
                       X      Y                                             d−1
                                                                            Y
      K(φ, φ′ ) = g              sin(φj ) sin(φ′j ) cos(φi ) cos(φ′i ) +     sin(φj ) sin(φ′j ) ,
                               i=1      j=1                                          j=1

                          Q0
with the convention           i=1 · = 1.
Consider the spherical coordinates introduced above, and assume that r = 1. Then, the NNGP
kernel given by K(φ, φ′ ) satisfies the conditions of Theorem 4.1.


Proof. Computing the derivative with respect to φ is equivalent to computing the derivative on the
unit sphere. For l ∈ {1, . . . , d − 1}, we have
                                                                                                        
                                   d−1 i−1                                           d−1
∂K(φ, φ′ )                         X     Y                                           Y
             = J(φ, φ′ )×g ′              sin(φj ) sin(φ′j ) cos(φi ) cos(φ′i ) +     sin(φj ) sin(φ′j ) ,
    ∂φl                            i=1 j=1                                           j=1

where
                                                     
                                                                    
              d−1                      i−1
              X                        Y               i−1
                                                          Y
J(φ, φ′ ) =                                                 sin(φ′j ) cos(φi ) cos(φ′i )
                      
                      cos(φl )               sin(φj ) 
                                                     
              i=l+1                    j=1                j=1
                                       j̸=l
                                              
                                                                                          
                           d−1
                           Y                  d−1
                                                 Y                l−1
                                                                  Y               l−1
                                                                                  Y
                                                   sin(φ′j ) −                      sin(φ′j ) sin(φl ) cos(φ′l ).
                     
          + cos(φl ) 
                                    sin(φj )
                                             
                                                                     sin(φj ) 
                              j=1                  j=1                j=1             j=1
                              j̸=l

When φ = φ′ , we obtain


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) A run of LOOD optimization under NNGP                      (b) A run of LOOD optimization under NNGP
kernel for fully connected network with depth 5                kernel for CNN with depth 5

Figure 8: Additional LOOD optimization results under NNGP kernels with different architectures.
We evaluate on class-balanced subset of CIFAR-10 dataset of size 1000. The optimized query
consistently has similar LOOD and MIA AUC score to the differing data record.



                                                                                        
                              d−1    i−1                                    d−1
                    cos(φl ) X  Y                               cos(φ l )   Y
          J(φ, φ) =                      sin(φj )2  cos(φi )2 +                sin(φj )2 
                    sin(φl )                                     sin(φl )
                             i=l+1 j=1                                       j=1
                                           
                                l
                    cos(φl )  Y
                  −               sin(φj )2  .
                    sin(φl ) j=1

By observing that
                                                                       
                                          
                  d−1        i−1
                  X          Y                             d−1
                                                             Y            Y l
                                  sin(φj )2  cos(φi )2 + 
                                                               sin(φj )2
                                                                          =   sin(φj )2 ,
                 i=l+1   j=1                                 j=1            j=1
                                                             j̸=l

                              ′
we conclude that ∂K(φ,φ
                   ∂φl
                        )
                          |φ=φ′ = 0 for all l.



D.3    M ORE EXAMPLES FOR QUERY OPTIMIZATION UNDER NNGP KERNEL FUNCTIONS

We show the optimized query for NNGP kernel under different model architectures, including fully
connected network and convolutional neural network with various depth, in Figure 8.
To further understand the query optimization process in details, we visualize an example LOOD
optimization process below in Figure 9.

D.4    W HEN THE DIFFERING POINT IS NOT THE OPTIMAL QUERY

In practice data-dependent normalization is used prior to training, such as batch and layer normal-
ization. Note that this normalization of the pair of leave-one-out datasets results in them differing
in more than one record 11 Then the optimized query data record obtains a higher LOOD than the
LOOD of the differing points; we show this in Figure 10; thus in such a setting there is value for the
attacker to optimise the query; this is consistent with results from (Wen et al., 2022) that exploit the
training data augmentation.

   11
      During inference, the same test record will again go through a normalization step that depends on the
training dataset before being passed as a query the corresponding Gaussian process.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Query after 0 itera-   (b) Query after 10 itera-   (c) Query after 20 itera-   (d) LOOD of query versus
tions of optimization      tions of optimization       tions of optimization       number of iterations

Figure 9: Illustration of an example LOOD optimization process at different number of optimization
iterations. We evaluate on a class-balanced subset of CIFAR-10 dataset of size 1000 and NNGP
kernel for fully connected network with depth 5. The query is initialized by uniform sampling from
the pixel domain, and starts recovering the differing data record as the optimization proceeds. We
plot the optimized queries after 0, 10 and 20 iterations and show the convergence of LOOD for query
with regard to the increasing number of iterations for LOOD optimization.


 (a) Differing data and optimized query in run one           (b) Differing data and optimized query in run two

Figure 10: Example runs of LOOD optimization under data-dependent training data normalization
(that uses per-channel mean and standard deviation of training dataset). The optimized query has a
slightly higher LOOD than differing point, and visually has darker color. Our setup uses 500 training
data points of the CIFAR10 dataset (50 per class) and NNGP specified by CNN with depth 5.


E     A NALYZING LOOD FOR M ULTIPLE Q UERIES AND
      L EAVE - ONE - GROUP - OUT S ETTING

E.1   LOOD UNDER MULTIPLE QUERIES

We now turn to a more general question of quantifying the LOOD when having a model answer
multiple queries {Q1 , ..., Qq } rather than just one query Q (this corresponds to the practical setting
of e.g. having API access to a model that one can query multiple times). In this setting, a natu-
ral question is: as the number of queries grows, does the distinguishability between leave-one-out
models’ predictions get stronger (when compared to the single query setting)? Our empirical obser-
vations indicate that the significant information regarding the differing data point resides within its
prediction on that data record. Notably, the optimal single query Q = S exhibits a higher or equal
degree of leakage compared to any other query set.
Specifically, to show that the optimal single query Q = S exhibits a higher or equal de-
gree of leakage compared to any other query set, we performed multi-query optimization
maxQ1 ,··· ,Qq LOOD(Q1 , · · · , Qq ; D, D′ ), which uses gradient descent to optimize the LOOD
across q queries, for varying numbers of queries q = 1, 2, 4, 8. We evaluated this setting under
the following conditions: NNGP using a fully connected network with depths of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10; using
500 random selections of leave-one-out datasets (where the larger dataset is of size 10000) sam-
pled from the ’car’ and ’plane’ classes of the CIFAR10 dataset. Our observations indicate that, in all


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


evaluation trials, the LOOD values obtained from the optimized m queries are lower than the LOOD
value from the single differing data record.

E.2   L EAVE - ONE - GROUP OUT DISTINGUISHABILITY

Here we extend our analysis to the leave-one group-out setting, which involves two datasets, D and
D′ , that differ in a group of s data points {S1 , ..., Ss }. There are no specific restrictions on how these
points are selected. In this setup, we evaluate the model using queries {Q1 , ..., Qq }, where q ≥ 1.
The leave-one group-out approach can provide insights into privacy concerns when adding a group
to the training set, such as in datasets containing records from members of the same organization or
family Dwork et al. (2014). Additionally, this setting can shed light on the success of data poisoning
attacks, where an adversary adds a set of points to the training set to manipulate the model or induce
wrong predictions. Here, we are interested in constructing and studying queries that result in the
highest information leakage about the group, i.e., where the model’s predictions are most affected
under the leave-one group-out setting.
Similar to our previous approach, we run maximization of LOOD to identify the queries that opti-
mally distinguishes the leave-one group-out models. Figure 3 presents the results for single-query
(q = 1) setting and multi-query (q = 3) setting, with a differing group size |S| = 3. We have
conducted in total 10 rounds of experiments, where in each round we randomly select a fixed group
of differing datapoints and then perform 10 independent optimization runs (starting from different
initializations). Among all the runs, 80% of them converged, in which we observe that the optimal
queries are visually similar to the members of the differing group, but the chance of recovering them
varies based on how much each individual data point is exposed through a single query (by measur-
ing LOOD when querying the point). We observe that among the points in set S, the differing data
point with the highest single-query LOOD was recovered 61% of the times, whereas the one with
the lowest single-query LOOD was recovered only 8% of the times. This can be leveraged for data
reconstruction attacks where the adversary has access to part of the train dataset of the model.


F     O PTIMAL QUERY UNDER MEAN DISTANCE AND DEFERRED PROOFS FOR
      S ECTION 5

We discuss here the computation of the optimal query under mean distance. This is equivalent to the
question of where the function is most influenced by a change in the dataset.

F.1   D IFFERING POINT IS IN GENERAL NOT OPTIMAL FOR M EAN D ISTANCE LOOD

Numerically identifying cases where the differing point is not optimal. We define an algorithm
that finds non-optimal differing points S such that when optimizing the query Q, the resulting query
is different from S. When the differing point S is not the optimal query, the gradient of M (Q)
evaluated at S is non-zero. Hence, intuitively, finding points S such that ∥∇Q M (Q) |Q=S ∥ is
maximal should yield points S for which the optimal query is not the differing point (as there is room
for optimising the query due to its positive gradient). We describe this algorithm in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Identifying non-optimal differing points S
Given D and σ, we solve the optimization problem S ∗ = argmaxS ∥∇Q M (Q) |Q=S ∥ to identify a
non-optimal differing point. (We use gradient descent to solve this problem.)

A toy example of where the differing point is not optimal. To assess the efficacy of Algorithm 1,
we consider a simple example in the one-dimensional case. The setup is as follows: (1) Data D =
{(xi , yi ), i = 1, . . . , 10} is generated using the following distribution: xi ∼ N (0, 1), yi = sin(xi ).
(2) Noise parameter is given by σ 2 = 0.01. (3) Kernel is given by K(x, x′ ) = exp(−(x − x′ )2 /2)
(RBF kernel). (4) In Algorithm 1, only Sx is optimized, the label Sy is fixed to Sy = sin(Sx ).

We show in Figure 11a the gradient of M (Q) evaluated at S for varying S, and highlight the point S ∗
(the result of Algorithm 1) that has the largest non-stationarity for mean distance LOOD objective.
Additionally, if we look at the query with maximal LOOD under differing data S = S ∗ , the optimal
query Q∗ that we found is indeed different from the differing point S ∗ , as shown in Figure 11b.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              0.8
                          QM(Q) Q = S                                                      0.6       M(Q) with S * = 3.899
              0.6       S * = argmaxS|| QM(Q) Q = S|| = 3.899                                        S * = argmaxS|| QM(Q) Q = S||
                        Training data                                                      0.5       Q * = argmaxQM(Q)
              0.4                                                                          0.4


                                                                                    M(Q)
              0.2                                                                          0.3

              0.0                                                                          0.2
                                                                                           0.1
              0.2
                                                                                           0.0
                    8      6      4      2      0      2        4      6       8                 8      6      4      2         0    2       4   6       8
                                                S                                                                               Q

              (a) The gradient of M (Q) evaluated at S.                                    (b) The mean distance M (Q) under S ∗ .

Figure 11: We plot the stationary condition indicator function ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S of LOOD when
query Q equals the differing data S, over different values of differing data S with Sx ∈ [−5, 5].
This allows us to run Algorithm 1 to identify a differing point S ∗ = maxS ∥∇Q M (Q) |Q=S ∥ that
has the highest objective (maximal non-stationarity), as shown in Algorithm 1 (where S ∗ = 3.899).
In Figure 11b, we validate that under the optimized differing data S ∗ , the query Q∗ that maximizes
LOOD (over leave-one-out datasets that differ in S ∗ ) is indeed not the differing point S ∗ .


Let us now look at what happens when we choose other differing points S ̸= S ∗ . Figure 12 shows
                                                                1e 7
                         M(Q)                           1.50                                                              0.8
       0.8               S                              1.25
       0.6               QM* = argmaxQM(Q)                                                                                0.6
                         Training data                  1.00
M(Q)


       0.4                                              0.75                                                              0.4
                                                        0.50
       0.2                                                                                                                0.2
                                                        0.25
       0.0                                              0.00                                                              0.0
               5          0              5                                 5            0              5                                 5           0       5
                          Q                                                             Q                                                            Q

Figure 12: The plot of M (Q) for varying Q and S. We also show the optimal query Q∗ and the
differing point S.
the optimal query for three different choices of S. When S is far from the training data D (Sx ∈
{−5, 5}), the optimal query approximately coincides with the differing point S. When S is close to
the training data (Sx = 0), the behaviour of the optimal query is non-trivial, but it should be noted
that the value of the MSE is very small in this case.

Explaining when the differing point is suboptimal for Mean Distance LOOD. We now give a
theoretical explanation regarding why the differing point is suboptimal for mean distance LOOD
when it is close (but not so close) to the training dataset (as observed in Figure 12 middle plot). We
first give a proposition that shows that the gradient of M (Q) is large when the differing point S is
close (but not so close) to the training dataset D.
Proposition 5.1. Consider a dataset D, a differing point S, and a kernel function K satisfying the
same conditions of Theorem 4.1. Then, we have that
                                        −1                 −1             −1
         ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S = −α−2 (1 − KSD MD  KDS )(yS − KSD MD  yD )2 K̊SD MD  KDS ,                                                                               (23)
where M (Q) denotes the mean distance LOOD as defined in Definition C.1, KSD ∈ R1×|D| is
                                                              ⊤             ∂
the kernel matrix between data point S and dataset D, KDS = KSD  , K̊SD = ∂Q  KQD |Q=S ,
                 2                      −1          2
MD = KDD + σ I, and α = 1 − KSD MD KDS + σ .


Proof. The left-hand-side of Equation (23) is ∇Q M (Q) = ∂Q  ∂
                                                                ∥µ(Q)−µ′ (Q)∥22 by definition of the
mean distance LOOD M (Q) in Definition C.1. This term occurs in the term F2 (Q) in Equation (13),
in the proof for Theorem 4.1. Specifically, we have ∇Q M (Q) = F2 (S) · Σ′ (S). The detailed
expression for F2 (S) is computed in line Equation (21) during the proof for Theorem 4.1. Therefore,
by multiplying F2 (S) in Equation (21) with Σ′ (S), we obtain the expression for ∇Q M (Q) in the
statement Equation (23).


                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As a result, it should be generally expected that ∇Q M (Q) |Q=S ̸= 0. We can further see that when
S is far from the data in the sense that KSD ≈ 0, the gradient is also close to 0. In the opposite case
                                                      −1
where S is close to D, e.g. satisfying yS ≈ KSD MD       yD , then the gradient is also close to zero.
Between the two cases, there exists a region where the gradient norm is maximal.

F.2    D IFFERING POINT IS OPTIMAL IN M EAN D ISTANCE LOOD WHEN IT IS FAR FROM THE
       DATASET


Explaining when the differing point is optimal for Mean Distance LOOD. We now prove that
the differing point is (nearly) optimal when it is far from remaining dataset. We assume the inputs
belong to some compact set C ∈ Rd .
Definition F.1 (Isotropic kernels). We say that a kernel function K : C × C → R is isotropic is
there exists a function g : R → R such that K(x, x′ ) = g(∥x − x′ ∥) for all x, x′ ∈ C.

Examples includes RBF kernel, Laplace kernel, etc. For this type of kernel, we have the following
result.
Lemma F.2. Let K be an isotropic kernel, and assume that its corresponding function g is differen-
tiable on C (or just the interior of C). Then, for all Q ∈ C, we have that
                 ∥∇Q M (Q)∥ ≤ ζ (d′ (Q, S) + d′ (Q, D)) max(d(Q, S), d(Q, D)),
where

        • D = {D1 , . . . , Dn }, D′ = D ∪ {S}
        • d′ (Q, D) = maxi∈[n] |g ′ (∥Q − Di ∥)| and d′ (Q, S) = g ′ (∥Q − S∥)
        • d(Q, D) = maxi∈[n] |g(∥Q − Di ∥)| and d(Q, S) = g(∥Q − S∥)
        • ζ > 0 is a constant that depends only on D.

Proof. Let Q ∈ C.          For the sake of simplification, we use the following notation:
u = (KDD + σ 2 I)−1 yD , and u′ = (KD′ D′ + σ 2 I)−1 yD′ .

Simple calculations yield
                                                 n
                                                                                            !
                                                 X
                                 ′
            ∇Q M (Q) = (KQD′ u − KQD u)                (u′i − ui )∇Q KQDi + u′n+1 ∇Q KQ,S       .
                                                 i=1

The first term is upperbounded by ∥u′[n] − u∥d(Q, D) + |u′n+1 |d(Q, S), where u′[n] is the vector
containing the first n coordinates of u′ , and ui refers to the ith coordinate of the vector u.

Now observe that ∥u′ ∥ is bounded for all S, provided the data labels y are bounded. For this,
it suffices to see that ∥(KD′ D′ + σ 2 I)−1 ∥2 ≤ σ −2 because of the positive semi-definiteness of
KD′ D′ .
                                                  Q−Di
Moreover, we have ∇Q KQDi = g ′ (∥Q−Di ∥) ∥Q−D        i∥
                                                         , which implies that ∥∇Q KQDi ∥ = |g ′ (∥Q−
Di ∥)|. Therefore, using the triangular inequality, we obtain
      n
      X
        (u′i − ui )∇Q KQDi + u′n+1 ∇Q KQ,S ≤ ∥u′[n] − u∥1 d′ (Q, D) + |u′n+1 ||g ′ (∥Q − S∥)|.
      i=1
The existence of ζ is trivial.

From Lemma F.2, we have the following corollary.
Corollary F.3. Assume that supz∈R g(z) < ∞, lim|z|→∞ g ′ (z) = 0 and g ′ (0) = 0. Then, provided
that C is large enough, for any D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } and ϵ > 0, there exists a point S, such that if
we define D′ = D ∪ {S}, then ∥∇Q M (S)∥ ≤ ϵ.
That is, if we choose S far enough from the data D, then the point S is close to a stationary point.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Although this shows that gradient is small at S (for S far enough from the data D), it does not say
whether this is close to a local minimum or maximum. T determine the nature of the stationary
points in this region, an analysis of the second-order geometry is needed. More precisely, we would
like to understand the behaviour of the Hessian matrix in a neighbourhood of S. In the next result,
we show that the Hessian matrix is strictly negative around S (for S sufficiently far from the data
D), which confirms that any stationary point in the neighbourhood of S should be a local maximum.
Lemma F.4 (Second-order analysis). Assume that g(0) > 0, limz→0 z −1 g ′ (z) = l− , where l− is
a negative constant that depends on the kernel function, and that limz→∞ z −1 g ′ (z) = 0. Then,
provided that C is large enough, for any D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } and ϵ > 0, there exists a point S, such
that if we define D′ = D ∪{S}, then there exists η > 0 satisfying: for all Q ∈ B(S, η), ∇2Q M (Q) ≺
0.
Lemma F.4. Assume that g(0) > 0, limz→0 z −1 g ′ (z) = l− , where l− < 0 is a negative constant
that depends on the kernel function, and that limz→∞ z −1 g ′ (z) = 0. Then, provided that C is
large enough, for any D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } and ϵ > 0, there exists a point S, such that if we define
D′ = D∪{S}, then there exists η > 0 satisfying: for all Q ∈ B(S, η), ∇2Q M (Q) ≺ 0 is a negatively
definite matrix.


Proof. Let Q ∈ C. Let v(Q) = KQD′ u′ − KQT u. The Hessian is given by

                      ∇2Q M (Q) = v(Q)∇2Q v(Q) + ∇Q v(Q)∇Q v(Q)⊤
                    Pn      ′                     ′
                                                                                      Pn       ′
where ∇2Q v(Q) =                     2                   2
                      i=1 (ui − ui )∇Q KQDi + un+1 ∇Q KQ,S and ∇Q v(Q) =                 i=1 (ui −
ui )∇Q KQDi + u′n+1 ∇Q KQ,S . By Lemma F.2, we have that for S far enough from the dataset
D, we have that ∥∇Q v(S)∥ ≤ ϵ. Therefore, the Hessian at S simplilfies to the following.
                                     n
                                                                               !
                                    X
             2                            ′                    ′
           ∇Q |Q=S M (Q) ≤ v(Q)        (ui − ui )∇Q KQDi + un+1 ∇Q KQ,S + ϵ2 .
                                                   2                  2

                                         i=1


For i ∈ [n], simple calculations yield

                                             (Q − Di )(Q − Di )⊤   g ′ (∥Q − Di ∥)
                 ∇2Q KQDi = α(Q, Di )                     2
                                                                 +                 I,
                                                 ∥Q − Di ∥             ∥Q − Di ∥
                                         ′
                                       (∥Q−Di ∥)
where α(Q, Di ) = g ′′ (∥Q − Di ∥) − g ∥Q−Di∥
                                                 .

Notice that u′n+1 ≈ yS − KSD u. Without loss of generality, assume that yS > 0. For S far enough
from the dataset D, we then have u′n+1 > 0 and v(S) ≈ yS > 0. Let us now see what happens
to the Hessian. For such S, and for any ϵ > 0, there exists a neighbourhood B(S, η), η > 0,
                                         ′
such that for all Q ∈ B(S, η), we have |g ∥Q−D
                                           (∥Q−Di ∥)|
                                               i∥
                                                      < ϵ, and |α(Q, Di )| < ϵ. This ensures that
∥∇2Q KQDi ∥F ≤ 2ϵ where ∥.∥F denotes the Frobenius norm of a matrix. On the other hand, we
                            ′
have ∇2Q KQ,S = limz→0 g z(z) I = l− I. It remains to deal with v(Q). Observe that for S far enough
from the data D, and Q close enough to S, v(Q) is close to v(S) ≈ yS > 0. Thus, taking ϵ small
enough, there exists η satisfying the requirements, which concludes the proof.


Lemma F.4 shows that whenever the point S is isolated from the dataset D, the Hessian is negative in
a neighbourhood of S, suggesting that any local stationary point can only be a local maximum. This
is true for isotropic kernels such as the Radial Basis Function kernel (RBF) and the Laplace kernel.
As future work, Lemma F.2 and Lemma F.4 have important computational implications for the
search for the ‘worst‘ poisonous point S. Finding the worst poisonous point S is computationally
expensive for two reasons: we cannot use gradient descent to optimize over S since the target
function is implicit in S, and for each point S, a matrix inversion is required to find maxQ M (Q).
Our analysis suggests that if S is far enough from the data D, we can use M (S) as a lower-bound
estimate of maxQ M (Q).


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3   T HE OPTIMAL QUERY FOR M EAN D ISTANCE LOOD ON IMAGE DATASETS

As we concluded in the analysis in Section 4, only when the differing datapoint is far away (in
some notion of distance) from the rest of the dataset is the optimal query (in mean distance LOOD)
the differing datapoint. In Figure 11b, we successfully identified settings on a toy dataset where
the differing point is not optimal for mean distance LOOD. We now investigate whether this also
happens on an image dataset.


(a) Differing data and optimized query   (b) Differing data and optimized query   (c) AUC gap on Q, S in 50
in run one                               in run two                               trials

Figure 13: Results for running single query optimization for Mean distance LOOD on class-balanced
subset of CIFAR-10 dataset of size 1000 and RBF kernel. The optimized query has higher mean
distance LOOD than the differing data record, despite having lower MIA AUC score. Across the 50
trials that we evaluated, more than 50% of trials result in an optimized query that has lower AUC
score (by more than 0.025) than the differing data.
In Figure 13, we observe that the optimized record is indeed similar (but not identical) to the differing
record for a majority fraction of cases. Therefore, also in image data the removal of a certain
datapoint may influence the learned function most in a location that is not the removed datapoint
itself. However, the optimized query for Mean distance LOOD still has much smaller MIA AUC
score than the differing data. This again indicates that MSE optimization finds a suboptimal query
for information leakage, despite achieving higher influence (mean distance).


G     D EFERRED PROOFS FOR S ECTION 6

Our starting point is the following observation in prior work (Schoenholz et al., 2017; Hayou et al.,
2019; 2021), which states that the NNGP kernel is sensitive to the choice of the activation function.
                                                                                L
Proposition G.1. Assume that the inputs are normalized, ∥x∥ = 1 and let KN        N GP denote the
NNGP kernel function of a an MLP of depth L ≥ 1. Then, the for any two inputs, we have the
following
                                                                                  L           ′
• [Non-smooth activations] With ReLU: there exists a constant α > 0 such that |kN   N GP (x, x ) −
           −2
α| = Θ(L ).
• [Smooth activations] With GeLU, ELU, Tanh: there exists a constant α > 0 such that
   L           ′             −1
|kN  N GP (x, x ) − α| = Θ(L    ).
As a result, for the same depth L, one should expect that NNGP kernel matrix with ReLU activation
is closer to a low rank constant matrix than with smooth activations such as GeLU, ELU, Tanh.12

For proving Proposition 6.1, we will need the following lemma.
Lemma G.2. Let A and B be two positive definite symmetric matrices. Then, the following holds
                    ∥A−1 − B −1 ∥2 ≤ max(λmin (A)−1 , λmin (B)−1 )∥A − B∥2 ,
where λmin (A) is the smallest eigenvalue of A, and ∥.∥2 is the usual 2-norm for matrices.

Proof. Define the function f (t) = (tA + (1 − t)B)−1 for t ∈ [0, 1]. Standard results from linear
algebra yield
                                   f ′ (t) = −f (t)(A − B)f (t)
  12
     The different activations are given by GeLU(x) = xΦ(x) where Φ is the c.d.f of a standard Gaussian
variable, ELU(x) = 1{x≥1} x + 1{x<1} (ex − 1), and Tanh(x) = (ex − e−x )(ex + e−x )−1 .


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, we have
                                          Z 1
                  ∥f (1) − f (0)∥2 = ∥          f ′ (t)dt∥2
                                            0
                                         Z 1
                                     ≤         ∥f ′ (t)∥2 dt
                                          0
                                         Z 1
                                     ≤         ∥f (t)∥22 ∥A − B∥2 dt
                                          0
                                         Z 1
                                     =         (λmin (tA + (1 − t)B))−2 ∥A − B∥2 dt.
                                          0



Using Weyl’s inequality on the eigenvalues of the sum of two matrices, we have the following
                        λmin (tA + (1 − t)B) ≥ λmin (tA) + λmin ((1 − t)B)
                                             = tλmin (A) + (1 − t)λmin (B)
                                             ≥ min(λmin (A), λmin (B)).
Combining the two inequalities concludes the proof.

We are now ready to prove Proposition 6.1, as follows.
Proposition 6.1. Let D and D′ = D∪S be an arbitrary pair of leave-one-out datasets, where D con-
tains n records and D′ contains n+1 records. Define the function h(α) = supx,x′ ∈D′ |K(x, x′ )−α|.
Let αmin = argminα∈R+ h(α), and thus h(αmin ) quantifies how close the kernel matrix is to a low
rank all-constant matrix. Assume that αmin > 0. Then, it holds that
                         max M (Q) ≤ Cn,αmin ,ζ n5/2 h(αmin ) + Cα,ζ n−1 ,
                            Q

where
                                                              (1 + n−1 )5/2 (αmin + h(αmin ))ζ

                             (αmin + h(αmin ))ζ
Cn,αmin ,ζ = max                                         ,                                                   ,
                       min(αmin σ , |αmin σ − nh(αmin )|) min(αmin σ 2 , |αmin σ 2 − (n + 1)h(αmin )|)
                                 2         2

                      −1
and Cαmin ,ζ = ζ(1 + αmin ).

As a result, if n5/2 h(αmin ) ≪ 1 and n ≫ 1, then the maximum mean distance LOOD (i.e.,
maximum influence) satisfies maxQ M (Q) ≪ 1.

Similarly, there exist constants An , B > 0 such that
                       max KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) ≤ An h(αmin ) + B n−1 .
                        Q


Proof. Let Q be a query point and α ∈ R. We have the following
                                       1       −1            −1
                             M (Q) =     ∥KQD MD  yD − KQD′ MD ′ yD ′ ∥,
                                       2
where MD = (KDD + σ 2 I) and the same holds for MD′ . Let U = αUn + σ 2 I and U ′ =
αUn+1 + σ 2 I , where Un is the n × n matrix having ones everywhere. With this notation, we have
the following bound
                                −1                        −1
             2 × M (Q) ≤ ∥KQD (MD  − U −1 )yD ∥ + ∥KQD′ (MD       ′ −1
                                                            ′ − (U )   )yD′ ∥
                            + ∥KQD′ (U ′ )−1 yD′ − KQD U −1 yD ∥,
Let us deal with first term. We have that
       −1                             −1                                    −1
∥KQD (MD  − U −1 )yD ∥ ≤ ∥KQD ∥∥yD ∥∥MD  − U −1 ∥ ≤ n1/2 (α + h(α))∥yD ∥2 ∥MD  − U −1 ∥.


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using Lemma G.2, we have the following
                    −1
                  ∥MD  − U −1 ∥ ≤ max(λmin (A)−1 , λmin (B)−1 )∥MD − U ∥,
which implies that

                        −1                      n3/2 (α + h(α))∥yD ∥2
                 ∥KQD (MD  − U −1 )yD ∥ ≤                                 × h(α),
                                               min(ασ 2 , |ασ 2 − nh(α)|)
where we have used the inequality |λmin (A) − λmin (B)| ≤ ∥A − B∥2 for any two symmetric
positive matrices A, B.

Similarly, we have the following

                   −1      ′ −1               (n + 1)3/2 (α + h(α))∥yD′ ∥2
           ∥KQD′ (MD ′ − (U )   )yD ∥ ≤                                       × h(α).s
                                             min(ασ 2 , |ασ 2 − (n + 1)h(α)|)

For the last term, we have
            ∥KQD′ (U ′ )−1 yD′ − KQD U −1 yD ∥ ≤ ∥(KQD′ − αe⊤      ′ −1
                                                            n+1 )(U )   yD′ ∥
                                                 + ∥(KQD − αe⊤
                                                             n )U
                                                                  −1
                                                                     yD ∥
                                                 + ∥αe⊤     ′ −1
                                                      n+1 (U )   yD′ − αe⊤
                                                                         nU
                                                                            −1
                                                                               yD ∥.


Moreover, we have                                               √
                             ∥(KQD − αe⊤
                                       n )U
                                            −1
                                               yD ∥ ≤ σ −2 ∥yD ∥ nh(α),
and,                                                           √
                     ∥(KQD′ − αe⊤      ′ −1
                                n+1 )(U )   yD′ ∥ ≤ σ −2 ∥yD′ ∥ n + 1h(α).
For the last term, we have
                                                                  n
                                                   α             X               α
∥αe⊤     ′ −1
   n+1 (U )   yD′ − αe⊤
                      nU
                         −1
                            yD ∥ ≤             2              2
                                                                     yDi +                   |yS |
                                        |αn + σ ||α(n + 1) + σ | i=1       |α(n + 1) + σ 2 |
                                     ≤ (1 + α−1 )ζn−1 .
Combining all these inequalities yield the desired bound.
                                                                               ′
                                                                               Σ (Q)          Σ(Q)
For the second upperbound, observe that KL(fD,σ2 (Q)∥fD′ ,σ2 (Q)) = log        Σ(Q)        + 2Σ ′ (Q) +

(µ(Q)−µ(Q′ ))2
    Σ′ (Q)     − 21 by the definition of KL LOOD in Definition C.3.    Meanwhile, for sufficiently
small h(αmin ), we have that
               2
Σ(Q) = αmin − αmin n(σ 2 + nαmin )−1 + O(h(αmin )) = αmin σ 2 (σ 2 + nαmin )−1 + O(h(αmin )),
and a similar formula holds for Σ′ (Q) with (n + 1) instead of n. Therefore, we obtain
                                     Σ(Q)        αmin
                                      ′
                                           =1+ 2         .
                                     Σ (Q)    σ + αmin n
Combining this result with the upperbound on the mean distance, the existence of An and B is
straightforward.


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.11267    LOOD:0.08864    LOOD:0.08516    LOOD:0.07705    LOOD:0.07506    LOOD:0.07432         LOOD:0.07211    LOOD:0.06895    LOOD:0.06663    LOOD:0.06372    LOOD:0.06230    LOOD:0.05962


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.11267    LOOD:0.08864    LOOD:0.08516    LOOD:0.07705    LOOD:0.07506    LOOD:0.07432         LOOD:0.07211    LOOD:0.06895    LOOD:0.06663    LOOD:0.06372    LOOD:0.06230    LOOD:0.05962


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.05820    LOOD:0.05808    LOOD:0.05660    LOOD:0.05623    LOOD:0.05472    LOOD:0.05416         LOOD:0.05218    LOOD:0.05067    LOOD:0.04894    LOOD:0.04579    LOOD:0.04475    LOOD:0.04438


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.05820    LOOD:0.05808    LOOD:0.05660    LOOD:0.05623    LOOD:0.05472    LOOD:0.05416         LOOD:0.05218    LOOD:0.05067    LOOD:0.04894    LOOD:0.04579    LOOD:0.04475    LOOD:0.04438


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.04369    LOOD:0.04327    LOOD:0.04316    LOOD:0.04199    LOOD:0.04198    LOOD:0.04183         LOOD:0.04144    LOOD:0.04109    LOOD:0.04094    LOOD:0.04037    LOOD:0.04006    LOOD:0.03800


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.04369    LOOD:0.04327    LOOD:0.04316    LOOD:0.04199    LOOD:0.04198    LOOD:0.04183         LOOD:0.04144    LOOD:0.04109    LOOD:0.04094    LOOD:0.04037    LOOD:0.04006    LOOD:0.03800


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.03678    LOOD:0.03734    LOOD:0.03663    LOOD:0.03644    LOOD:0.03642    LOOD:0.03631         LOOD:0.03600    LOOD:0.03504    LOOD:0.03473    LOOD:0.03451    LOOD:0.03403    LOOD:0.03401


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.03678    LOOD:0.03677    LOOD:0.03663    LOOD:0.03644    LOOD:0.03642    LOOD:0.03631         LOOD:0.03600    LOOD:0.03504    LOOD:0.03473    LOOD:0.03451    LOOD:0.03403    LOOD:0.03401


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.03363    LOOD:0.03357    LOOD:0.03341    LOOD:0.03324    LOOD:0.03323    LOOD:0.03300         LOOD:0.03251    LOOD:0.03212    LOOD:0.03169    LOOD:0.03089    LOOD:0.03089    LOOD:0.03078


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.03363    LOOD:0.03357    LOOD:0.03341    LOOD:0.03324    LOOD:0.03323    LOOD:0.03300         LOOD:0.03238    LOOD:0.03212    LOOD:0.03169    LOOD:0.03089    LOOD:0.03089    LOOD:0.03078


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.03059    LOOD:0.02947    LOOD:0.02879    LOOD:0.02858    LOOD:0.02829    LOOD:0.02823         LOOD:0.02802    LOOD:0.02781    LOOD:0.02774    LOOD:0.02730    LOOD:0.02723    LOOD:0.02672


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.03059    LOOD:0.02947    LOOD:0.02879    LOOD:0.02858    LOOD:0.02829    LOOD:0.02823         LOOD:0.02802    LOOD:0.02781    LOOD:0.02774    LOOD:0.02730    LOOD:0.02723    LOOD:0.02672


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02656    LOOD:0.02639    LOOD:0.02600    LOOD:0.02598    LOOD:0.02576    LOOD:0.02570         LOOD:0.02520    LOOD:0.02514    LOOD:0.02503    LOOD:0.02490    LOOD:0.02481    LOOD:0.02466


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.02656    LOOD:0.02639    LOOD:0.02600    LOOD:0.02598    LOOD:0.02576    LOOD:0.02570         LOOD:0.02520    LOOD:0.02514    LOOD:0.02503    LOOD:0.02490    LOOD:0.02481    LOOD:0.02466


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02421    LOOD:0.02408    LOOD:0.02400    LOOD:0.02399    LOOD:0.02392    LOOD:0.02384         LOOD:0.02382    LOOD:0.02376    LOOD:0.02373    LOOD:0.02336    LOOD:0.02331    LOOD:0.02318


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.02421    LOOD:0.02408    LOOD:0.02400    LOOD:0.02399    LOOD:0.02392    LOOD:0.02384         LOOD:0.02382    LOOD:0.02376    LOOD:0.02373    LOOD:0.02336    LOOD:0.02331    LOOD:0.02318


Figure 14: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 1). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02303    LOOD:0.02302    LOOD:0.02289    LOOD:0.02274    LOOD:0.02260    LOOD:0.02229         LOOD:0.02221    LOOD:0.02193    LOOD:0.02186    LOOD:0.02174    LOOD:0.02174    LOOD:0.02156


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.02303    LOOD:0.02302    LOOD:0.02289    LOOD:0.02274    LOOD:0.02260    LOOD:0.02229         LOOD:0.02221    LOOD:0.02193    LOOD:0.02186    LOOD:0.02174    LOOD:0.02174    LOOD:0.02156


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02154    LOOD:0.02152    LOOD:0.02143    LOOD:0.02128    LOOD:0.02103    LOOD:0.02099         LOOD:0.02080    LOOD:0.02078    LOOD:0.02068    LOOD:0.02067    LOOD:0.02065    LOOD:0.02059


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.02154    LOOD:0.02152    LOOD:0.02143    LOOD:0.02128    LOOD:0.02103    LOOD:0.02099         LOOD:0.02080    LOOD:0.02077    LOOD:0.02068    LOOD:0.02067    LOOD:0.02065    LOOD:0.02059


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02059    LOOD:0.02021    LOOD:0.02015    LOOD:0.02011    LOOD:0.02011    LOOD:0.02009         LOOD:0.02009    LOOD:0.02002    LOOD:0.02001    LOOD:0.01996    LOOD:0.01988    LOOD:0.01986


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.02059    LOOD:0.02021    LOOD:0.02015    LOOD:0.02011    LOOD:0.02011    LOOD:0.02009         LOOD:0.02009    LOOD:0.02002    LOOD:0.02001    LOOD:0.01996    LOOD:0.01988    LOOD:0.01986


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01976    LOOD:0.01973    LOOD:0.01972    LOOD:0.01946    LOOD:0.01917    LOOD:0.01917         LOOD:0.01917    LOOD:0.01897    LOOD:0.01893    LOOD:0.01889    LOOD:0.01847    LOOD:0.01835


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.01976    LOOD:0.01973    LOOD:0.01972    LOOD:0.01946    LOOD:0.01917    LOOD:0.01917         LOOD:0.01917    LOOD:0.01897    LOOD:0.01893    LOOD:0.01889    LOOD:0.01847    LOOD:0.01835


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01825    LOOD:0.01822    LOOD:0.01815    LOOD:0.01801    LOOD:0.01783    LOOD:0.01776         LOOD:0.01771    LOOD:0.01762    LOOD:0.01723    LOOD:0.01694    LOOD:0.01651    LOOD:0.01642


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.01825    LOOD:0.01822    LOOD:0.01815    LOOD:0.01801    LOOD:0.01783    LOOD:0.01776         LOOD:0.01771    LOOD:0.01762    LOOD:0.01723    LOOD:0.01694    LOOD:0.01651    LOOD:0.01642


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01642    LOOD:0.01625    LOOD:0.01584    LOOD:0.01568    LOOD:0.01547    LOOD:0.01527         LOOD:0.01514    LOOD:0.01514    LOOD:0.01511    LOOD:0.01494    LOOD:0.01485    LOOD:0.01460


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.01642    LOOD:0.01625    LOOD:0.01584    LOOD:0.01568    LOOD:0.01547    LOOD:0.01527         LOOD:0.01514    LOOD:0.01514    LOOD:0.01511    LOOD:0.01494    LOOD:0.01485    LOOD:0.01460


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01450    LOOD:0.01425    LOOD:0.01419    LOOD:0.01419    LOOD:0.01404    LOOD:0.01365         LOOD:0.01335    LOOD:0.01315    LOOD:0.01313    LOOD:0.01303    LOOD:0.01238    LOOD:0.01216


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.01450    LOOD:0.01425    LOOD:0.01419    LOOD:0.01419    LOOD:0.01404    LOOD:0.01365         LOOD:0.01335    LOOD:0.01315    LOOD:0.01313    LOOD:0.01303    LOOD:0.01238    LOOD:0.01216


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01197    LOOD:0.01190    LOOD:0.01174    LOOD:0.01173    LOOD:0.03048    LOOD:0.01160         LOOD:0.01160    LOOD:0.01128    LOOD:0.01079    LOOD:0.01045    LOOD:0.01037    LOOD:0.01002


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.01197    LOOD:0.01190    LOOD:0.01174    LOOD:0.01172    LOOD:0.01166    LOOD:0.01160         LOOD:0.01160    LOOD:0.01128    LOOD:0.01079    LOOD:0.01045    LOOD:0.01037    LOOD:0.01002


Figure 15: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 2). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00943    LOOD:0.00942    LOOD:0.00903    LOOD:0.00881    LOOD:0.00833    LOOD:0.00832         LOOD:0.00822    LOOD:0.00812    LOOD:0.00759    LOOD:0.00750    LOOD:0.01980    LOOD:0.00741


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00943    LOOD:0.00942    LOOD:0.00903    LOOD:0.00881    LOOD:0.00833    LOOD:0.00832         LOOD:0.00822    LOOD:0.00812    LOOD:0.00758    LOOD:0.00750    LOOD:0.00750    LOOD:0.00741


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00725    LOOD:0.00715    LOOD:0.00595    LOOD:0.00556    LOOD:0.00465    LOOD:0.00464         LOOD:0.05335    LOOD:0.08214    LOOD:0.01642    LOOD:0.00367    LOOD:0.00347    LOOD:0.04034


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00725    LOOD:0.00715    LOOD:0.00595    LOOD:0.00556    LOOD:0.00465    LOOD:0.00464         LOOD:0.00460    LOOD:0.00389    LOOD:0.00383    LOOD:0.00367    LOOD:0.00347    LOOD:0.00344


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.03648    LOOD:0.00307    LOOD:0.03577    LOOD:0.03706    LOOD:0.05191    LOOD:0.04711         LOOD:0.08392    LOOD:0.02822    LOOD:0.05252    LOOD:0.02144    LOOD:0.03490    LOOD:0.04911


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00338    LOOD:0.00307    LOOD:0.00282    LOOD:0.00271    LOOD:0.00247    LOOD:0.00206         LOOD:0.00199    LOOD:0.00198    LOOD:0.00193    LOOD:0.00192    LOOD:0.00162    LOOD:0.00160


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.05124    LOOD:0.02470    LOOD:0.05657    LOOD:0.02189    LOOD:0.06925    LOOD:0.03109         LOOD:0.02962    LOOD:0.04066    LOOD:0.07845    LOOD:0.04868    LOOD:0.07299    LOOD:0.02364


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00154    LOOD:0.00151    LOOD:0.00148    LOOD:0.00143    LOOD:0.00143    LOOD:0.00142         LOOD:0.00137    LOOD:0.00136    LOOD:0.00134    LOOD:0.00128    LOOD:0.00122    LOOD:0.00122


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.07113    LOOD:0.04005    LOOD:0.03044    LOOD:0.03634    LOOD:0.01994    LOOD:0.02035         LOOD:0.03902    LOOD:0.02847    LOOD:0.02229    LOOD:0.04828    LOOD:0.03866    LOOD:0.01505


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00115    LOOD:0.00113    LOOD:0.00113    LOOD:0.00112    LOOD:0.00111    LOOD:0.00109         LOOD:0.00109    LOOD:0.00106    LOOD:0.00104    LOOD:0.00104    LOOD:0.00103    LOOD:0.00102


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02578    LOOD:0.02855    LOOD:0.00437    LOOD:0.01112    LOOD:0.06310    LOOD:0.01424         LOOD:0.02354    LOOD:0.02091    LOOD:0.03824    LOOD:0.03619    LOOD:0.06928    LOOD:0.01827


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00101    LOOD:0.00101    LOOD:0.00099    LOOD:0.00096    LOOD:0.00095    LOOD:0.00091         LOOD:0.00090    LOOD:0.00089    LOOD:0.00089    LOOD:0.00087    LOOD:0.00087    LOOD:0.00087


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.05793    LOOD:0.04239    LOOD:0.03110    LOOD:0.03124    LOOD:0.02729    LOOD:0.03789         LOOD:0.03684    LOOD:0.04845    LOOD:0.01951    LOOD:0.03032    LOOD:0.02307    LOOD:0.02515


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00087    LOOD:0.00084    LOOD:0.00083    LOOD:0.00080    LOOD:0.00080    LOOD:0.00080         LOOD:0.00079    LOOD:0.00079    LOOD:0.00078    LOOD:0.00078    LOOD:0.00077    LOOD:0.00075


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02202    LOOD:0.02633    LOOD:0.01066    LOOD:0.03576    LOOD:0.01265    LOOD:0.03237         LOOD:0.03547    LOOD:0.06689    LOOD:0.03437    LOOD:0.02633    LOOD:0.01637    LOOD:0.01051


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00075    LOOD:0.00071    LOOD:0.00071    LOOD:0.00071    LOOD:0.00067    LOOD:0.00064         LOOD:0.00062    LOOD:0.00061    LOOD:0.00061    LOOD:0.00061    LOOD:0.00059    LOOD:0.00059


Figure 16: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 3). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01583    LOOD:0.01854    LOOD:0.01069    LOOD:0.01774    LOOD:0.00778    LOOD:0.01150         LOOD:0.01709    LOOD:0.02363    LOOD:0.03169    LOOD:0.03482    LOOD:0.01416    LOOD:0.01411


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00058    LOOD:0.00057    LOOD:0.00056    LOOD:0.00056    LOOD:0.00053    LOOD:0.00053         LOOD:0.00051    LOOD:0.00051    LOOD:0.00050    LOOD:0.00048    LOOD:0.00048    LOOD:0.00048


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.04709    LOOD:0.02629    LOOD:0.02209    LOOD:0.01680    LOOD:0.02008    LOOD:0.02257         LOOD:0.04513    LOOD:0.01833    LOOD:0.01362    LOOD:0.02947    LOOD:0.02422    LOOD:0.03767


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00047    LOOD:0.00047    LOOD:0.00046    LOOD:0.00046    LOOD:0.00046    LOOD:0.00046         LOOD:0.00045    LOOD:0.00045    LOOD:0.00044    LOOD:0.00044    LOOD:0.00044    LOOD:0.00043


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02585    LOOD:0.02182    LOOD:0.00717    LOOD:0.01367    LOOD:0.01369    LOOD:0.01359         LOOD:0.00866    LOOD:0.01945    LOOD:0.02525    LOOD:0.02015    LOOD:0.02675    LOOD:0.00433


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00042    LOOD:0.00042    LOOD:0.00041    LOOD:0.00039    LOOD:0.00037    LOOD:0.00036         LOOD:0.00036    LOOD:0.00035    LOOD:0.00034    LOOD:0.00033    LOOD:0.00032    LOOD:0.00031


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00779    LOOD:0.02493    LOOD:0.02392    LOOD:0.00882    LOOD:0.02291    LOOD:0.02842         LOOD:0.03416    LOOD:0.02719    LOOD:0.03477    LOOD:0.02603    LOOD:0.02004    LOOD:0.01747


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00031    LOOD:0.00031    LOOD:0.00031    LOOD:0.00031    LOOD:0.00030    LOOD:0.00029         LOOD:0.00029    LOOD:0.00027    LOOD:0.00026    LOOD:0.00026    LOOD:0.00026    LOOD:0.00025


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01911    LOOD:0.00400    LOOD:0.02012    LOOD:0.00856    LOOD:0.01670    LOOD:0.00872         LOOD:0.02935    LOOD:0.01848    LOOD:0.03761    LOOD:0.01219    LOOD:0.01360    LOOD:0.02007


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00025    LOOD:0.00023    LOOD:0.00023    LOOD:0.00023    LOOD:0.00022    LOOD:0.00022         LOOD:0.00022    LOOD:0.00022    LOOD:0.00021    LOOD:0.00021    LOOD:0.00019    LOOD:0.00018


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00368    LOOD:0.00975    LOOD:0.00647    LOOD:0.01842    LOOD:0.01831    LOOD:0.02481         LOOD:0.03865    LOOD:0.01153    LOOD:0.01375    LOOD:0.02420    LOOD:0.02273    LOOD:0.02417


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00018    LOOD:0.00018    LOOD:0.00017    LOOD:0.00017    LOOD:0.00016    LOOD:0.00016         LOOD:0.00016    LOOD:0.00015    LOOD:0.00014    LOOD:0.00014    LOOD:0.00014    LOOD:0.00013


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02124    LOOD:0.01064    LOOD:0.01941    LOOD:0.02026    LOOD:0.01117    LOOD:0.01717         LOOD:0.02648    LOOD:0.01433    LOOD:0.01058    LOOD:0.01447    LOOD:0.01330    LOOD:0.02837


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00013    LOOD:0.00013    LOOD:0.00012    LOOD:0.00012    LOOD:0.00012    LOOD:0.00011         LOOD:0.00011    LOOD:0.00010    LOOD:0.00010    LOOD:0.00010    LOOD:0.00009    LOOD:0.00009


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.04528    LOOD:0.00291    LOOD:0.00686    LOOD:0.02288    LOOD:0.00579    LOOD:0.01565         LOOD:0.02777    LOOD:0.02554    LOOD:0.00456    LOOD:0.00594    LOOD:0.00925    LOOD:0.03961


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00009    LOOD:0.00009    LOOD:0.00008    LOOD:0.00007    LOOD:0.00007    LOOD:0.00007         LOOD:0.00006    LOOD:0.00006    LOOD:0.00006    LOOD:0.00006    LOOD:0.00006    LOOD:0.00005


Figure 17: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 4). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01168    LOOD:0.01904    LOOD:0.02628    LOOD:0.01840    LOOD:0.01897    LOOD:0.00175         LOOD:0.01233    LOOD:0.00614    LOOD:0.03230    LOOD:0.00726    LOOD:0.00734    LOOD:0.00226


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00005    LOOD:0.00005    LOOD:0.00005    LOOD:0.00005    LOOD:0.00005    LOOD:0.00005         LOOD:0.00004    LOOD:0.00004    LOOD:0.00004    LOOD:0.00003    LOOD:0.00003    LOOD:0.00003


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01252    LOOD:0.01731    LOOD:0.01999    LOOD:0.00641    LOOD:0.00956    LOOD:0.01840         LOOD:0.01836    LOOD:0.01037    LOOD:0.02315    LOOD:0.01998    LOOD:0.00975    LOOD:0.02696


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00003    LOOD:0.00003    LOOD:0.00003    LOOD:0.00002    LOOD:0.00002    LOOD:0.00002         LOOD:0.00001    LOOD:0.00001    LOOD:0.00001    LOOD:0.00001    LOOD:0.00001    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.01009    LOOD:0.02939    LOOD:0.03047    LOOD:0.01789    LOOD:0.01005    LOOD:0.01233         LOOD:0.01546    LOOD:0.00195    LOOD:0.01883    LOOD:0.03404    LOOD:0.00579    LOOD:0.05763


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.03037    LOOD:0.02439    LOOD:0.00886    LOOD:0.01063    LOOD:0.03072    LOOD:0.03627         LOOD:0.02162    LOOD:0.01157    LOOD:0.01389    LOOD:0.00880    LOOD:0.01145    LOOD:0.02190


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02863    LOOD:0.02917    LOOD:0.02089    LOOD:0.03417    LOOD:0.02626    LOOD:0.00657         LOOD:0.00738    LOOD:0.01073    LOOD:0.00952    LOOD:0.00174    LOOD:0.00458    LOOD:0.01520


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00992    LOOD:0.01582    LOOD:0.01820    LOOD:0.00635    LOOD:0.00505    LOOD:0.00255         LOOD:0.00570    LOOD:0.00645    LOOD:0.00446    LOOD:0.03138    LOOD:0.00661    LOOD:0.01677


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.00846    LOOD:0.01485    LOOD:0.02242    LOOD:0.01209    LOOD:0.02104    LOOD:0.00935         LOOD:0.00601    LOOD:0.01314    LOOD:0.04021    LOOD:0.00694    LOOD:0.00436    LOOD:0.03243


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


       differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
      LOOD:0.02508    LOOD:0.01027    LOOD:0.00296    LOOD:0.02684    LOOD:0.00767    LOOD:0.00742         LOOD:0.01070    LOOD:0.02532    LOOD:0.02327    LOOD:0.00152    LOOD:0.01116    LOOD:0.01594


        opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
      LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


Figure 18: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 5). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image
 LOOD:0.00994    LOOD:0.00327    LOOD:0.01066    LOOD:0.00181    LOOD:0.03200    LOOD:0.01688         LOOD:0.02805    LOOD:0.00352    LOOD:0.00961    LOOD:0.00846    LOOD:0.01028    LOOD:0.01484


   opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query
 LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


  differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image    differ image         differ image    differ image
 LOOD:0.01617    LOOD:0.00921    LOOD:0.03189    LOOD:0.02536    LOOD:0.00318    LOOD:0.01481         LOOD:0.00467    LOOD:0.00643


   opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query       opt query            opt query       opt query
 LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000         LOOD:0.00000    LOOD:0.00000


Figure 19: Visualization of 500 randomly chosen differing data and query optimized by LOOD
(Part 6). We show differing data above the optimized query, and use their LOOD gap to sort the
images.


                                                                                                 37
