Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NCENTIVIZED C OLLABORATIVE L EARNING : A RCHI -
TECTURAL D ESIGN AND I NSIGHTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Collaborations among various entities, such as companies, research labs, AI
         agents, and edge devices, have become increasingly crucial for achieving ma-
         chine learning tasks that cannot be accomplished by a single entity alone. This
         is likely due to factors such as security constraints, privacy concerns, and limita-
         tions in computation resources. As a result, collaborative learning (CL) research
         has been gaining momentum. However, a significant challenge in practical ap-
         plications of CL is how to effectively incentivize multiple entities to collaborate
         before any collaboration occurs. In this study, we propose ICL, an architectural
         framework for incentivized collaborative learning, and provide insights into the
         critical issue of when and why incentives can improve collaboration performance.
         Then, we apply the concepts of ICL to specific use cases in federated learning,
         assisted learning, and multi-armed bandit, corroborated with both theoretical and
         experimental results.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved significant success in engineering and
scientific domains, e.g., robotic control (Deisenroth et al., 2013; Kober & Peters, 2014), natural
language processing (Li et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al., 2017), computer vision (Liu et al., 2017;
Brunner et al., 2017), and finance (Lee et al., 2020; Lussange et al., 2021). With this trend, a growing
number of entities, e.g., governments, hospitals, companies, and edge devices, are integrating AI
models into their workflows to facilitate data analysis and enhance decision-making.
While a variety of standardized machine learning models are readily available for entities to imple-
ment AI tasks, model performance heavily depends on the quality and availability of local training
data, models, and computation resources (Goodfellow et al., 2016). For example, a local bank’s
financial model may be constrained by the small size of its subjects and the number of feature vari-
ables. However, this bank could possibly improve its model by integrating additional observations
and feature variables from other banks or industry sectors. Therefore, there is a strong need for
collaborative learning that allows entities to enhance their model performance while respecting the
proprietary nature of local resources. This has motivated recent research on learning frameworks,
such as Federated Learning (FL) (Konecny et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Diao et al., 2021b;
2022c) and Assisted Learning (AL) (Xian et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2023b; Diao et al., 2022b; Wang
et al., 2022), which can improve learning performance from distributed data.
1.1 D ESIGN GOALS OF INCENTIVIZED COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
Machine learning entities, similar to humans, can collaborate to accomplish tasks that benefit each
participant. However, these entities possess local machine learning resources that can be highly
heterogeneous in terms of training procedures, computation cost, sample size, and data quality. A
key challenge in facilitating such collaborations is understanding the motivations and incentives
that drive entities to participate in the first place. For example, a recent study on parallel assisted
learning (Wang et al., 2022, Section III.D) has demonstrated cases where two entities, Alice and
Bob, collaborate to improve the performance of their distinct tasks simultaneously. However, it may
be the case that Alice can assist Bob more than the other way around. In such scenarios, an effective
incentive mechanism is crucial for facilitating a “benign” collaboration in which high-quality entities
are suitably motivated to maximize the overall benefit.
The need to deploy collaborative learning systems in the real world has motivated recent research
in incentivized FL. The existing literature has studied different aspects of incentives in particular


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


application cases, e.g., using contract theory to set the price for participating in FL, or evaluating
contributions for reward or penalty allocation, which we will review in Subsection 1.2. However,
understanding when and why incentive mechanism design can enhance collaboration performance is
under-explored. This work aims to address this problem by developing an incentivized collaborative
learning framework and general principles that can be applied to many use cases. Three examples
are given below to show the potential use scenarios to be revisited in later sections.
Example 1. Multiple clinics hold data on different patients. They must decide whether to partici-
pate in an FL platform to improve their local prediction performance. Specifically, each participating
clinic will have the chance to be selected as an active participant to realize an FL-updated model us-
ing their local data and computation resources. All participants will receive the updated model. A
clinic has the incentive to participate as long as the expected model gain is more valuable than the
participation price it must pay for the platform, other participants, or both. From the system per-
spective, the incentive aims to maximize the model gain or monetary profit from entities’ payments.
Example 2. Multiple entities collect surveys from the same cohort of customers but in different
modalities, e.g., demographic and healthcare information. The user data can be collated by a non-
private identifier, e.g., an encrypted username. They will use assisted learning to improve pre-
dictability by leveraging multi-modalities without sharing models. The incentive mechanism must
enable entities to reach a consensus on who to realize the collaboration to benefit the entities.
Example 3. An investment team is recruiting strategists. Once recruited, a strategist will be selected
by a multi-armed bandit (MAB) rule to realize a reward that will be enjoyed by all the participants.
Each strategist will pay or be paid to participate. Under a good incentive, 1) a top-performing
strategist may participate because it may be selected and receive collected payment from others, 2)
a mediocre strategist may participate to enjoy the reward shared by the top strategist at a relatively
smaller participation cost, and 3) a laggard strategist may not participate because of an overly high
participation cost, which can in turn benefit the collaborative system by reducing exploration costs.
This work establishes an incentivized collabora-
tive learning framework to abstract common ap-                         Coordinator
plication scenarios. In our framework, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1 and elaborated in Section 2, a set
                                                                 Information Payment                             Gain
of learners play three roles as the game proceeds:
1) candidates, who decide whether to participate            Pricing Plan         Selection Plan     Collaboration
in the game based on a pricing plan, 2) partici- Candidates            Participants      Active Participants
pants, whose final payment, which can be neg-
ative if interpreted as a reward, depends on the        Stage 1         Stage 2         Stage 3          Stage 4

pricing plan and actual outcomes of collabora- Figure 1: An overview of the incentivized col-
tion, and 3) active participants, who jointly real- laborative learning game
ize a collaboration gain to be enjoyed by all par-
ticipants. The system-level goal is to promote high-quality collaborations for an objective. Examples
of the collaboration gain include improved models, predictability, and rewards.
We will use the following design principles of incentives to benefit collaboration: (1) Each partici-
pant can simultaneously play the roles of contributor and beneficiary of the collaboration gain. (2)
Each participant will pay to participate in return for a collaboration gain if the improvement over
its local gain outweighs its participation cost. (3) The pricing plan determines each entity’s partic-
ipation cost and can be positive or non-positive, tailored to reward those who contribute positively
and charge those who hinder collaboration or disproportionately benefit from it. (4) The system for
collaboration may incur a net zero cost, while still engaging entities to achieve the maximum pos-
sible collaborative gains. Our framework provides a unified understanding for the modular design
of incentives from a system design perspective. We will show how incentives can be used to reduce
exploration complexity and create win-win situations for participants from collaboration.
Contribution of this work: The main contributions are threefold.
• First, we propose an architectural framework for incentivized collaborative learning (ICL) along
with design principles. These collectively formalize the role of incentives in learning, ensuring that
eligible entities are motivated to actively foster collaboration and benefit all the participants.
• Second, we apply the proposed framework and principles to three concrete use scenarios, includ-
ing incentivized FL, AL, and MAB, and quantify the insights. In particular, we demonstrate how the
pricing and selection plans can play crucial roles in reducing the cost of exploration in learning, ul-


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


timately creating mutual benefits for all participating entities. We also conduct experimental studies
to corroborate the developed theory and insights.
• Lastly, the developed ICL framework promotes interoperability among different collaborative
learning settings, allowing researchers to adapt the same architecture across various use cases.
1.2 R ELATED WORK
To address collaborative learning challenges, existing studies have focused on various aspects, such
as security (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020), privacy (Truex et al., 2019; Le et al.,
2022), fairness (Yu et al., 2020b;a), personalization (Chen et al., 2022; Le et al., 2022; Khan et al.,
2023), model heterogeneity (He et al., 2020; Diao et al., 2021b; Mushtaq et al., 2021), and lack-of-
labels (Diao et al., 2022c; Mushtaq et al., 2023). However, a fundamental question remains: why
would participants want to join collaborative learning in the first place? This has motivated an active
line of research to use incentive schemes to enhance collaboration. We briefly review them below.
Promoter of incentives Who want to design mechanisms to incentivize participants and initiate a
collaboration? From this angle, existing work can be roughly categorized in two classes: server-
centric, meaning that a collaboration is initiated by a server who owns the model and aims to incen-
tivize edge devices to join model training (Kang et al., 2019; Pandey et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020;
Zhan et al., 2020), and participant-centric where the incentives are designed at the participants’
interest (Huang et al., 2022).
Different goals of incentives What is the objective of an incentive mechanism design? Most exist-
ing work on incentivized collaborative learning, in particular FL, have adopted some common rules
for incentive mechanism design, e.g. incentive compatibility and individual rationality (Kang et al.,
2019; Zhan et al., 2020). The eventual objective for incentivized collaboration is often maximiz-
ing profit from the perspective of the incentive mechanism designer, which is either the coordinator
(also called “server”, “platform”) (Kang et al., 2019) or the participants (also called “clients” in
FL) (Huang et al., 2022). Another commonly studied objective is maximizing global model perfor-
mance in FL, which can be commercialized and turned into profit (Zeng et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020b;
Cho et al., 2022). Other objectives being studied include budget balance (Tang & Wong, 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022), computational efficiency (Xu et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2022), fairness (Tay
et al., 2022), and Pareto efficiency (Zeng et al., 2020).
Components of incentive mechanism design How to implement incentives? The existing work
has focused one of the following machinery: 1) pricing, in which participants bid for collaboration
(using the auction theory) (Zeng et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022) or a coordinating server determines
the price (based on contract theory) (Kang et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2022),and 2) payment allocation,
based on contribution evaluation (Yang et al., 2022), fair sharing (Carbunar & Tripunitara, 2010; Yu
et al., 2020a), rewarding, or local accuracy (Han et al., 2022).
Overall, the role of incentives in collaborative learning has inspired many recent studies on bringing
economic concepts to design learning platforms. Most existing work has focused on FL, especially
mobile edge computing scenarios. Nonetheless, the need for collaboration extends beyond FL, as
shown in (Tay et al., 2022) which studied synthetic data generation based on collaborative data shar-
ing, and (Wang et al., 2022) which developed an AL framework where an entity being assisted is
bound to assist others based on implicit mechanism design. Moreover, incentives in collaborative
learning is under-studied in two critical aspects. Firstly, how to design incentives under a unified ar-
chitecture, considering the existing work often focuses on specific application scenarios? Secondly,
when and why do incentives improve collaboration performance? Prior work has often focused on
designing an incentive as a separate problem based on an existing collaboration scheme, instead of
treating incentive as part of the learning itself. These gaps motivated this work on ICL.

2   F ORMULATION OF I NCENTIVIZED C OLLABORATIVE L EARNING (ICL)
2.1 OVERVIEW OF ICL AND INTUITIONS
We will focus on a generic round and provide an overview of the ICL formulation below. As illus-
trated in Fig. 1, a collaboration consists of four stages. In Stage 1, the coordinator sets a pricing
plan based on prior knowledge of the candidates’ potential gains (e.g., from previous rounds), and
each candidate decides whether to be a participant by committing a payment at the end of this round.
In Stage 2, the coordinator collects participants’ information (e.g., their estimated gains) and uses
a selection plan to choose the active participants. In Stage 3, the active participants collaborate to
produce an outcome, which is enjoyed by all participants (including non-active ones). In Stage 4,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the coordinator charges according to the pricing plan, the realized collaboration gain, and individual
gains of active participants. Here, a gain (e.g., decrease in test loss) is assumed to be a function of
the realized outcome (e.g., trained model).
2.2 D ETAILED EXPLANATIONS OF THE ICL COMPONENTS
The proposed collaborative learning game includes two parties: candidate entities and coordinator.
For notational convenience, we will first introduce a single-round game and extend it in Section 3.
                                                          ∆
Candidates: Consider M candidates indexed by [M ] = {1, . . . , M }. In an ICL game, each candi-
date m can potentially produce an outcome xm ∈ X , such as a model parameter. Any element in X
can be mapped to a gain Z ∈ R, e.g., reduced prediction loss. But such a gain will not necessarily
be realized unless the candidate becomes an active collaborator of the game. At the beginning of a
game, a candidate will receive a pricing plan from the coordinator specifying the cost of participat-
ing in the game and use that to decide whether to become a participant of the game. If a candidate
participates, it has the opportunity to be selected as an active participant. All active participants will
then collaborate to produce an outcome (e.g., model or prediction protocol), which also generates a
collaboration gain. This outcome is distributed among all participants to benefit them. At the end of
the game, all participants must pay according to the pre-specified pricing plan, with the actual price
depending on the realized collaboration gain.
We let IP and IA denote the set of participants and active participants, respectively (so IA ⊆ IP ⊆
[M ]). Given the above, an entity has a consumer-provider bi-profile in the sense that it can serve as
a consumer who wishes to benefit from and also a provider who contributes to the collaboration.
Coordinator: A coordinator, e.g., company, government agency, or platform, orchestrates the game
by performing the following actions in order: determine a pricing plan of the participation costs
based on initial information collected from candidates, select active participants from those candi-
dates that have chosen to become participants, realize the collaboration gain, and charge the partici-
pants according to the gain. The coordinator can be a virtual entity rather than a physical one.
Collaboration gain: Given active participants represented by IA , the collaborative gain is a function
of their individual outcomes, denoted by G : (xm , m ∈ IA ) 7→ zIA ∈ R. This gain will be enjoyed
by all participants and the coordinator, e.g., in the form of an improved model distributed by the
coordinator. We also use G : xm 7→ zm ∈ R, m ∈ [M ], to denote the gain of an individual outcome.
Pricing plan: The pricing plan is a function from R|IA |+1 to R|IP | that maps the collaboration gain
and individual gains of active participants to a cost needed to participate in the game, denoted by
                                 P : (z, zm , m ∈ IA ) 7→ (cj , j ∈ IP ),                             (1)
where z denotes the realized collaboration gain. In practice, we may parameterize P so that it is
low for active and good-performing entities, medium for non-active entities, and high for active and
laggard/disruptive entities, a point we will demonstrate in the experiments. We assume that the active
participants will share their individual gains, namely zm , m ∈ IA , so that all other participants’ cost
can be evaluated. The P will provide incentives to each candidate to decide to participate or not. As
such, we denote the set of participants by IP = Incent(P).
Profit: For each party, the profit will consist of two components: monetary profit from participation
fees and gain-converted profit from collaboration gains. More specifically, let cm denote the final
participation cost for entity m. Let the Utility-Income (UI) function z 7→ U(z) determine the amount
of income uniquely associated with any particular gain Z. We suppose the UI function is the same
for participants and the system. Then, the profit of client m is

                           P ROFITm = 1m∈IP · (−cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm )),
                                      ∆
                                                                                                      (2)
           ∆
where zIA = G(xm , m ∈ IA ), and the last term contrasts withP
                                                             its standalone learning. We define the
system-level profit as the overall income from participation, m∈IP cm , weighted plus the amount
converted from collaboration gain, U(zIA ), namely
                                             ∆
                                                 X
                                  P ROFITsys = λ     cm + U(zIA ),                              (3)
                                                   m∈IP

where λ ≥ 0 is a pre-specified control variable that balances the monetary income and collaboration
gain. We can regard the system-level profit as the coordinator’s profit.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RemarkP   1 (Coordinator’s profit). One may put additional
                                                        Pconstraints on the coordinator’s monetary
income m∈IP cm . A particular case is to restrict that m∈IP cm = 0, which may be interpreted
that the system does not need actual monetary income but rather uses the mechanism for model
improvement. This is typical in coordinator-free decentralized learning (to revisit in Section 3.2).
Selection plan. The coordinator will select the active participants IA from IP based on a set of
available information, denoted by I. We assume that the I consists of the coordinator’s belief of
the distributions of xm (namely the realizable gain) for each client m in IP . The selection plan is a
function that maps from I and IP to a set IA ⊆ IP , denoted by
                                            S : (I, IP ) 7→ IA .                                       (4)
This can be a randomized map, e.g., when each participant is selected with a certain probability
(Section 2.4.2). In practice, I may refer to the coordinator’s estimates of the underlying distribution
of xm , m ∈ IP , based on historical performance on the participant side.
Objective of mechanism design. Our objective in designing a collaboration mechanism is to max-
imize the system-level profit under constraints tied to candidates’ individual incentives, which will
be revisited in Section 2.4. The maximization is over the pricing plan P and selection plan S. With
the earlier discussions, the objective is to solve
                            X
      Objective: max E λ           cm + U(zIA ) , where                                           (5)
                   P,S
                              m∈IP
      cm is specified by P in (1), zIA = G(xm , m ∈ IA ), IA = S(I, IP ), s.t. IP = Incent(P).         (6)
We will elaborate on (6) in Section 2.3.
Remark 2 (Interpretation of the objective). We discuss three interesting cases of the objective. First,
when λ = 1, the objective is equivalent to maximizing the overall profit. Second, when λ = 0, the
objective is to improve the modeling through a collaboration mechanism. In this case, the system
has no interest in the participation income but only provides a platform to incentivize the non-active
to pay for the gain obtained by the active. SincePthe system need not pay for any participants, it is
natural to assume the “zero-balance” constraint m∈IP cm = 0. Thus, we have

                                      Objective: max E{U(zIA )}.                                       (7)
                                                   P,S
                                                                                           P
Third, as λ → ∞, the objective reduces to maximizing the system profit, maxP,S E{ m∈IP cm }.
Intuitively, the collaboration gain should still be reasonable to attract sufficiently many participants.
Lastly, the following proposition shows that by properly replacing the λ, the system’s objective can
be interpreted as an alternative objective that combines the system’s and participants’ gains.
                          ∆
Proposition 1. Let λ′ = |Iλ−1
                           P |+1
                                 . The Objective (5) where λ′ is replaced with λ is equivalent to
                                                              P
maximizing the average social welfare defined by (P ROFITsys + m∈IP P ROFITm )/(|IP | + 1).

2.3 I NCENTIVES OF PARTICIPATION
We study the incentives of collaboration from the candidates’ perspectives. First, we will elaborate
on (6) here. For each candidate, the incentive to become a participant is the larger profit of receiv-
ing the collaboration gain compared with realizing a gain on its own. Then, candidate m has the
incentive to participate in the game if and only if

                             Incentm : E −cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm ) ≥ 0,                               (8)
where zIA and cm were introduced in (6). Here, E denotes the expectation regarding the random
quantities, including the active participant set and the realized gains.
Remark 3 (Inaccurate candidate). A candidate may have its own expectation Em in place of E in (8)
when making its decision. In this case, if the candidate is overly confident about the collaboration
gain – its expected z tends to be larger than the actual, either intentionally or not – it will participate
in the game. The system can have a further screening of it: 1) if this participant is selected as
an active participant, it will likely suffer from a penalty since its realized gain will be seen by the
coordinator, which will implicitly give feedback as an incentive to that candidate; 2) if not selected,
it will become an inactive participant, which will contribute to the system’s profit but not harm the
collaboration. In this way, a candidate will have a limited extent to harm the system.

                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.4 M ECHANISM DESIGN FOR THE ICL GAME
The idea of mechanism design in economic theory is to devise mechanisms to jointly regulate the de-
cisions of multiple parties in a game to eventually attain a system’s desired goal (see, e.g., (Maskin,
2008)). In our ICL game, the system’s desired goal is to maximize (5), and the mechanisms to design
include P and S. Section 2.3 discussed the incentives from the candidates’ view. This subsection
studies the mechanism designs from the system’s perspective.
2.4.1 P RICING PLAN : FROM CANDIDATES TO PARTICIPANTS
From the system’s view, we can cast the M candidates and the coordinator as the parties in a game.
Consider the following strategy choices of each party. Each candidate m has two choices: whether to
participate or not, represented by bm = 1m∈IP ∈ {0, 1}; the coordinator has a choice of the pricing
                                        ∆

and selection plans, denoted by (P, S). Following the notation in (4), for a set of participants that
                          (−m)           (−m) ∆       (−m)          ∆       (−m)
exclude m, denoted by IP       , we let IA    = S(I, IP    ) and IA = S(I, IP     ∪ {m}). We have
the following condition under a Nash equilibrium.
Theorem 1 (Equilibrium condition). The condition to attain Nash equilibrium is

           Incentm : E −cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm ) ≥ 0, if and only if m ∈ IP ,                            (9)

           Incentsys : E λcm + U(zIA ) − U(zI(−m) ) ≥ 0, if and only if m ∈ IP .                     (10)
                                                    A


Remark 4 (Pricing as a part of the collaborative learning). A critical reader may wonder why
not price participants directly based on the realized gains, which we refer to as post-collaboration
pricing, e.g., using the Shapley value (Roth, 1988; Khan et al., 2023). The main distinction is that our
studied pricing plan can not only generate profit or reallocate resources on the system side but also
influence collaboration gains. Specifically, the pricing plan can screen higher-quality candidates to
allow the coordinator to improve model performance in the subsequent collaboration. For instance,
consider the case where the sole purpose is to maximize collaboration gain, namely λ = 0. In this
situation, an entity m violating the condition in (10) is treated as a laggard, and cm can be designed
accordingly to ensure this client will not participate, as per violating (9).
2.4.2 S ELECTION PLAN : FROM PARTICIPANTS TO ACTIVE PARTICIPANTS
We introduce a general probabilistic selection plan. Assume the information transmitted from par-
ticipant m is a distribution of xm , denoted by Pm for all m ∈ IP . Suppose the system expects to
select ρ ∈ (0, 1] proportion of the participants. Consider a probabilistic selection plan that will select
each client m in IP with probability qm ∈ [0, 1]. Let q = [qm ]m∈IP . We thus have the constraint

                                              ∆
                                                      X
                               q ∈ Q(ρ, IP ) = q :         qm = ρ|IP | .                             (11)
                                                        m∈IP

Let bm denote an independent Bernoulli random variable with P(bm = 1) = qm , or bm ∼ B(qm ).
Then, conditional on the existing participants IP , maximizing any system objective, e.g., (5) and (7),
will lead to a particular law of client selection represented by q. For example, for the objective (7),
                                                                       ∆
we may solve the following problem. q ∗ = arg maxq∈Q(ρ,IP ) U (q) = E U(zIA ) = U(G(xm , m ∈


IA )) , where the expectation is over bm ∼ B(qm ), xm ∈ Pm , and IA = {m ∈ IP : bm = 1}. We
will show specific examples in Section 3. The existing works have examined client sampling from
perspectives other than incentives, such as minimizing gradient variance (Chen et al., 2020).
Remark 5 (Free-rider and adversarial participants). We will briefly discuss how pricing and selec-
tion plans can jointly address concerns regarding free-riders and adversarial participants. A free-
rider is an entity m with a low local gain zm but hopes to participate to enjoy the collaboration
gain realized by other more capable participants with a relatively small participation cost. To that
end, the entity may deliberately inform the system of a poor Pm so that the system, if follow-
ing the above-optimized selection plan, will not select it as active. Consequently, the free-rider’s
actual local gain will not be revealed and may not suffer a high participation cost. This case mo-
tivates us to adopt a random selection to a certain extent in selecting the active participants. More
specifically, suppose every participant m ∈ IP will have at least a ρ̄ > 0 probability of being
selected to be active. Then, it expects to pay at least ρ̄ · E{cm } = ρ̄ · P(z, zi , i ∈ IA ) in re-
turn for an additional model gain of E{U(zIA ) − U(zm )}, where IA contains m. Thus, it is not
worth the entity m’s participation should the system design a cost function that meets the following:


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ρ̄ · E{P(z, zm , m ∈ IA )} ≥ E{U(zIA ) − U(zm )} for all zm overly small. For example, the coordi-
nator may impose a high cost whenever the realized local gain zm revealed after the collaboration
exceeds a pre-specified threshold. On the other hand, there may be an adversarial participant with
a poor local gain but informs the system of an excellent Pm so that the system will select it to be
active. In such cases, the same argument regarding the choice of the pricing plan applies, so no
adversarial entity would dare to risk paying an excessively high cost after participating in the game.

3   U SE CASES OF COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
3.1 ICL FOR FEDERATED LEARNING
Federated learning (FL) (Konecny et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Diao et al., 2021b) is a popular
distributed learning framework where the main idea is to learn a joint model using the averaging of
locally learned model parameters. Its original goal is to exploit the resources of massive edge devices
(also called “clients”) to achieve a global objective orchestrated by a central coordinator (“server”)
in a way that the training data do not need to be transmitted. In line with FL, we suppose that at any
particular round, the outcome of client m, xm , represents a model. The collaboration will generate
                                       ∆                        P             P
an outcome in an additive form: zIA = G(xm , m ∈ IA ) = G( i∈IA ζi xi / i∈IA ζi ), where ζi ’s are
the pre-determined unnormalized positive weights associated with all the candidates, e.g., according
to the sample size (McMahan et al., 2017) or uncertainty quantification (Chen et al., 2022). Let
   ∆
IP = [K], where K ≤ M is the number of participants, and M is the number of candidates.
3.1.1 L ARGE - PARTICIPATION APPROXIMATION
Suppose the selection plan is based on a random sampling of IP with a given probability, say ρ ∈
(0, 1), for each participant to be active. Assume bm , for m ∈ [K], are IID Bernoulli random variables
with P(bm = 1) = ρ. Let U ◦ G denote the composition of U and G, and (U ◦ G)′ its derivative.
Then, we have the following result to approximate the equilibrium conditions in Section 2.4 under
a large number of participating clients. Let ζ̄IP and x̄IP denote all the participants’ average of ζ and
                                        ∆ P                   ∆ P                P
weighted average of X, namely ζ̄IP = ( i∈IP ζi )/|IP |, x̄IP = ( i∈IP ζi xi )/( i∈IP ζi ).
Theorem 2. Assume max{|ζm |, ∥ζm xm ∥∞ } ≤ τ for all m ∈ IP and log d/|IP | → 0 as |IP | → ∞,
where |IP | is the number of participants. Then, the conditions (9) and (10) can be written as

              E{cm } ≤ E (U ◦ G)(x̄IP + op (1)) − U ◦ G(xm ) ,                                 (12)

                                                          bm          ζm
              λE{cm } ≥ E (U ◦ G)′ (x̄IP + op (1))                 ×       (x̄I − xm ) ,
                                                     (1 + op (1))ρ K ζ̄IP P
where op (1) denotes a term whose ℓ1 -norm converges in probability to zero as |IP | goes to infinity.
                                                                         P                P
The proof is based on large-sample analysis, e.g., to show that ( i∈IP bi ζi xi )/( j∈IP bj ζj ) is
asymptotically close to x̄IP for large |IP |. From the above result and its proof, the system’s marginal
profit increase attributed to an entity m is approximately

                                                    ′      ζm
                           bm · E λcm − (U ◦ G) (x̄K )          (x̄K − xm ) .                       (13)
                                                          K ζ̄K
3.1.2 I TERATIVE MECHANISM DESIGN
To optimize the mechanism in practice, the server cannot evaluate the collaboration gain G(xm , m ∈
IA ) due to its complex dependency on the individual outcomes xm . Alternatively, the server can
optimize its mechanism by maximizing the sum of the quantities in (13) as a surrogate of the collab-
oration gain. The determination of the pricing plan will involve multiple candidates’ choices. Since
a practical FL system involves multiple rounds, we suppose each client will use the results from the
previous rounds to approximate the current strategy set and make the next moves. In Appendix D,
we will elaborate on this idea and proposed a concrete incentivized FL algorithm built on Theorem 2.
It is envisioned that a reasonable incentive mechanism can enhance the robustness of FL training.
To demonstrate this, we develop an experimental study that involves two types of Byzantine attacks:
random modification (Xia et al., 2019) and label flipping (Jebreel et al., 2022). Byzantine client
ratios are adjusted to two levels: {0.2, 0.3}. Among participating clients, the server will select 10%
of clients as active clients per round. We studied three incentivized FL (labeled as “ICL”) pricing


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (a) RM, Byzantine-0.2        (b) RM, Byzantine-0.3         (c) LP, Byzantine-0.2        (d) LP, Byzantine-0.3
Figure 2: Learning curves of ICL and FedAvg measured by Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM),
label flipping (LP) attacks, and two malicious client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the CIFAR10 dataset.
plans γ = 1, 2, 3, where a larger γ is interpreted as a higher cost per gain. We visualize the learning
curves on the CIFAR10 dataset in Fig. 5. From the results, in comparison with non-incentivized
FedAvg, the incentivized FL algorithm from our framework can deliver a higher and more rapidly
increasing model performance. On the other hand, ICL with pricing plan 1 underperforms, which
is expected as it only imposes a mild penalty on laggard/adversarial active clients. The results also
suggest the importance of a reasonable pricing plan. Furthermore, the random modification attack
poses a more significant threat compared to the label flipping attack, making it particularly difficult
for non-incentivized FedAvg to converge. More extensive results are included in Appendix D.
Remark 6 (Random sampling (RS) for noninformative scenarios). We show that if the system is
noninformative, RS can be close to the optimal selection, following Section 2.4.2. Suppose the
information from participant m is the mean and variance of xm ∈ R, denoted by µm , σ 2 for m ∈ IP .
A large σ 2 means less information. The result below shows RS is close to the optimal for large σ.
                                                            ∆
Proposition 2. Assume the gain is defined by G(x) = −E(x − µ)2 , where µ represents the
underlying parameter of interest, and the participants’ weights ζm ’s are the same. Assume that
σ 2 /(|IP | · maxm∈IP (µm − µ)2 ) → ∞ as |IP | → ∞. Then, we have U (q)/U (q ∗ ) →p 1 as |IP | → ∞.
3.2 ICL FOR ASSISTED LEARNING
Assisted learning (AL) (Xian et al., 2020b; Diao et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022) is a decentralized
learning framework that allows organizations to autonomously improve their learning quality within
only a few assistance rounds and without sharing local models, objectives, or data. Unlike FL
schemes, AL is 1) decentralized in that there is no global model to be shared or synchronized among
all the entities in the training and 2) assistance-persistent in the sense that an entity still needs the
output from other entities in the prediction stage. From the perspective of incentivized collaboration,
the above naturally leads to two considerations with complementary insights into the pricing and
selection plans compared with FL in Section 3.1.
• Consideration 1: Autonomous incentive design without a coordinator Since each entity can initi-
ate and terminate assistance, it is natural to consider a coordinator-free scenario, where entities can
autonomously reach a consensus on collaboration partners based on their pricing plans.
• Consideration 2: Limited information for incentive design In AL, an entity aims to seek assistance
to enhance prediction performance without sharing proprietary local models. Thus, we suppose the
communicated information for collaboration is limited to gains (z) rather than outcomes (x).
To put it into perspective, we will study a three-entity setting in Section 3.2.1 to develop insights into
the incentive that allows for a consensus on collaboration in Stage 1 (Fig. 1). In Section 3.2.2, we
will further study a multi-entity setting where multiple less-competitive participants are allowed to
enter Stage 2 to enjoy the collaboration gain, but they will not compete for being active participants.
3.2.1 C ONSENSUS OF COMPETING CANDIDATES
In this section, we study three candidate entities, Alice, Bob, and Carol, and suppose each candidate
aims to maximize its profit. Suppose a collaboration round can only consist of two entities. Then,
the collaboration will only occur when two out of the three, say Alice and Bob, can maximally
assist each other. From Alice’s perspective, Carol is less competitive than Bob, and meanwhile,
from Bob’s perspective, Carol is less competitive than Alice. We will provide conditions to reach a
consensus. Suppose each entity has its own payment plan: entity i will pay a price pi (z − zi ) for any
given collaboration gain z and its local gain zi , for all i ∈ [M ]. So, if entities i and j collaborate,
the actual price i will pay is pi (z − zi ) − pj (z − zj ). The goal of each entity is to maximize
the expected gain-converted profit minus the participation cost, namely the quantity in (2). For
                                                                     ∆
simplicity, suppose pi (∆z) = ci · ∆z and U(z) = u · z. Let µi,j = E(U(zi,j )) denote the expected
                                                                                        ∆
income of the collaboration gain formed by entities i and j, and µj←i = E(U(zi,j ) − U(Zj )) the
additional gain brought by i to j. With this setup, we have the following result.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. A consensus on collaboration exists if and only if there exist entities 1 and 2 satisfying
                         (u − c1 )µ1,2 + c2 µ2←1 ≥ (u − c1 )µ1,3 + c3 µ3←1 ,                      (14)
                         (u − c2 )µ2,1 + c1 µ1←2 ≥ (u − c2 )µ2,3 + c3 µ3←2 .
Inequality (14) can be interpreted that the total gain of entity 1 re-
ceived from entity 2, which consists of the collaboration-generated
gain (u − c1 )µ1,2 and the pricing-based gain c2 µ2←1 , is no larger
than that from entity 3. To show our pricing plan can promote mu-
tually beneficial collaboration, we apply ICL to the parallel assisted
learning (PAL) framework (Wang et al., 2022) to develop an incen-
tivized PAL. The detailed algorithms and experimental studies are
included in Appendix E. We show an experiment using real-world
clinical dataset MIMIC (Johnson et al., 2016). Suppose three divi-
sions, denoted by Entity 1, 2, and 3, collect heterogeneous features
from the same patients for different tasks: predict the heart rate, the
systolic blood pressure, and the length of stay. In Setting i, Entity
i does not provide an incentive while the other two entities do. The
                                                                        Figure 3: Test error of Entity
results in Fig. 3 show that in Setting 1, entity 1 will not gain much
                                                                        1 in three settings. In Setting
as it does not provide incentives; in other two settings, it gains from
                                                                        i, entity i pays none (ci = 0)
collaborating with the entity with mutual benefits.
                                                                         while entity j ̸= i pays with
3.2.2 C ONSENSUS OF NON - COMPETING CANDIDATES                             cj ̸= 0, for i, j ∈ [3].
We will further study a multi-entity setting where multiple less-
competitive participants are allowed to enjoy the collaboration gain,
but they will not compete for being active participants. The objective is to develop an incentive to
maximize the collaboration gain, namely Objective (7), that will eventually benefit all the partici-
pants. For ease of presentation, we will consider only one active participant (namely |IA | = 1). In
general, we may regard a set of participants as one “mega” participant. Following the above two
considerations of AL, we will first study the following setup. Suppose K entities decide to partic-
ipate in a collaboration, where one of them will be selected to realize the collaboration gain. For
example, if participant m is active, it will realize a model gain zm ∼ G(xm ), where xm ∼ Pm is
                                                   ∗
the potential outcome of participant m. Let Pm       denote the distribution of zm induced by Pm for
m ∈ [K] and suppose they are the shared information among    P     participants. In line with Considera-
tion 1, the system is set to have a zero balance, namely m∈[K] cm = 0. Following the notation in
(1), we consider the following particular pricing plan:
                          P : z 7→ C(z)1j̸∈IA − (K − 1)C(z)1j∈IA , j ∈ IP ,                         (15)
where C is non-decreasing so that a larger gain is associated with a larger cost. In other words, each
of the K − 1 non-active participants will pay a cost of C(z), which depends on the realized z, to the
active participant. Then, the condition to reach a consensus among participants is the existence of
a participant, say participant 1, such that when it is active, (i) the collaboration gain is maximized,
and (ii) every participant sees that its individual profit is maximized, as formalized below.
Theorem 4. Assume U is a pre-specified non-decreasing function. Consider the pricing plan in (15)
                                                                            ∆
where C can be any non-negative and non-decreasing function. Let µm = EPm          ∗ {U(zm )} denote the

expected gain of participant m when it is active, m ∈ [K]. The necessary and sufficient condition
for reaching a pricing consensus is the existence of a participant, say participant 1, that satisfies
µ1 − uj ≥ EP1∗ {C(z1 )} + EPj∗ {(K − 1)C(zj )} for all j ̸= 1. If we further assume the linearity
      ∆
U(z) = u · z and C(z) = c · z, this inequality becomes c ≤ minj̸=1 u · (µ1 − µj )/(µ1 + (K − 1)µj ).
4 C ONCLUSION
As the demand for learning tasks continues to grow, collaboration among entities becomes increas-
ingly important for enhancing their performance. We proposed an ICL framework to study how
entities can be properly incentivized to create common benefits. While our work provides an angle
toward incentivizing collaborative learning, there are several limitations worth further investigation.
For instance, future studies could examine the functional forms of pricing plans, use cases to pro-
mote model security (Wang et al., 2021; Xian et al., 2023) and privacy (Dwork et al., 2006; Ding &
Ding, 2022), and potential trade-offs between collaboration and competition in collaborative learn-
ing contexts. The Appendix contains more details on ICL and related works, ethics discussion,
concrete use cases and experiments of FL, AL, and MAB, and technical proofs.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly Shmatikov. How to
  backdoor federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2938–2948. PMLR, 2020.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu, Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron
  Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An actor-critic algorithm for sequence prediction. In Proc. Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Supriyo Chakraborty, Prateek Mittal, and Seraphin Calo. Analyzing federated
  learning through an adversarial lens. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 634–
  643. PMLR, 2019.

Avrim Blum, Nika Haghtalab, Richard Lanas Phillips, and Han Shao. One for one, or all for all:
  Equilibria and optimality of collaboration in federated learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1005–1014. PMLR, 2021.

Gino Brunner, Oliver Richter, Yuyi Wang, and Roger Wattenhofer. Teaching a machine to read
  maps with deep reinforcement learning. In Proc. Association for the Advancement of Artificial
  Intelligence (AAAI, 11 2017.

Bogdan Carbunar and Mahesh Tripunitara. Fair payments for outsourced computations. In 2010 7th
  Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications
  and Networks (SECON), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2010.

Cheng Chen, Jiawei Zhang, Jie Ding, and Yi Zhou. Assisted unsupervised domain adaptation. Proc.
  International Symposium on Information Theory, 2023a.

Cheng Chen, Jiaying Zhou, Jie Ding, and Yi Zhou. Assisted learning for organizations with limited
  data. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023b.

Huili Chen, Jie Ding, Eric Tramel, Shuang Wu, Anit Kumar Sahu, Salman Avestimehr, and Tao
  Zhang. Self-aware personalized federated learning. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.

Wenlin Chen, Samuel Horvath, and Peter Richtarik. Optimal client sampling for federated learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13723, 2020.

Yae Jee Cho, Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Tian Li, Virginia Smith, and Gauri Joshi. To feder-
  ate or not to federate: Incentivizing client participation in federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.14840, 2022.

Luke N Darlow, Elliot J Crowley, Antreas Antoniou, and Amos J Storkey. Cinic-10 is not imagenet
  or cifar-10. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03505, 2018.

M. P. Deisenroth, G. Neumann, and J. Peters. A Survey on Policy Search for Robotics. 2013.

Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. HeteroFL: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. In Prof. International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021a.

Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. HeteroFL: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021b.

Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. GAL: Gradient assisted learning for decentralized multi-
  organization collaborations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11854–
  11868, 2022a.

Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. GAL: Gradient assisted learning for decentralized multi-
  organization collaborations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. SemiFL: Communication efficient semi-supervised fed-
  erated learning with unlabeled clients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022c.
Enmao Diao, Vahid Tarokh, and Jie Ding. Privacy-preserving multi-target multi-domain recom-
  mender systems with assisted autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13340, 2022d.
Jie Ding and Bangjun Ding. Interval privacy: A privacy-preserving framework for data collection.
   IEEE Trans. Signal Process., 2022.
Jie Ding, Eric Tramel, Anit Kumar Sahu, Shuang Wu, Salman Avestimehr, and Tao Zhang. Fed-
   erated learning challenges and opportunities: An outlook. In Proc. International Conference on
   Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2022.
Cynthia Dwork, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Frank McSherry, Ilya Mironov, and Moni Naor. Our
  data, ourselves: Privacy via distributed noise generation. In Proc. EUROCRYPT, pp. 486–503.
  Springer, 2006.
Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Local model poisoning at-
 tacks to byzantine-robust federated learning. In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Conference on
 Security Symposium, pp. 1623–1640, 2020.
Waris Gill, Ali Anwar, and Muhammad Ali Gulzar. Feddebug: Systematic debugging for federated
 learning applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03553, 2023.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA, USA, 2016.
Jingoo Han, Ahmad Faraz Khan, Syed Zawad, Ali Anwar, Nathalie Baracaldo Angel, Yi Zhou,
   Feng Yan, and Ali R Butt. Tiff: Tokenized incentive for federated learning. In 2022 IEEE 15th
   International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), pp. 407–416. IEEE, 2022.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Hrant Khachatrian, David C Kale, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Multi-
  task learning and benchmarking with clinical time series data. Scientific data, 6(1):1–18, 2019.
Chaoyang He, Erum Mushtaq, Jie Ding, and Salman Avestimehr. Fednas: Federated deep learning
  via neural architecture search. 2020.
Guangjing Huang, Xu Chen, Tao Ouyang, Qian Ma, Lin Chen, and Junshan Zhang. Collaboration
  in participant-centric federated learning: A game-theoretical perspective. IEEE Transactions on
  Mobile Computing, 2022.
Najeeb Moharram Jebreel, Josep Domingo-Ferrer, David Sánchez, and Alberto Blanco-Justicia. De-
  fending against the label-flipping attack in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01982,
  2022.
George F Jenks and Fred C Caspall. Error on choroplethic maps: definition, measurement, reduction.
  Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 61(2):217–244, 1971.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, H Lehman Li-wei, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Sci. Data, 3:160035, 2016.
Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato, Han Yu, Ying-Chang Liang, and Dong In Kim. Incentive
   design for efficient federated learning in mobile networks: A contract theory approach. In 2019
   IEEE VTS Asia Pacific Wireless Communications Symposium (APWCS), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2019.
Ahmad Faraz Khan, Xinran Wang, Qi Le, Azal Ahmad Khan, Haider Ali, Jie Ding, Ali Butt, and Ali
  Anwar. Pi-fl: Personalized and incentivized federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07514,
  2023.
Jens Kober and Jan Peters. Reinforcement Learning in Robotics: A Survey, pp. 9–67. Springer,
  2014.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jakub Konecny, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Qi Le, Enmao Diao, Xinran Wang, Ali Anwar, Vahid Tarokh, and Jie Ding. Personalized federated
  recommender systems with private and partially federated autoencoders. Asilomar Conference on
  Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2022.
Jinho Lee, Raehyun Kim, Seok-Won Yi, and Jaewoo Kang. Maps: Multi-agent reinforcement
   learning-based portfolio management system. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International
   Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-20, pp. 4520–4526, 7 2020.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep reinforce-
  ment learning for dialogue generation. In Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 1192–1202, 2016.
Qinbin Li, Yiqun Diao, Quan Chen, and Bingsheng He. Federated learning on non-iid data silos: An
  experimental study. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE),
  pp. 965–978. IEEE, 2022.
F. Liu, S. Li, L. Zhang, C. Zhou, R. Ye, Y. Wang, and J. Lu. 3dcnn-dqn-rnn: A deep reinforcement
   learning framework for semantic parsing of large-scale 3d point clouds. In Proc. International
   Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5679–5688, 2017.
Johann Lussange, Ivan Lazarevich, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde, Stefano Palminteri, and Boris Gutkin.
  Modelling stock markets by multi-agent reinforcement learning. Computational Economics, 57,
  01 2021.
Lingjuan Lyu, Xinyi Xu, Qian Wang, and Han Yu. Collaborative fairness in federated learning.
  Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 189–204, 2020.
Stefano Marano, Vincenzo Matta, and Lang Tong. Distributed detection in the presence of byzantine
  attacks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 57(1):16–29, 2008.
Eric S Maskin. Mechanism design: How to implement social goals. American Economic Review,
  98(3):567–76, 2008.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. AISTATS,
  pp. 1273–1282, 2017.
Erum Mushtaq, Chaoyang He, Jie Ding, and Salman Avestimehr. Spider: Searching personalized
  neural architecture for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13939, 2021.
Erum Mushtaq, Yavuz Faruk Bakman, Jie Ding, and Salman Avestimehr. Federated alternate train-
  ing (FAT): Leveraging unannotated data silos in federated segmentation for medical imaging. 20th
  International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), 2023.

Gergely Dániel Németh, Miguel Ángel Lozano, Novi Quadrianto, and Nuria Oliver. A snapshot of
  the frontiers of client selection in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04607, 2022.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Shashi Raj Pandey, Nguyen H Tran, Mehdi Bennis, Yan Kyaw Tun, Zhu Han, and Choong Seon
  Hong. Incentivize to build: A crowdsourcing framework for federated learning. In 2019 IEEE
  Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
Sanjay Purushotham, Chuizheng Meng, Zhengping Che, and Yan Liu. Benchmarking deep learning
  models on large healthcare datasets. J. Biomed. Inform, 83:112–134, 2018.
Matthew Rabin. Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. The American economic
 review, pp. 1281–1302, 1993.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alvin E Roth. The Shapley value: essays in honor of Lloyd S. Shapley. Cambridge University Press,
  1988.
Junyu Shi, Wei Wan, Shengshan Hu, Jianrong Lu, and Leo Yu Zhang. Challenges and approaches
  for mitigating byzantine attacks in federated learning. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on
  Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom), pp. 139–146. IEEE,
  2022.
Yuxin Shi, Han Yu, and Cyril Leung. Towards fairness-aware federated learning. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.
Rachael Hwee Ling Sim, Yehong Zhang, Mun Choon Chan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Col-
  laborative machine learning with incentive-aware model rewards. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 8927–8936. PMLR, 2020.
Ming Tang and Vincent WS Wong. An incentive mechanism for cross-silo federated learning: A
 public goods perspective. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer Communi-
 cations, pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2021.
Sebastian Shenghong Tay, Xinyi Xu, Chuan Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Incentiviz-
  ing collaboration in machine learning via synthetic data rewards. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 9448–9456, 2022.
Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and
  Yi Zhou. A hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In Proceedings of the 12th
  ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security, pp. 1–11, 2019.
Xuezhen Tu, Kun Zhu, Nguyen Cong Luong, Dusit Niyato, Yang Zhang, and Juan Li. Incentive
  mechanisms for federated learning: From economic and game theoretic perspective. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2022.
Xinran Wang, Yu Xiang, Jun Gao, and Jie Ding. Information laundering for model privacy. Proc.
  ICLR, 2021.
Xinran Wang, Jiawei Zhang, Mingyi Hong, Yuhong Yang, and Jie Ding. Parallel assisted learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 70:5848–5858, 2022.
Leon Witt, Mathis Heyer, Kentaroh Toyoda, Wojciech Samek, and Dan Li.                Decentral and
  incentivized federated learning frameworks: A systematic literature review.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.07855, 2022.
Chenrui Wu, Yifei Zhu, Rongyu Zhang, Yun Chen, Fangxin Wang, and Shuguang Cui. Fedab:
  Truthful federated learning with auction-based combinatorial multi-armed bandit. IEEE Internet
  of Things Journal, 2023.
Xiaohu Wu and Han Yu. Mars-fl: Enabling competitors to collaborate in federated learning. IEEE
  Transactions on Big Data, 2022.
Qi Xia, Zeyi Tao, Zijiang Hao, and Qun Li. Faba: an algorithm for fast aggregation against byzantine
  attacks in distributed neural networks. In IJCAI, 2019.
X. Xian, G. Wang, J. Srinivasa, A. Kundu, X. Bi, M. Hong, and J. Ding. Understanding backdoor
  attacks through the adaptability hypothesis. Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.
Xun Xian, Xinran Wang, Jie Ding, and Reza Ghanadan. Assisted learning: A framework for multi-
  organization learning. volume 33, pp. 14580–14591, 2020a.
Xun Xian, Xinran Wang, Jie Ding, and Reza Ghanadan. Assisted learning: A framework for multi-
  organization learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020b.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jia Xu, Jinxin Xiang, and Dejun Yang. Incentive mechanisms for time window dependent tasks
   in mobile crowdsensing. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 14(11):6353–6364,
   2015.
Dejun Yang, Guoliang Xue, Xi Fang, and Jian Tang. Crowdsourcing to smartphones: Incentive
  mechanism design for mobile phone sensing. In Proceedings of the 18th annual international
  conference on Mobile computing and networking, pp. 173–184, 2012.
Xun Yang, Weijie Tan, Changgen Peng, Shuwen Xiang, and Kun Niu. Federated learning incentive
  mechanism design via enhanced shapley value method. Wireless Communications and Mobile
  Computing, 2022, 2022.
Dongdong Ye, Xumin Huang, Yuan Wu, and Rong Yu. Incentivizing semi-supervised vehicular fed-
  erated learning: A multi-dimensional contract approach with bounded rationality. IEEE Internet
  of Things Journal, 2022.
Han Yu, Zelei Liu, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Mingshu Cong, Xi Weng, Dusit Niyato, and Qiang
  Yang. A fairness-aware incentive scheme for federated learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
  Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 393–399, 2020a.
Han Yu, Zelei Liu, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Mingshu Cong, Xi Weng, Dusit Niyato, and Qiang
  Yang. A sustainable incentive scheme for federated learning. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 35(4):
  58–69, 2020b.
Haoxiang Yu, Hsiao-Yuan Chen, Sangsu Lee, Sriram Vishwanath, Xi Zheng, and Christine Julien.
  idml: Incentivized decentralized machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05354, 2023.
Rongfei Zeng, Shixun Zhang, Jiaqi Wang, and Xiaowen Chu. Fmore: An incentive scheme of multi-
  dimensional auction for federated learning in MEC. In 2020 IEEE 40th International Conference
  on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 278–288. IEEE, 2020.
Rongfei Zeng, Chao Zeng, Xingwei Wang, Bo Li, and Xiaowen Chu. A comprehensive survey of
  incentive mechanism for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15406, 2021.
Yufeng Zhan, Peng Li, Zhihao Qu, Deze Zeng, and Song Guo. A learning-based incentive mecha-
  nism for federated learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(7):6360–6368, 2020.
Jingwen Zhang, Yuezhou Wu, and Rong Pan. Online auction-based incentive mechanism design for
   horizontal federated learning with budget constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09047, 2022.
Haitao Zheng and Chunyi Peng. Collaboration and fairness in opportunistic spectrum access. In
  IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2005. ICC 2005. 2005, volume 5, pp. 3132–
  3136. IEEE, 2005.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Appendix for “Incentivized Collaborative Learning:
            Architectural Design and Insights”

The Appendix contains additional discussions on the ICL framework and related work, ethical con-
siderations, detailed use cases of FL, AL, and collaborative MAB, their experimental studies, and
all the technical proofs.

A    F URTHER REMARKS ON THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Next, we will discuss more detailed aspects of the proposed framework.
Motivation to have a unified framework. A general incentive framework is important due to the
following reasons:
1. Generalizability: A unified framework captures the essence of incentives in various collaborative
learning settings, enabling its application across different scenarios. This allows researchers and
practitioners to apply the same principles and techniques to multiple use cases, saving time and re-
sources. For instance, we applied the ICL framework to federated learning, assisted learning, and
an additional case study called incentivized multi-armed bandit, which we introduce in Appendix F.
In these cases, we demonstrated how the crucial components of the pricing plan and selection plan
could play key roles in reducing exploration complexity from the learning perspective, thereby cre-
ating win-win situations for all participants in the collaborative system.
2. Interoperability: A unified incentive framework promotes interoperability among different collab-
orative learning settings. Researchers and practitioners can build upon the same principles, avoiding
the need to reinvent the wheel for every new use case.
3. Ease of adaptation: A unified framework provides a structured approach to design incentives
under a general collaborative learning framework with guaranteed incentive properties. This makes
adapting the framework for specific use cases easier, such as defining collaboration gain based on
model fairness if that is part of the system-level goal.
In summary, a unified incentive framework for collaborative learning offers generalizability, inter-
operability, and ease of adaptation. These advantages make it a more appealing approach compared
to designing specifically tailored incentive mechanisms for each use case.
Lie about the realized gain. Participants may lie about the realized gain to pay less than they have
to. This is an important aspect to consider in practical collaborative systems. There are several
possible ways to encourage honest behavior in collaborative learning. First, if the realized gain
must be published at the end of the collaboration (e.g., due to third-party verification, or the final
collaboration gain is a function of individual realized gains), we can design an incentive mechanism
to discourage dishonest behavior by rewarding clients who turn out to be honest at the end of the
learning process. This type of expected reward can motivate clients to behave well. For example,
when defining the “Collaboration gain” in Section 2.2, we considered a generic scenario that the
final collaboration gain depends on the transparent outcomes of active participants, which indicates
that the system has a way to evaluate the realized gains. Additionally, our incentive framework
allows the active participants to gain from non-active participants’ paid costs. In that particular case,
the active participants’ realized outcomes are transparent to the coordinator, so they cannot lie, while
the non-active participants do not realize anything but only enjoy the collaboration gain, so they may
have to pay a flat rate regardless of whether they lie.
There are several ways to verify clients’ realized gain in FL settings, especially FL with hetero-
geneous clients (e.g., (Diao et al., 2021a) and the references therein). One way is to estimate the
realized local gain from global/transparent testing data; Another possible way is to estimate the re-
alized gain from local test data which is uploaded to a verified third party before training. In our
work, in the FL setting, the system knows the submitted local models and can estimate their realized
gains.
Heterogeneous contributions to entities. The contribution to one entity might not be the same as
the contribution in another. In a setting where participants have heterogeneous evaluation metrics


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(e.g., due to distributional heterogeneity or personalization need), one can let the utility-income
function depend on specific entities. For example, in Eq. (9) of the main paper, we can add a
subscript of “m” to the U -function to highlight its possible dependence on entities. Such a change
will be notational, as it will not affect the key ideas and insights in the proposed work. For instance,
the idea of using incentives to regulate entities’ local decisions still applies.
Sub-selling of models. There may be a participant in one round that sub-sell the trained model. This
concern can be addressed in three aspects. First, when the utility-income function is defined (by
domain experts), it can already account for all the values of a trained model, including its potential
subselling. Second, although participants may use a global model to generate synthetic data or apply
knowledge distillation for potential performance improvement, these approaches may require spend
extra costs in data and modeling, which may not be worth it for the client. Third, even if a participant
can leverage an earlier round to better position itself in the next round, we are fine with it as long as
it benefits the system – we allow each client to have varying capability in each round.
Collaboration among competitors. In practice, there is a possible revenue loss due to competitors
getting better. Modeling competing entities in a collaborative learning framework is an interesting
future problem. A recent work on MarS-FL framework (Wu & Yu, 2022) introduced δ-stable mar-
ket and friendliness concepts to assess FL viability and market acceptability. In our framework, one
possible formulation of the potential collaborators have conflicting interests is to define the collabo-
ration gain as a function of not only active participants’ outcomes but also their level of conflicts.
Explicit coordinator in the incentivized learning. We do not need an explicit coordinator in the
incentivized learning We employ the term “coordinator” to represent the role of the collaboration
initiator or promoter, which could either be a physical coordinator (e.g., the server in an FL setting)
or one of the participants (e.g., the entity initiating collaboration in an AL setting). Therefore, we
do not really need a physical coordinator in the incentivized learning for all the models. Also, the
developed concepts (e.g., entities’ incentives, pricing mechanism, selection mechanism) and the
derived insights do not depend on the coordinator.
Timing for each participant to pay. The general idea of mechanism design is to develop incentives
to regulate entities’ local decisions to better achieve a global objective. In our framework, a critical
component of mechanism design is to use the pricing plan before collaborative learning to provide
a suitable incentive for improving collaboration. For transparency, we assume the pricing plan can
inform the participants of what they actually would be paying. The pricing plan (mapping from
outcome to price) is determined before each candidate entity decides participation or not, as shown
in Fig. 1. Additionally, since every entity’s outcome could be random, their decisions are all based
on expected values.
Determination of the value of machine learning results. Assessing the relationship between util-
ity and income in practical applications can be challenging. This is analogous to defining “utility” in
economic studies, as its precise value depends on the particular context. For instance, the monetary
value of a machine learning model can vary depending on its commercial viability.


B    E THICS DISCUSSION

A critical reader may raise the fairness concern that the studied incentive design be unfair and po-
tentially worsen the inequality between high-quality and low-quality entities. We would like to
respectfully point out that this has no conflict with the scope of our work.
Firstly, the literature contains numerous definitions of fairness (Shi et al., 2023). It is impractical
to evaluate the fairness of a procedure without identifying a specific type of fairness and examining
it within the context of a particular use case. We do not see that the proposed framework conflicts
with some popular types of fairness. One common type of fairness is model fairness, meaning
that the model performs equally well on different subpopulations. In the incentivized collaborative
learning framework, there are multiple ways to incorporate such fairness when defining model per-
formance (e.g., using weighted accuracy across different subpopulations). Another type of fairness,
more widely studied in game-theoretic settings (Rabin, 1993; Zheng & Peng, 2005) and recently
in federated learning contexts (Lyu et al., 2020), is collaboration fairness. Rooted in the game the-
ory (Rabin, 1993), this fairness notion dictates that a client’s payoff should be proportional to its
contribution to the FL model. Hence, a system that rewards higher-quality contributors more is in-


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


herently “fair.” This direction of fairness aligns with our framework since the goal of the incentive
here is to encourage high-quality clients to actively contribute to the collaboration.
Secondly, even though our incentive mechanism encourages high-quality entities to actively con-
tribute, it does not mean that low-quality entities will be ”unfairly” treated. In fact, our framework
advocates for a win-win situation in which all participants can enjoy the collaboration’s results.
Keep in mind that each entity’s final profit/gain consists of the part attributed to the participation
cost/reward and the part attributed to the collaboration gain. If the latter is higher due to a more rea-
sonable incentive, everyone can enjoy positive post-collaboration gains. Therefore, a performance-
oriented system goal does not necessarily violate fairness from the perspective of individual partici-
pants.
Thirdly, several published works have used the contribution to the model to allocate rewards
(e.g., (Yang et al., 2022) and references therein). Related to that direction of work, we aim to design
the mechanism of allocation before collaborative learning has trained a model, to provide a suitable
incentive for improving the modeling. The collaborative result would then benefit every participant.
In summary, concerning fairness, our work aligns more with contribution fairness (also called col-
laboration fairness in FL (Zheng & Peng, 2005)). Our motivation for incentives is to suitably regu-
late the entities’ local decisions (who will autonomously make decisions) to facilitate collaborative
performance that will be enjoyed by even low-quality entities (but willing to pay), thus creating
win-win collaborations. The performance can be measured in various ways depending on practical
considerations, such as reflecting model fairness when defining the quality of collaboration, but this
is beyond the scope of this work.

C     M ORE DISCUSSIONS ON RELATED WORKS
           Table 1: Summary of the most related literature on incentive-based collaboration.

 Setting                             Incentive                                           Key feature
 Federated learning                  FLI (Yu et al., 2020a)                              fair reward distribution
 Federated learning                  FMore (Zeng et al., 2020)                           multi-factor utility function
 Federated learning                  CrossSiloFLI(Tang & Wong, 2021)                     social welfare maximization
 Federated learning                  FedAB (Wu et al., 2023)                             multi-armed bandit for client selection
 Assisted learning                   AL (Xian et al., 2020a), GAL (Diao et al., 2022a)   intertwined interest in prediction
 Assisted learning                   PAL (Wang et al., 2022)                             intertwined interest in training and prediction
 Collaborative generative modeling   CGM (Tay et al., 2022)                              synthetic data as rewards
 Crowdsourcing                       CML (Sim et al., 2020)                              model as rewards
 Crowdsourcing                       MSensing (Yang et al., 2012)                        reverse auction-based mechanism
 Decentralized learning              iDML (Yu et al., 2023)                              blockchain-based mechanism


Our proposed ICL framework builds on the related literature on incentivized collaborative systems,
which often focuses on one or more of three components: pricing, payment allocation, and par-
ticipant selection (Zeng et al., 2021). Many incentive mechanisms have been designed for these
components, depending on particular application scenarios. In Table 1, we summarize a few repre-
sentative works and their main features. Next, we will relate these existing works to our proposed
ICL framework.
In (Yu et al., 2020a), a fairness-aware incentive scheme for FL called FLI was established to maxi-
mize collaboration gain while minimizing inequality in payoffs. The payoff allocation in FLI can be
regarded as a particular pricing plan designed to promote both FL model gain and equitable reward
allocation. In (Zeng et al., 2020), the authors proposed an FL incentive scheme called FMore that
utilizes a multi-dimensional auction to encourage participation from high-quality edge nodes. The
scheme determines a utility function based on multiple client-specific factors, which provides a gen-
eral approach to designing our pricing plan. In (Tang & Wong, 2021; Blum et al., 2021), the authors
formulate a particular social welfare objective problem under a budget balance constraint to address
the challenges of organization heterogeneity in cross-silo FL. Recently, (Wu et al., 2023) developed
an auction-based combinatorial multi-armed bandit algorithm called FedAB for FL client selection
to maximize the server’s utility. In our framework, this approach can be particularly helpful when
the server lacks trust in the clients’ shared information. In (Xian et al., 2020a; Diao et al., 2022a), the
assisted entity continually relies on others’ provided information during the prediction stage, leading


                                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to persistent collaboration even after training. The work of (Wang et al., 2022) develops an assisted
learning approach for entities with different learning objectives/tasks, requiring them to combine
their tasks during the training phase and jointly decode the prediction results during the prediction
stage. As a result, the approach enforces an implicit mechanism design that compels an assisted
entity to assist others. In (Tay et al., 2022), the authors proposed a collaborative learning problem
to incentivize data contribution from entities for training generative models. The synthetic data is
treated as rewards in our framework to solicit contributions from private data sources, different from
the commonly used trained models or monetary rewards. In (Sim et al., 2020), the collaboration sys-
tem uses the Shapley value and and information gain to assess the post-collaboration contribution
of participants and charge accordingly. Two particular incentive models for mobile phone sensing
systems are developed in (Yang et al., 2012) to encourage user participation. The platform-centric
approach uses a Stackelberg game-based mechanism to approximate a solution to Nash equilibrium
in a generic round. The user-centric approach employs an auction-based mechanism to determine
entity participation. In (Yu et al., 2023), the authors proposed a decentralized and transparent learn-
ing system resistant to fraud or manipulation by utilizing blockchain technology. This approach can
be compatible with our ICL framework and can be used for secure information sharing. We refer to
(Zeng et al., 2021; Tu et al., 2022; Németh et al., 2022; Witt et al., 2022) for more literature reviews.

D     ICL FOR FEDERATED LEARNING
Federated Learning (FL): For an entity to achieve near-oracle performance as if all the local re-
sources were centralized, many distributed learning methods have been developed. A popular di-
rection of research is FL (Konecny et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Diao et al., 2021b; Ding
et al., 2022). The main concept behind FL involves learning a joint model by alternating between
the following steps in each federated or communication round: 1) a server sends a model to clients,
who subsequently perform multiple local updates, and 2) the server aggregates models from a subset
of clients. This approach leverages the resources of a large number of edge devices, also known as
”clients,” to achieve a global objective coordinated by a central server.
In this section, we give a more specific incentivized FL setup and operational algorithm based on
the development in Section 3.1.

D.1    O PERATIONAL ALGORITHM OF INCENTIVIZED FL

First, let us recall the general Objective (6):
                                               X
                           Objective: max E λ    cm + U(zIA ) , where
                                      P,S
                                                 m∈IP
                                      cm was introduced in (1),                                      (16)
                                         ∆                          ∆
                                      zIA = G(xm , m ∈ IA ),    IA = S(I, IP ),
                                      s.t. IP = Incentm (P).                                         (17)
The above could be regarded as a collaboration game in any particular round of FL. As FL consists of
multiple rounds, it is natural to use the previous rounds as a basis for each candidate client to decide
whether to participate in the current round. We will use a subscript t to highlight the dependence of
a quantity on the FL round. For example, the outcome xm will be replaced with xm,t for round t.
More specifically, we consider the following FL equipped with an incentive setup:
• Let the outcome xm,t represent the updated model of participant m at round t.
• The “gain” function G maps a model to the decreased test loss compared with the previous round,
so the larger, the better. We assume the FL server (coordinator) holds a test dataset to compute the
gain.
• The pricing plan Pθ : (z, zm , m ∈ IA ) 7→ (cj , j ∈ IP ) can be written in the following form
parameterized by θ = [θ1 , θ2 ]:

                               cj = A1 (z; θ1 ) + 1j∈IA A2 (z − zm ; θ2 ),
                                  ∆
                                                                                                     (18)
where A1 , A2 are pre-specified functions. The intuitions is described as follows. On the one hand,
if a participant is non-active, the server will never observe its outcome and local gain. So, it is


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reasonable to let all non-active participants pay the same price A1 (z; θ1 ) that depends on the realized
collaboration gain. On the other hand, if a participant is active, the server will observe its local gain
and thus leverage that information to correct the price by A2 (z − zm ; θ2 ), a function of the improved
gain due to collaboration (which can be negative). With such a design, it is possible to incentivize a
laggard or adversarial client not to participate–since, otherwise, it will possibly be active and suffer
from a large (penalty) cost.
• To optimize the pricing plan parameterized by θ, we need to establish an objective function of θ.
Based on the proof of Theorem 2, the marginal gain brought by any client m would be

                                             ′      ζm
                           E λcm − (U ◦ G) (x̄K )        (x̄K − xm )                          (19)
                                                   K ζ̄K
given that the client m participates in the collaboration. The server would foresee the client’s strategy
based on Inequality (12): namely, it would participate if

                               E U ◦ G(x̄K ) − U ◦ G(xm ) − cm ≥ 0.
We let bm ∈ {0, 1} denote the indicator variable of the above condition. Given the above, we
propose to optimize θ that maximizes the total marginal gains over those who will participate:

                           ∆                                ζm
                    O(θ) = bm · E λcm − (U ◦ G)′ (x̄K )         (x̄K − xm ) .                  (20)
                                                          K ζ̄K

However, bm is not differentiable in θ. For gradient descent-based optimization of θ, we use the
sigmoid function with scaling factor s, denoted by σs (b) = (1 + e−b/s )−1 to approximate it. In
other words, we let


                            bm = σs E U(z̄K ) − U(zm ) − cm .                               (21)

The hyperparameter s controls the softness of the approximation, which is tuned in the experiment.
Moreover, the collaboration or client-specific gains are not observable at the current round t since the
outcomes have not been realized. To address that, we will use the performance from the previous
rounds to approximate them. More specifically, we will approximate z̄K with the server’s model
gain from the last round, denoted by z̄t−1 ; we approximate zm with the client’s model gain from the
last round when it was active, denoted by z̄τm,t . Here and afterward, τm,t ≤ t denotes the last time
client m was active by time t.

D.2   P SEUDOCODE

The pseudocode is summarized in Algorithm 1.

D.3   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS FOR INCENTIVIZED FL

In the experimental studies, we considered the following setup.
Data We evaluate the FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR10 (Netzer et al., 2011), and
CINIC10 (Darlow et al., 2018) datasets. In Table 2, we present the key statistics of each dataset.

                          Table 2: Statistics of datasets in our experiments

                        Datasets         FashionMNIST        CIFAR10       CINIC10
                   Training instances         60,000           50,000       20,000
                     Test instances           10,000           10,000       10,000
                        Features                784            1,024         1,024
                         Classes                10               10            10


Settings Standard FL can be vulnerable to poor-quality or adversarial clients. It is envisioned that a
reasonable incentive mechanism can enhance the robustness of FL training against participation of


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Incentivized Federated Learning
Input: Datasets D1:M distributed on M local clients, active rate ρ ∈ (0, 1], number of commu-
       nication rounds T , objective parameter λ, clients’ unnormalized weights ζ1:M , test loss L,
       pricing plan Pθ : (z, zm , m ∈ IA ) 7→ (cj , j ∈ IP ), where θ = [θ1 , θ2 ] is the unknown
      parameter, cj = A1 (z; θ1 ) + 1j∈IA A2 (z − zm ; θ2 ), and A1 , A2 are pre-specified functions,
                        ∆

      server’s test dataset Dtest , sigmoid function σs : v 7→ (1 + e−v/s )−1 where s > 0 is a
      hyperparameter, learning rate η > 0 for optimizing θ. Recall that τm,t ≤ t deni £¸select
      it as active©ˆ§´1·············7· ··‘·· · · 1· szeeszzssssssssssssslast round when the client m was
      active before round t, and U is a given Utility-Income function known to all the clients and
      the server.
Output: Server’s updated model x̄t , overall realized profit λ m∈IP,t c∗m,t + U(x̄t ), t = 1, . . . , T
                                                                   P
                            ∆
Initialization: θ0 , x̄0 , z̄0 = G(x̄0 )
System executes:
    for each communication round t = 1, . . . , T do
           ∆
        θt = (θ1,t , θ2,t ) ← ServerStrategy(z̄τm,t , zm,τm,t , x̄τm,t , xτm,t , ζm , m ∈ [M ], θt−1 )
        Distribute Pt ≡ Pθt to all M clients
        bm,t ← ClientStrategy(Pt , zm,τm,t , z̄t−1 ), m ∈ [M ]
        IP,t ← {m ∈ [M ] : bm,t = 1}
        IA,t ← randomly sample max(⌊ρ · |IP,t |⌋, 1) active clients from IP,t
        for each client m ∈ IA,t in parallel do
             Distribute the server’s model parameter x̄t−1 to local client m
             xm,t ← ClientUpdate(Dm , x̄t−1 ) // use any standard local update
             Send xm,t to the server
        end
        Receive      model Pparameters from active clients,                      and calculate x̄t           =
         ( m∈IA,t ζm )−1 m∈IA,t ζm xm,t
           P

        Calculate the collaboration gain z̄t = G(xm,t , m ∈ IA ) and broadcast to all candidate clients
        Calculate the individual gain of each active participant zm,t = G(xm,t ) and return it to the
         associated client m
        Participant m pays c∗m,t = A1 (z̄t ; θ1,t ) + 1m∈IA,t · A2 (z̄t − zm,t ; θ2,t ), for all m ∈ IP,t
                                     ∆

    end
ServerStrategy (z̄τm,t , zm,τm,t , x̄τm,t , xτm,t , ζm , m ∈ [M ], θt−1 ):
    Define the objective function of θ to maximize:
                   M
                  X                                         ζm
       Ot (θ) =        σs (δm,t ) · λ · cm,t (θ) − P                 · f ′ (x̄τm,t ) · (x̄τm,t − xm,τm,t ) , where
                 m=1                                     j∈IA,τ  ζj
                                                             m,t

              ∆
     cm,t (θ) = A1 (z̄τm,t ; θ1 ) + ρ · A2 (z̄τm,t − zm,τm,t ; θ2 )                                     (22)
              ∆
         δm,t = U(z̄t−1 ) − U(zm,τm,t ) − cm,t (θ),                                                     (23)
    where f is defined by
                                                 ∆
                                           f (x) = U −L(x, Dtest ) .                                    (24)
    Return θt ← θt−1 + η · ∇θ Ot (θt−1 )
ClientStrategy (Pt , zm,τm,t , z̄t−1 ):
    Return bm,t = 1δm,t >0 , where δm,t is the same as in (23) but with θ = θt
                ∆


these unwanted clients. To demonstrate this intuition, we consider an extreme case where there exist
Byzantine attacks carried out by malicious or faulty clients (Shi et al., 2022). We then demonstrate
the robustness of the incentivized FL (labeled as “ICL” in the results) against two types of Byzantine
attacks (Marano et al., 2008; Fang et al., 2020): random modification, which is a training data-
based attack (Xia et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2022), and label flipping, which is a parameter-based
attack (Jebreel et al., 2022; Gill et al., 2023). Specifically, the random modification is based on


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generating local model parameters from a uniform distribution between −0.25 and 0.25, and the
label flipping uses cyclic alterations, such as changing ‘dog’ to ‘cat’, and vice versa. Byzantine
client ratios are adjusted to two levels: {0.2, 0.3}. In the reported results below, Byzantine-0.2
refers to a scenario where 20% of the total clients are adversarial. We generate 100 clients using IID
partitioning of the training part of each dataset. Among participating clients, the server will select
10% of clients as active clients per round. We adopt the model architecture and hyperparameter
settings similar to (Li et al., 2022), which are summarized in Tables 3 and 4.

                                   Table 3: Network architecture

                         Data             FashionMNIST          CIFAR10        CINIC10
                  CNN Hidden Size                            [120, 84]


                                      Table 4: Hyperparameters

                       Global            Communication round                   100
                                                Batch size                      10
                                               Local epoch                       5
                                                Optimizer                      SGD
                                               Learning rate                 3.00E-02
                       Client
                                               Weight decay                  5.00E-04
                                                Momentum                     9.00E-01
                                                 Nesterov                       ✓
                                                Scheduler                Cosine Annealing
                                               Learning rate                 1.00E-04
                                                Optimizer                      SGD
                                               Learning rate                 1.00E-02
                 Objective function            Weight decay                  5.00E-04
                                                Momentum                     5.00E-01
                                                 Nesterov                        ✓
                                                Scheduler                Cosine Annealing
                                                Sigmoid s                      0.005

Pricing We consider the pricing plan in the form of (18) with
                       cj = A1 (z; θ1 ) + 1j∈IA A2 (z − zm ; θ2 )                                (25)
                          = θ1 · z + 1j∈IA θ1 · z · (−1 + γσs (z − zm − θ2 )).                   (26)
Accordingly, we replace the calculation of cost in (22) with

                        ∆
               cm,t (θ) = θ1 · z̄τm,t 1 + ρ · (−1 + γσs (z̄τm,t − zm,τm,t − θ2 ))                (27)

In our study, we conduct an ablation test with three different values of the hyperparameter γ: 11,
101, and 2001. These are henceforth referred to as ICL plans 1, 2, and 3 in the following results. A
larger value of γ implies a more substantial penalty for the underperforming clients. The parameter
θ2 is initialized in each global communication round using the Jenks natural breaks technique (Jenks
& Caspall, 1971) and optimized based on the objective function.
Profit Recall that the profit of a client or the server consists of monetary profit from participation
fees and gain-converted profit from collaboration gains. In FL, we define the collaboration gain
Zt as the negative test loss of the updated server model at round t, so the larger, the better. More
specifically,
                            z̄t = G(xm,t , m ∈ IA ) = −L(x̄t , Dtest )
                                ∆
                                          X
                                =−                  ℓ(input, output; x̄t ),
                                      (input,output)∈Dtest



                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ℓ is the cross-entropy loss under the model parameterized by x̄t . Likewise, the local gain of a
client m is defined by
                                                 ∆
                             zm,t = G(xm,t ) = −L(xm,t , Dtest )                                          (28)
                                  ∆
                                            X
                                  =−               ℓ(input, output; xm,t ).                               (29)
                                        (input,output)∈Dtest

Notably, the test set only needs to be stored and operated by the server, and the clients only need to
access their own historical gains and the server’s gains. We use λ = 0.1 and U : z 7→ z (the identity
map) in the experiment.
Results We visualize the learning curves on each dataset in Figures 4, 5, and 6. The model perfor-
mance is assessed using the top-1 accuracy on the test dataset. We also summarize the best model
performance in Tables 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
The following key points can be drawn from the results. Firstly, in comparison with non-incentivized
Federated Learning (FL) based on FedAvg, our proposed incentivized FL (denoted as “ICL”) algo-
rithm can deliver a higher and more rapidly increasing model performance (representing Collabora-
tion Gain in our context), as defined in (7). Across all settings–including two types of adversarial
attacks, two ratios of adversarial clients, and three datasets–ICL with pricing plan 3 consistently out-
performs FedAvg by a significant margin. On the other hand, ICL with pricing plan 1 underperforms,
which is expected as it only imposes a mild penalty on laggard/adversarial active clients. The results
suggest that it is possible to significantly mitigate the influence of malicious clients by precluding
them from participating in an FL round, given that the pricing penalty is sufficiently large. Further-
more, the figures also indicate that the random modification attack poses a more significant threat
compared to the label flipping attack, making it particularly difficult for non-incentivized FedAvg to
converge.


     (a) RM, Byzantine-0.2       (b) RM, Byzantine-0.3         (c) LP, Byzantine-0.2   (d) LP, Byzantine-0.3


Figure 4: Learning curves of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg measured by
Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two malicious
client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the FashionMNIST dataset.


     (a) RM, Byzantine-0.2       (b) RM, Byzantine-0.3         (c) LP, Byzantine-0.2   (d) LP, Byzantine-0.3


Figure 5: Learning curves of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg measured by
Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two malicious
client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the CIFAR10 dataset.


                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) RM, Byzantine-0.2     (b) RM, Byzantine-0.3               (c) LP, Byzantine-0.2         (d) LP, Byzantine-0.3


Figure 6: Learning curves of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg measured by
Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two malicious
client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the CINIC10 dataset.


Table 5: Best model prediction accuracy of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg
measured by Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two
malicious client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the FashionMNIST dataset.

                                Random modification                                 Label flipping
             Method
                            Byzantine-0.2        Byzantine-0.3           Byzantine-0.2       Byzantine-0.3
             FedAvg           87.1(0.1)               86.5(0.1)             89.6(0.0)          89.3(0.0)
      ICL pricing plan 1      87.2(0.0)               86.4(0.0)             89.5(0.1)          89.0(0.1)
      ICL pricing plan 2      87.0(0.0)               86.4(0.3)             89.3(0.1)          89.4(0.2)
      ICL pricing plan 3      89.4(0.0)               89.2(0.1)             89.4(0.1)          89.2(0.1)



Table 6: Best model prediction accuracy of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg
measured by Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two
malicious client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the CIFAR10 dataset.

                                Random modification                                 Label flipping
             Method
                            Byzantine-0.2        Byzantine-0.3           Byzantine-0.2       Byzantine-0.3
             FedAvg           55.7(0.4)               50.1(0.3)             67.3(0.2)          66.9(0.2)
      ICL pricing plan 1      54.8(0.2)               42.0(0.9)             67.0(0.4)          66.9(0.3)
      ICL pricing plan 2      68.1(0.0)               67.0(0.2)             67.6(0.1)          67.1(0.1)
      ICL pricing plan 3      67.1(0.2)               66.4(0.1)             67.9(0.2)          67.4(0.1)



Table 7: Best model prediction accuracy of ICL (incorporating three pricing plans) and FedAvg
measured by Accuracy, assessed for random modification (RM) label flipping (LP) attacks and two
malicious client ratios (0.2 and 0.3), applied to the CINIC10 dataset.

                                Random modification                                 Label flipping
             Method
                            Byzantine-0.2        Byzantine-0.3           Byzantine-0.2       Byzantine-0.3
             FedAvg           45.9(0.8)               41.0(0.6)             54.3(0.4)          53.8(0.8)
      ICL pricing plan 1      44.1(0.0)               38.6(2.1)             54.4(0.3)          53.9(0.1)
      ICL pricing plan 2      54.1(0.0)               41.2(7.8)             55.4(0.8)          54.7(0.6)
      ICL pricing plan 3      54.6(0.0)               54.7(0.3)             55.1(0.6)          54.2(0.3)



                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     ICL FOR ASSISTED LEARNING
Assisted learning (AL): AL (Xian et al., 2020b) is a decentralized learning framework that enables
autonomous organizations to significantly improve their performance by seeking feedback from
peers with just a few assistance rounds, without sharing their private models, objectives, or data.
Since then, AL has been expanded to encompass a broader range of learning tasks, including su-
pervised learning (Diao et al., 2022b), recommendation systems (Diao et al., 2022d), and multi-task
learning (Wang et al., 2022). AL has primarily focused on vertically partitioned data, where entities
possess data with distinct feature variables collected from the same cohort of subjects. Recently, AL
has been extended to support organizations with horizontally partitioned data based on the idea of
transmitting model training trajectories, within applications to reinforcement learning (Chen et al.,
2023b) (in which the assisting agent has diverse environments) and unsupervised domain adapta-
tion (Chen et al., 2023a) (where the assisting agent possesses supplementary data domains).
In this section, we give a more specific incentivized AL setup and operational algorithm based on the
development in Section 3.1 and the parallel assisted learning (PAL) (Wang et al., 2022) framework.

E.1   O PERATIONAL ALGORITHM

Review of non-incentivized PAL. The main idea is to let each entity seek assistance from others
by iteratively exchanging non-private statistics. Such statistics received by an entity will contain
unknown task information deliberately injected by others so that each entity has an incentive to ‘do
well.’ In the training stage (Stage I), at the first round of assistance, A sends its residual vector to
B . Upon receipt of the query, B blends the received vector with some statistics sb,a ∈ Rn calculated
from its local task, treats it as learning labels, and fits a model. After that, B sends the residual
back to A, who will initialize the next round. The above procedure continues until an appropriate
stop criterion is triggered. The training stage initialized by A is then completed. After that, B will
initialize another training stage by swapping the role with A. After the second training stage is
completed, both entities can proceed to the prediction stage.
In the prediction stage (Stage II), upon arrival of a new feature vector, A queries the prediction results
from B’s local models and combines them with its own to form the final prediction. So does B. Each
entity will need to tell how they blend the learned labels to ‘decode’ the faithful prediction values.
Our incentivized PAL protocol. Following Equation (14), each entity i needs to evaluate
(u − ci )µi,j + cj µj←i at a particular PAL round. We will estimate µi,j (respectively µj←i ) with
the collaboration gain from i, j (respectively the additional gain brought by i to j, at the last round
they collaborated. More specifically, µi,j is estimated by the reduced prediction loss on a validation
dataset for entity i’s task, comparing the collaborative PAL protocol trained from previous and cur-
rent rounds. The µj←i is estimated by the reduced prediction loss comparing the entity i’s locally
trained model and the collaboratively trained PAL protocol at the current rounds.
The pseudocode is summarized in Algorithm 2. More specifically, the PAL training stage consists
of multiple rounds. In each round, each of the three entities will decide who to collaborate based
on the estimated expected gain. If a pair of entities favors each other, they will form PAL, and the
remaining entity learns on its own; otherwise, every entity will learn on its own. The PAL training
of any entity can be terminated at the discretion of that entity. This provides flexibility to ensure
that any entity can stop appropriately if other participants’ model/data are no longer helpful or its
validation performance has reached a plateau. Despite when an entity exits the training stage, it will
still be dedicated to working with others in the prediction stage for joint prediction, using its locally
learned models.

E.2   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS FOR INCENTIVIZED AL

In the experimental studies, we considered the following setup.
Data We consider a real-world clinical dataset MIMIC (Johnson et al., 2016) under PAL set-
ting (Wang et al., 2022). We conduct experiments to show our pricing plan can promote mutually
beneficial collaboration. We pre-processed MIMIC3 following (Purushotham et al., 2018; Harutyun-
yan et al., 2019) and obtained a dataset of 6916 patients and 18 variables. We used 35% training,
15% validation, and 50% testing. Suppose there are three divisions/entities that collected various


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Incentivized Parallel Assisted Learning
Input: Entity i (i ∈ [3]) with local task label yi ∈ R, local feature variables xi ∈ Rdi , concatenated
                                                  ∆
        predictor variables (in hindsight) x = [x1 , x2 , x3 ] ∈ Rd1 +d2 +d3 , pricing function pi : ∆z 7→
        ci · ∆z, locally trained model fi,0 (without collaboration), blending parameter τi for PAL,
        test loss function Li , and Utility-Income function U : z 7→ u · z
Output: Prediction protocol for each entity i represented by fi,t (xj , j ∈ Ct ), t = 1, . . . , T , where
          Ct ⊂ [3] denotes the set of collaborating entities at round t.
                                             ∆
Initialization: Entity i’s initial label ri = yi − fi,0 (xi ), i ∈ [3]
Training stage:
    for each assistance round t = 1, . . . , T do
        for each entity i ∈ [3] in parallel do
             For all j ̸= i, let τi,j,t denotes the most recent round when i, j collaborated by round t
              (if any) and calculate:

                     ∆    (u − ci ) · µi,j,τi,j,t + cj · µj←i,τi,j,t   if i, j have collaborated in at least one round
              qi,j,t =
                          ∞                                            otherwise
                                                                                                        (30)
                               ∆
            Entity i favors i∗ = arg maxj̸=i qi,j,t – if there are more than one maximum, randomly
              choose one
            if Entity i has collaborated with entity j and µi,j,τi,j,t ≤ 0 for all j ̸= i then
                Entity i will no longer favor anyone and stop collaborations
            end
       end
       if there exists two entities, say A and B, that favor each other then
            fA,t , µA,B , µB←A , fB,t , µB,A , µA←B = runPAL(subject-aligned observations of
              (xA , rA ), (xB , rB ))
            rA ← yA − fA,t (x), rB ← yB − fB,t (x), Ct ← {A, B}
       end
       For each remaining entity, say C, train a local model from (xC , rC ) to obtain a function
         hC,t (xC ), and construct a prediction-stage function fC,t (x) = fC,t−1 (x) + hC,t (xC ).
   end
   For each entity, if its validation loss no longer decreases, it will quit the training stage and will
    be in the prediction stage
runPAL (Entity A’s local sample of (xA , rA ), entity B’s local sample of (xB , rB )):
   Entities A and B run PAL for one round with (xa , ra ) and (xb , rb ), which result in two local
    models hA,t and hB,t
                                                             ∆
    Entity A obtains a prediction-stage function fA,t (x) = fA,t−1 (x) + hA,t (xA ) + hB,t (xB )
    Entity A trains a local model from (xA , rA ) to obtain a function h̃A,t (xA ), and construct a a
     prediction-stage function without collaboration at t: f˜A,t (x) = fA,t−1 (x) + h̃(xA ).
    Entity A evaluates the gains using the empirical expectation over A’s local test data (denoted by
     Etest ):
                                   ∆
                         µA,B,t = Etest {LA (fA,t−1 (x), yA ) − LA (fA,t (x), yA )},                  (31)
                                   ∆
                         µA←B,t = Etest {LA (f˜A,t (x), yA ) − LA (fA,t (x), yA )}.
    Repeat the above for entity B
    Return: A holds fA,t , µA,B,t , µB←A,t , B holds fB,t , µB,A,t , µA←B,t
Prediction stage (a future subject whosePmodality xfi is observed by entity i ⊂ [3]):
   Each entity i will predict with yif = t∈[T ]:i∈Ct fi,t (xj , j ∈ Ct )
   // Note: each entity will only operate on its local data and receive assistance (namely hj,t (xj ))
     from other entities


features from the same cohort of patients and have different regression tasks. In particular, Entity 1,
2, and 3 aim to predict the heart rate, the systolic blood pressure, and the length of stay, respectively.


                                                    25
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 We supposed Entity 1 holds the variables of capillary refill rate, diastolic blood pressure, fraction
 inspired oxygen, heart rate, height, mean blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate;
 Entity 2 holds the variables of capillary refill rate, diastolic blood pressure, and fraction inspired
 oxygen. Entity 3 holds the variables of temperature, weight, pH, glucose, Glasgow coma scale total,
 Glasgow coma scale, eye Glasgow coma scale motor, and Glasgow coma scale verbal. Each entity
 will locally used a random forest model with 50 trees and max tree depth 5 in each round. We ran
 ten times of the experiments and recorded the standard errors, where the randomness comes from
 the local training and data splitting.
 To demonstrate how incentives can help assisted learning, we studied the following three settings.
 In Setting i (i = 1, 2, 3), entity i uses ci = 0, namely it does not pay, while other two entities use
 cj = u = 10 (following the notation in Algorithm 2). It is expected that in Setting i, entity i will
 not receive a good assistance from others as it does not incentivize peer entities.
 Results The results are summarized in Fig. 7. The results show that for every entity i, its perfor-
 mance curves tends to decrease faster, or gain more, if it provide incentives to other peers. We also
 summarized the eventual PAL gain of each entity in Table 8. The results show that incentivized PAL
 can significantly improve upon an entity’s local learning performance (without collaboration).

             17.0            Entity 1                                                Entity 2                               190                   Entity 3
                                     Setting 1                        15                     Setting 1                                                    Setting 1
                                     Setting 2                                               Setting 2                      188                           Setting 2
             16.5                    Setting 3                                               Setting 3                                                    Setting 3
                                                                      14
                                                                                                                            186
             16.0                                                     13
Test error


                                                         Test error


                                                                                                               Test error
                                                                                                                            184
             15.5                                                     12
                                                                                                                            182
                                                                      11
             15.0                                                                                                           180
                                                                      10
             14.5                                                                                                           178
                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
                             Round                                                  Round                                                  Round

 Figure 7: Test performance of each entity in incentivized PAL: test error (measured by quadratic
 loss) against assistance round in three settings. In Setting i, entity i does not pay, namely ci = 0
 following the notation in Algorithm 2.

                      Table 8: Test performance of each entity after incentivized PAL in three settings.

                                            Entity 1                                           Entity 2                                              Entity 3
                            Setting 1      Setting 2        Setting 3          Setting 1       Setting 2     Setting 3              Setting 1        Setting 2       Setting 3
     Incentivized PAL      16.01 (0.05)   14.78 (0.08)   15.37 (0.09)         11.95 (0.51)   10.97 (0.46)   9.85 (0.06)           180.00 (1.16)    178.97 (1.28)   182.06 (2.14)
       Local modeling                     16.22 (0.04)                                       15.07 (0.05)                                          188.99 (1.37)


                                                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     ICL FOR MULTI - ARMED BANDIT
F.1 C OLLABORATIVE MULTI - ARMED BANDIT
As a follow-up to our Introduction section, we present another motivating example using MAB.
In the standard Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) setting, suppose there are M arms, each producing a
gain zi with mean µi . The player will select an arm, denoted by  it , at each round and realize a gain,
                                                                 PT                  PT
and its goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward E          t=1 zit = E      t=1 µit at any
stopping time T . Note that the above it ’s can be random due to the selection rule. Without loss of
generality, we suppose the arms are ordered in such a way that µ1 ≥ · · · ≥ µM . We consider the
following MAB-inspired collaborative setting, which we refer to as collaborative MAB.
Collaborative MAB: Each arm represents a candidate entity that knows its underlying µi but is un-
aware of others’. In each round, entities decide whether to participate and if so, they may be selected
to realize the reward. All participants share the realized reward and pay accordingly. Meanwhile,
the coordinator employs a selection scheme to maximize system-level profit.
We will demonstrate some key insights using the collaborative MAB problem. In particular, we will
show that the collaboration requires screening at participation and selection stages, so that strong
candidates will remain to maximize the collaboration gain, medium candidates will pay to enjoy the
gain, and the laggard candidates (with low expected reward) will not participate in the game to avoid
potential large costs.

F.2   A PPLICATION OF ICL TO THE MULTI - ARMED BANDIT

Specifically, we consider the selection rule that each time, the coordinator will select the entity
with the largest average realized reward from history with probability 1 − ε and select among the
participants uniformly at random with probability ε. We suppose U(z) = z.
Then, the Equilibrium condition in Theorem 1 can be rewritten as

      Incentm : E −cm + µA − µm ≥ 0, Incentsys : E λcm + µA − µA(−m) ≥ 0,                          (32)
where A and A(−m) denote respectively the selected active entity/arm from all the participants and
that from all the participants excluding m.
Based on the above, we will then focus on the ideal equilibrium scenario where the best-performing
arm, namely arm 1, consistently participates and also has the largest empirical reward in history,
namely A equals 1 with probability 1 − ε and any remaining arm with probability ε/(|IP | − 1).
Then, we have
                                                P
                                                          µi
                      E(µA ) = (1 − ε)µ1 + ε i∈IP ,                                            (33)
                                                    |IP |
                                                      P
                                                              (−m) µi
                                                          i∈IP
                      E(µA(−m) ) = (1 − ε)µ1 + ε            (−m)
                                                                      , ∀m ̸= 1,               (34)
                                                          |IP     |
                                                 µ̄I − µm
                      E(µA(−m) ) − E(µA ) ≈ ε P                ,                               (35)
                                                     |IP |
                                                                                        P
                                                                                              µi
where the last equation is an asymptotic approximation for large |IP |, and µ̄IP = i∈I    P
                                                                                       |IP | is the
average of µ’s within IP . Assume λ > 0 for now. Taking the above to (32), we obtain the conditions
for the pricing plan:
                               E{cm } ≤ (1 − ε)µ1 + εE{µ̄IP } − µm ,                               (36)
                                          ε
                               E{cm } ≥       (µ̄I − µm ).                                         (37)
                                        λ|IP | P

• Interpretation of (36): Arm m will participate if its expected cost is no larger than the expected
additional reward. For large T , we often let ε vanish. In this case, we can further approximate this
condition as
                                         E{cm } ≤ µ1 − µm .                                        (38)


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Interpretation of (37): The system will welcome Arm m if its expected payment can overcome its
harm in degrading the collaboration reward (as reflected in the term µ̄IP − µm ). Also, the large λ, the
more tolerance of the system to the “laggard” arms. This is intuitive as a large λ means the system’s
profit from participation costs outweighs that from the collaboration gain.
Remark 7 (Incentive eliminates the “laggard” candidates). In practice, there may be many laggard
or even adversarial arms, meaning that their µm ’s are much smaller than µ̄IP , that aim to participate
to enjoy the gain or harm the system with only a small participation cost. To alleviate this concern,
we should design the pricing plan in a way that significantly penalize the laggard arms, so that when
they are selected to be active, albeit with a small probability, the overall expected participation cost
is very high. With such an incentive design, we aim to achieve the following goals:
1) prevent the laggard arms from participating by leveraging their incentives, which can further
improve the collaboration gain,
2) encourage the medium-performing arms to participate to enjoy the collaboration gain, which can
boost the overall profit, and
3) reward the top-performing arms to participate to make sure that they can be consistently selected
to be active.
Next, we will exemplify the above insights by studying a specific pricing plan.

Example: Consider the pricing plan
                                  cj = b0 + b1 1zj <κ1 − b2 1zj >κ2                                (39)
where b0 ≥ 0 is the baseline price, b1 ≥ 0 is the extra price for realizing a reward (if selected) that
is less than a threshold κ1 , and b2 ≥ 0 is the reward for realizing a reward that is greater than a
threshold κ2 .
We suppose each arm m knows its distribution of reward zm and the mean µm . Assume Zm | µm ∼
N (µm , s2 ), and let F denote the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of N (0, s2 ). According to
(36), arm m’s condition to participate is
                               E{cm } ≤ (1 − ε)µ1 + εE{µ̄IP } − µm ,
which we approximate with
                          b0 + b1 P(zm < κ1 ) − b2 P(zm > κ2 )
                           = b0 + b1 Fs (κ1 − µm ) − b2 Fs (µm − κ2 )
                                                            X
                           ≤ (1 − ε) max µ̂j,t + ε · M −1       µ̂j,t − µm ,                       (40)
                                     j∈[M ]
                                                            j∈[M ]

where µ̂j,t is the empirical average reward realized by arm j up to time t.
To compare with the standard non-incentivized MAB, we will consider λ = 0, namely the system-
level profit is simply the cumulative realized rewards. We will show that with incentive design, the
MAB can attain a cumulative consistently larger that that of a non-incentivized MAB. To that end,
we discuss how to choose the pricing plan as parameterized by b = [b0 , b1 , b2 ] and κ = [κ1 , κ2 ].
They need to satisfy two conditions:
1) Effective incentive: The arms incentivized to participate must be of high quality (with large
means) so that the exploration cost of MAB can be significantly reduced to benefit the cumulative
rewards.
In the asymptotic regime where the number of rounds is large and ε tends to zero, condition (40)
becomes
                        b0 + b1 Fs (κ1 − µm ) − b2 Fs (µm − κ2 ) ≤ µ1 − µm .                       (41)
It can be seen that both the left and right-hand sides are decreasing in µm . We will design b, κ such
that

                   µm 7→µ1 − µm − b0 + b1 Fs (κ1 − µm ) − b2 Fs (µm − κ2 ) ,                      (42)


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


referred to as the profit-performance function, is strictly increasing in µm . Recall that IP is the set
of m that meets the condition (41). Therefore, IP can be written in the form of
                                                      IP = {m : µm ≥ µm∗ }                                                                        (43)
         ∗
where m is such that µm∗ is the smallest among all µ’s that guarantees the condition (41), namely
the arms whose underlying µ is above a threshold.
2) Non-negative balance: The overall participation cost should be non-negative so that the system
does not need to spend extra cost on incentivizing candidate arms.
For this condition to hold, we should have
                         X
                             {b0 + b1 Fs (κ1 − µm ) − b2 Fs (µm − κ2 )} ≥ 0
                            m∈IP

where IP is determined by the condition in (43).
We conduct a simulated experiment to demonstrate the insights. We generate M µ’s from a Gaussian
distribution, generate z’s from Gaussian distributions centered at the corresponding µ, run T time
steps. We choose M = 50, T = 150, and hyperparameters b = [1, 5, 10], κ = [2, 4]. We record the
system’s cumulative profit and the participation activities of each arm over 20 random experiments
and plot their average in Fig. 8. To show the pricing plan is reasonable, we also visualized the
underlying µ’s from one random experiment and its corresponding profit-performance function as
defined in (42).



                                  System cummulative balance                                         Arm's round-wise profit
                 2500
                                                                             300

                 2000
                                                                             200
                 1500

                                                                             100
                 1000

                                                                              0
                  500


                        0    20     40     60   80   100   120    140              0       5    10   15   20    25    30     35    40   45

                            System's cummulative realized gains
                                                                             50
                            incentivized
                            non-incentivized
                  400                                                        45


                  300                                                        40


                                                                             35
                  200

                                                                             30
                  100
                                                                             25
                   0                                                                                                        trace of active arm
                        0    20     40     60   80   100   120    140                  0       20    40    60    80        100    120   140


Figure 8: Performance of the incentivized MAB: system’s cumulative profit (from participation
costs), 50 arms’ profit in boxplot, cumulative realized rewards and comparison with nonincentivized
game, and trace of selected active arms (larger index, larger performance), averaged over 20 random
experiments.


                                                                        29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Entities' capability mu Expected net profit under the incentive
                                                                 3
                            3.5
                                                                 2
                            3.0

                            2.5                                  1

                            2.0
                                                                 0
                            1.5
                                                                 1
                            1.0

                            0.5                                  2

                                  0          20        40                 1      2     3
                                                                                mu


Figure 9: Illustration of a particular incentive (b = [1, 5, 10], κ = [2, 4]): an arm’s expected net
profit by participating the game against its underlying capability (µ). Arms with better performance
expect to have positive profits and are therefore incentivized to participate.


                                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     P ROOFS OF THEORETICAL RESULTS
G.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                                             ∆
Proposition 1 (restatement) Let λ′ = |Iλ−1
                                        P |+1
                                              . The Objective (5) where λ′ is replaced with λ is equiv-
                                                                        P
alent to maximizing the average social welfare defined by (P ROFITsys + m∈IP P ROFITm )/(|IP |+1).

Proof. According to (2) and (3), and the fact that non-participating candidates have a zero profit
from collaboration, we have
                              X
                 P ROFITsys +     P ROFITm
                                   m∈IP

                                                            1m∈IP · (−cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm ))
                          X                          X
                  =λ             cm + U(zIA ) +
                          m∈IP                       m∈IP
                          X                          X
                  =λ             cm + U(zIA ) +             ·(−cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm ))
                          m∈IP                       m∈IP
                                  X                                   X
                  = (λ − 1)              cm + (|IP | + 1)U(zIA ) −           U(zm )
                                  m∈IP                                m∈IP

                                              λ−1 X
                  = (|IP | + 1) ×                      cm + U(zIA ) − const ,
                                             |IP | + 1
                                                     m∈IP
                             −1
                                  P
where const = (|IP | + 1)     m∈IP U(zm ) is a term that does not depend on the incentive mecha-
nism. Therefore, maximizing the average profit is equivalent to maximizing
                                    λ−1 X
                                                 cm + U(zIA ),                              (44)
                                   |IP | + 1
                                                      m∈IP
which concludes the proof.

G.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1 (restatement) The condition for a strategy profile (b∗m , m ∈ [M ], P ∗ , S ∗ ) to attain a
Nash equilibrium is

                     Incentm : E −cm + U(zIA ) − U(zm ) ≥ 0,                                     (45)

                     Incentsys : E λcm + U(zIA ) − U(zI(−m) ) ≥ 0,                               (46)
                                                                        A

if and only if m ∈ IP .

Proof. From the perspective each entity m, its expected profit if participating the game is E −cm +
U(zIA ) − U(zm ) . Thus, conditional on other parties’ decisions, entity m will participate if and only
if Inequality 45 holds. From the perspective each entity m, from the definition in (3), the additional
expected profit of a candidate m participating the game is
       X                             X
   E λ       ci + U(zIA ) − E λ             ci + U(zI(−m) ) = E λcm + U(zIA ) − U(zI(−m) ) .
                                                                 A                             A
        i∈IP                             i∈IP −{m}
                                                                                               (47)
Then, the system’s strategy is to welcome a participant m if and only if its expected marginal gain
brought by this participant is nonnegative, which leads to Condition 46.



G.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (restatement) Let ζ̄IP and x̄IP denote all the participants’ average of ζ and weighted
average of X, namely
                                  P                    P
                                ∆    i∈IP ζi        ∆         ζi xi
                           ζ̄IP =            , x̄IP = Pi∈IP         .                       (48)
                                     |IP |                i∈IP ζi



                                                            31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assume that max{|ζm |, ∥ζm xm ∥∞ } ≤ τ for all m ∈ IP and log d/|IP | → 0 as |IP | → ∞. Then, the
equilibrium Conditions (9) and (10) can be written as

             E{cm } ≤ E (U ◦ G)(x̄IP + op (1)) − U ◦ G(xm ) ,                               (49)

                                                         bm       ζm
             λE{cm } ≥ E (U ◦ G)′ (x̄IP + op (1))                        (x̄IP − xm ) ,     (50)
                                                    (1 + op (1))ρ K ζ̄IP
where op (1) denotes a term whose ℓ1 -norm converges in probability to zero as |IP | goes to infinity.

Proof. By the definition of zIA and Taylor expansion, we have
                    P
                             ζi xi
                                                X
                                                      Bζx
   U(zIA ) = U ◦ G Pi∈IA             =U ◦G           P i i i      ,
                          i∈IA ζi               i∈IP  j∈IP Bj ζj
                     X
                                      Bi ζi xi
U(zI(−m) ) = U ◦ G              P
                                   j∈IP −{m} Bj ζj
    A
                     i∈IP −{m}
                                                X
                                 ′                                           1                      1            bm ζm xm
           = U(zIA ) + (U ◦ G) (ωK,m ) ×               Bi ζi xi P                        −P                    −P
                                                   i∈IP −{m}           j∈IP −{m} Bj ζj        j∈IP Bj ζj          j∈IP Bj ζj
                                                      P
                                                       i∈IP −{m} Bi ζi xi

                              ′            bm ζm
           = U(zIA ) + (U ◦ G) (ωK,m ) × P            P                   − xm ,                        (51)
                                          j∈IP Bj ζj    j∈IP −{m} Bj ζj

where ωK,m is on the line connecting
                             P                   P
                               i∈IP Bi ζi xi       i∈I −{m} Bi ζi xi
                              P              and P P                 .                                  (52)
                                     B
                                j∈IP j jζ           j∈IP −{m} Bj ζj

          ∆
When K = |IP | is large, we will show that both the above terms (and thus ωK,m ) will concentrate
at x̄IP with high probability. Let xℓ denote the ℓ-th element of a vector X ∈ Rd . Using the bound of
∥ζi xi ∥∞ , the fact that bm ’s follow independent B(ρ), and Hoeffding’s inequality, we have for any
small constant v > 0,
                      X                    X
                   P        Bi ζi xi,ℓ − ρ   ζi xi,ℓ ≥ vKτ ζ̄IP ≤ 2 exp(−v 2 ζ̄I2P K)            (53)
                       i∈IP                 i∈IP

for every ℓ = 1, . . . , d. It follows from the union bound that
                  X                     X
              P            Bi ζi xi − ρ    ζi xi    ≤ vKτ ζ̄IP ≥ 1 − 2d exp(−v 2 ζ̄I2P K).              (54)
                    i∈IP             i∈IP          ∞

Likewise, we have
      X               X      X
    P       Bi ζi − ρ   ζi =   Bi ζi − ρK ζ̄IP ≤ vKτ ζ̄IP ≥ 1 − 2 exp(−v 2 ζ̄I2P K).                    (55)
         i∈IP              i∈IP     i∈IP

Taking Inequalities (54) and (55) into (52), we have
           P                     P
                   Bi ζi xi   ρ          ζi xi
            Pi∈IP           − Pi∈IP
               j∈I  B  ζ
                      j j       ρ     i∈I ζi    ∞
               PP                    P P
                       B  ζ x −    ρ         ζ x
                                                                                  X
                  i∈IP i i i            i∈IP i i              1             1
          =                                      + P                  −                Bi ζi xi
                            ρK ζ̄IP                        j∈IP Bj ζj     ρK ζ̄IP i∈I
                                                                                     P
                                                                                                ∞
                                                             X
             vKτ ζ̄IP                 vKτ ζ̄IP
          ≤            +                                      ρ      ζi xi    + vKτ ζ̄IP
              ρK ζ̄IP      (ρK ζ̄IP )(ρK ζ̄IP − vKτ ζ̄IP )      i∈I        ∞
                                                                 P

             vτ        vτ                                   vτ   v(ρ + v)τ 2
           ≤    +                  (ρKτ ζ̄IP + vKτ ζ̄IP ) =    +                                        (56)
              ρ   ρ(ρ − vτ )K ζ̄IP                           ρ   ρ(ρ − vτ )


                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last two lines are due to the triangle inequality. From (54), (55), and (56), and the as-
sumption that log d/K → 0 as K → ∞, we can choose v = (K −1 log d)2/3 so that v → 0 and
v 2 · K/ log d → ∞ as K → ∞, which leads to
                      P                   P
                         i∈IP Bi ζi xi   ρ i∈IP ζi xi
                       P               =   P          + op (1) = x̄IP + op (1),                (57)
                          j∈IP Bj ζj      ρ i∈IP ζi

where
  P
      op (1) denotes a term whose ℓ1 -norm converges in probability to zero. The same result applies
              B i ζi x i
to Pi∈IP −{m} Bj ζj .
      j∈IP −{m}


By a similar argument as above, we have

                                        1                     1
                                  P               =                     .                      (58)
                                     j∈IP Bj ζj       ρK(ζ̄IP + op (1))

Taking (57) and (58) into (51), we conclude the proof.



G.4     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Proposition 2 (restatement) Suppose the information transmitted from participant m is the mean
and variance of xm ∈ R, denoted by µm , σ 2 for all m ∈ IP . Assume the gain is defined by the
                     ∆
quadratic loss G(x) = −E(X − µ)2 , where µ represents the underlying parameter of interest, and
the participants’ weights ζm ’s are the same. Assume that σ 2 /(|IP | · maxm∈IP (µm − µ)2 ) → ∞ as
|IP | → ∞. Then, we have U (q)/U (q ∗ ) →p 1 as |IP | → ∞.


Proof. By the definition of G, we have
                                                P
                                                 m∈IP bm xm

                           G(xm , m ∈ IA ) = G   P
                                                  m∈IP bm
                                                 P               2
                                                   m∈IP bm xm
                                           = −E   P           −µ                               (59)
                                                    m∈IP bm
                                            = −(T1 + T2 )

where
                                  P                    P                   2
                              ∆     m∈IP bm xm             m∈IP bm µm
                           T1 = E  P              − P
                                      m∈IP bm                 m∈IP bm
                                    P
                                                b   x

                                          m∈IP m m
                              = E Var    P                 | bm , m ∈ I P
                                            m∈IP bm
                                  P        2
                                    m∈IP bm Var(xm )

                              =E      P             2      | b m , m  ∈ I P
                                        m∈IP bm
                                          bm σ 2
                                  P
                              = E Pm∈IP         2
                                      m∈IP bm
                                      σ2                    |IP |−1 σ 2

                              =E P               =        −1
                                                               P                               (60)
                                    m∈IP bm          |IP |         m∈IP bm
                                  P                      2
                              ∆     m∈IP bm µm
                           T2 = E  P              − µ ≤ E(∆µ2 ).                               (61)
                                      m∈IP  b m



                                                      33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the Markov inequality, we have
                     P                        P
                         m∈IP bm                   m∈IP (bm − qm )

                 P                −ρ ≥ε =P                            ≥ε
                          |IP |                         |IP |
                                                  P                    2
                                                      m∈IP (bm − qm )
                                         ≤ ε−2 E
                                                           |IP |
                                               P
                                                        q m (1 − qm )
                                         = ε−2 m∈IP
                                                        |IP |2
                                                 1
                                         ≤ ε−2        →0
                                               4|IP |
as |IP | → ∞. Therefore, based on (60), (61), and the assumption that |IP |−1 σ 2 ≫ ∆µ2 , T1 will
asymptotically dominate T2 and
                                          G(xm , m ∈ IA )
                                                          →p 1                                         (62)
                                           (ρ|IP |)−1 σ 2
as |IP | → ∞. Since the denominator in (62) does not depend on the particular q introduced in (11),
we conclude the proof.

G.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We consider a more general setting. Let pi (∆z) denote the price i is willing to pay for any additional
                                                                                                          ∆
gain of ∆z. The actual gain entity i will pay in a collaboration, say with j, is denoted by Ci←j =
pi (zi,j − zi ) − pj (zj,i − zj ). Let µi = E{zi } and µi,j = E{Z}i,j for all i, j ∈ [M ]. For all i, j, let
       ∆
µi←j = µi,j − µi denote the expected additional gain bought by entity i to j.
Theorem 3 (restatement) Suppose pi (∆z) = ci · ∆z for all i ∈ [M ] and U(z) = u · z. Then, there
exists a consensus on collaboration if and only if there exist two entities, say i, j ∈ [M ], such that
                                        E{U(zi,j ) − Ci←j } ≥ 0.                                       (63)
In the linear case, the above conditions became
                           (u − ci )µi,j + cj µj←i ≥ (u − ci )µi,k + ck µk←i ,
                           (u − cj )µj,i + ci µi←j ≥ (u − cj )µj,k + ck µk←j ,
for all k ̸= i, j.

Proof. Based on the setup, the expected profit of an entity i will be the sum of the profit converted
from PAL gain minus the paid cost. We let P ROFITi←j and zi,j respectively denote the P ROFITi and
the collaboration gain Z generated from the PAL formed by entities i and j. Then, we have
                                                ∆
                                  P ROFITi←j = E{U(zi,j ) − Ci←j }.                                    (64)
For entity i to favor j over others, we have
                                P ROFITi←j ≥ P ROFITi←k ,       ∀k ̸= i, j,                            (65)
which, according to (64), implies that
                     E{U(zi,j )} − E{Ci←j } ≥ E{U(zi,k )} − E{Ci←k },         ∀k ̸= i, j.              (66)
Likewise, for entity j to favor i over others, we have
                     E{U(zj,i )} − E{Cj←i } ≥ E{U(zj,k )} − E{Cj←k },          ∀k ̸= i, j.             (67)
Finally, for entity i to have a non-negative profit so that it will participate in the collaboration, we
have
                                     E{U(zi,j )} − E{Ci←j } ≥ 0.                                       (68)
These proves the first part of the theorem.


                                                    34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With the linear assumption of pi ’s, we have
                E{U(zi,j )} − E{Ci←j } = uµi,j − {ci (µi,j − µi ) − cj (µi,j − µj )}               (69)
                                       = (u − ci + cj )µi,j + ci µi − cj µj ,                      (70)
and similarly for other subscripts. Thus, it can be calculated that Inequalities (66) and (67) can
reduce to
                    (u − ci )(µi,j − µi,k ) + cj µj←i − ck µk←i ≥ 0,
                    (u − cj )(µj,i − µj,k ) + ci µi←j − ck µk←j ≥ 0,     ∀k ̸= i, j.
Also, Inequality (68) reduces to
                                   uµi,j − ci µi←j + cj µj←i ≥ 0.                                  (71)
These conclude the proof.

G.6   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

Theorem 4 (restatement) Assume U is a pre-specified non-decreasing function. Consider the
                                                                                                      ∆
pricing plan in (15) where C can be any non-negative and non-decreasing function. Let µm =
EPm ∗ {U(zm )} be the expected gain of participant m when active, m ∈ [K]. The necessary and suf-

ficient condition for reaching a pricing consensus is the existence of a participant, say participant 1,
that satisfies
                          µ1 − uj ≥ EP1∗ {C(z1 )} + EPj∗ {(K − 1)C(zj )}                           (72)
                                                           ∆
for all j ̸= 1. In particular, assume the linearity U(z) = u · z and C(z) = c · z. Inequality (72) is
equivalent to
                                                 u · (µ1 − µj )
                                     c ≤ min                      .
                                          j̸=1 µ1 + (K − 1)µj


Proof. The necessary and sufficient conditions for participant 1 to be active with consensus are: 1)
from the system’s perspective, participant 1 can maximize the expected collaboration gain; 2) from
participant 1 perspective, its expected profit serving as an active participant is better than that of
serving as non-active participant; from other participants’ perspectives, the expected earn of being
active is no better than being active. Specifically, we have the following conditions:
                 Perspective of collaboration gain 1 :
                 EP1∗ {G(z1 )} ≥ EPj∗ {G(zj )}, ∀j ̸= 1                                            (73)
                 Perspective of Participant 1 :
                 EP1∗ {(K − 1)C(z1 ) + G(z1 )} ≥ EPj∗ {−C(zj ) + G(zj )}, ∀j ̸= 1                  (74)
                 Perspective of Participant j ̸= 1 :
                 EP1∗ {−C(z1 ) + G(z1 )} ≥ EPj∗ {(K − 1)C(zj ) + G(zj )}.                          (75)
Here, Inequality (73) states that if there exists an active participant with consensus, it must achieve
the maximal collaboration gain. Inequality (75) is equivalent to Inequality (72). By the assumption
of non-negativeness of C, Inequality (75) implies Inequality (73), which further implies Inequal-
ity (74). This proves the first part of the theorem.
In particular, assuming G(z) = g · z and C(z) = c · z, Inequality (75) can be equivalently written as
                             −cµ1 + gµ1 ≥ max{(K − 1)cµj + gµj },                                  (76)
                                               j̸=1

which can be equivalently written as
                                                 g · (µ1 − µj )
                                     c ≤ min                      .                                (77)
                                          j̸=1 µ1 + (K − 1)µj

This concludes the proof.


                                                      35
