Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BALANCING S TABILITY AND P LASTICITY IN
C ONTINUAL L EARNING :
THE READOUT- DECOMPOSITION
OF ACTIVATION CHANGE (RDAC) FRAMEWORK

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Continual learning (CL) algorithms strive to acquire new knowledge while pre-
         serving prior information. However, this stability-plasticity trade-off remains a
         central challenge. This paper introduces a framework that dissects this trade-
         off, offering valuable insights into CL algorithms. The Readout-Decomposition
         of Activation Change (RDAC) framework first addresses the stability-plasticity
         dilemma and its relation to catastrophic forgetting. It relates learning-induced acti-
         vation changes in the range of prior readouts to the degree of stability, and changes
         in the null space to the degree of plasticity. In deep non-linear networks tackling
         split-CIFAR-110 tasks, the framework clarifies the stability-plasticity trade-offs
         of the popular regularization algorithms Synaptic intelligence (SI), Elastic-weight
         consolidation (EWC), and learning without Forgetting (LwF), and replay based
         algorithms Gradient episodic memory (GEM), and data replay. GEM and data
         replay preserved both stability and plasticity, while SI, EWC, and LwF traded off
         plasticity for stability. The inability of the regularization algorithms to maintain
         plasticity was linked to them restricting the change of activations in the null space
         of the prior readout. Additionally, for one-hidden-layer linear neural networks, we
         derived a gradient decomposition algorithm to restrict activation change only in
         the range of the prior readouts, to maintain high stability while not further sacrific-
         ing plasticity. Results demonstrate that the algorithm maintained stability without
         significant plasticity loss. The RDAC framework not only informs the behavior of
         existing CL algorithms but also paves the way for novel CL approaches. Finally, it
         sheds light on the connection between learning-induced activation/representation
         changes and the stability-plasticity dilemma, also offering insights into represen-
         tational drift in biological systems.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Continual learning (CL) is a fundamental challenge in the field of neural networks, aiming to equip
these systems with the ability to acquire new knowledge while not forgetting previously learned
information, which is termed the stability-plasticity dilemma (Carpenter & Grossberg, 1987; Mer-
millod et al., 2013). In the common setting of gradient-based learning in neural networks, perfor-
mance on prior tasks reduces as new tasks are learned i.e. stability is traded off for plasticity. This
phenomenon is termed catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999).
Much of such catastrophic forgetting has been linked to learning-induced changes that occur in
the later layers of neural networks (Ramasesh et al., 2020; Kalb & Beyerer, 2022). Going a step
further, recent work revealed that, during task-incremental learning (van de Ven et al., 2022), a large
portion of the loss in task performance is not about the information relevant to the previous tasks
being forgotten. Instead due to learning, the activations change, and the prior decision hyperplanes
no longer align with the discriminative directions in those activations (Davari & Belilovsky, 2021;
Anthes et al., 2023). Inspired by these results, we introduce a framework to study what aspects of
such learning-induced activation changes are related to the performance on prior and future tasks
i.e. the stability and plasticity during learning.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Conceptualization of the readout-decomposition of activity change. The readout for a
task reads from a subspace of the pre-readout activation space. In the case of a two-dimensional
activation space, and a binary readout, the hyperplane defines a line through the 2D space. (Left)
Any gradient affecting this space in a way that changes activation patterns perpendicular to the
hyperplane (the range of the readout) affects the mapping between hidden and readout activations,
and is detrimental to stability. (Right) Any gradient affecting this space in a way that changes
activation patterns parallel to the hyperplane (the null space of the readout) does not affect the
mapping between hidden and readout activations. However, this change is useful for learning new
tasks i.e. being plastic, while not disrupting stability.


We present the Readout-Decomposition of Activation Change (RDAC) framework. The central
principle is as follows: Learning-induced activation changes within the range of a prior readout
can lead to the task-relevant activations being misaligned with that readout, hampering stability.
In contrast, changes in the null space do not affect stability, but they might reflect changes in the
upstream weights due to the network learning new tasks. If so, restricting changes to the null space
would make the network less capable of learning new tasks, hampering plasticity. This principle is
exemplified in Figure 1.
The RDAC framework serves as a diagnostic tool to study the stability-plasticity trade-offs of CL
algorithms. Moving beyond performance-based comparisons, we can probe the causes of those
trade-offs by comparing them to the learning-induced activation changes in the range and null space
of the prior readouts. In this work, we assessed the stability-plasticity trade-offs of popular CL
algorithms - three regularization algorithms: Synaptic intelligence (SI; Zenke et al. (2017)), Elastic-
weight consolidation (EWC; Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)), and Learning without forgetting (LwF; Li
& Hoiem (2017)), and two rehearsal algorithms: Gradient episodic memory (GEM; Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato (2017)), and data replay (Rebuffi et al., 2017).
Our results revealed that during learning the split-CIFAR-110 tasks, SI, EWC, and LwF traded off
plasticity for stability, and restricted the activation changes in both the range and null space of prior
readouts. Meanwhile, GEM and data replay maintained high stability and plasticity and surprisingly
did not restrict activation changes in both the range and null space of prior readouts. We explain these
observations in terms of the implementation details of those algorithms. Thus, we demonstrate the
usefulness of RDAC in assessing the behavior of continual learning algorithms function at the level
of the activations and the weights in the networks.
The RDAC framework can also guide the development of new continual learning algorithms, which
shed further light on the relationship between the stability-plasticity trade-offs and the activation
changes in the range and null space of the readouts. We demonstrate how we can translate the core
principle of RDAC analytically into a gradient decomposition algorithm for simple one-hidden-layer
linear networks (tested on split-MNIST tasks). We show that their stability-plasticity trade-offs are
linked to the activation changes in the range and null space of the prior readout, and we can exert


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


full control over the trade-off with two parameters related to the range and null space of the readout.
Thus, we validate the central principle of RDAC and show its value in building new CL algorithms.
In sum, the RDAC framework helps in assessing the stability-plasticity trade-offs in existing CL
algorithms and paves the way for the development of new CL algorithms. By shedding light on these
critical aspects of CL, this paper contributes to the ongoing efforts to characterize the complexities
of continual learning in order to solve it.


2    R ELATED WORK

In the landscape of research addressing the challenges of continual learning (CL), several noteworthy
contributions have emerged that offer valuable insights into the stability-plasticity trade-off and
related concepts (Parisi et al., 2019; De Lange et al., 2021; Mundt et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023;
Kim & Han, 2023). Most of these approaches compare the different CL algorithms in terms of
their performance on previously-learned tasks as a function of learning new tasks and ablations on
the various components of those algorithms. We seek to characterize the stability-plasticity trade-
offs of the algorithms in terms of the changes in weights and prior tasks’ activations. In addition
to investigating how well algorithms solve the catastrophic forgetting problem, we place special
emphasis on the algorithms’ continued ability to learn new tasks i.e. their plasticity.
Recently, many groups have sought to understand the influence of learning-induced activation
changes on stability and plasticity (Wang et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2023). All these approaches analyze the gradient updates in the range of the space spanned by
the activations for previous tasks, for each layer of the network. However, it is unclear whether the
range of the readouts, which determines the outputs of the network, is equivalent to the range of the
activations for the previous tasks. The range of the activations is most probably larger than the range
of the readouts, and the pre-readout activation space is usually very high-dimensional compared to
the readout. Also, prior work has shown that the activation space contains classification-orthogonal
information (e.g. size and location of the object; Hong et al. (2016); Thorat et al. (2021)), which
implies the activation space has more information than required by the readout. If the range of the
activations is indeed larger, the space in which activations could change, while maintaining the pre-
vious tasks’ performance, would seem smaller. This would suggest a reduced capacity for learning
future tasks. To circumvent this potential issue, in the RDAC framework, we provide a different view
on the link between the activation change and the stability-plasticity trade-off, by directly focusing
on the range of the readouts.


3    T HE R EADOUT-D ECOMPOSITION OF ACTIVATION C HANGE FRAMEWORK

In the RDAC framework, we link the performance-based stability-plasticity trade-offs of continual
learning algorithms to how they constrain learning. We study how learning-based changes in prior
task activations, in the range and null space of the prior readouts, are linked to stability and plasticity.
In task-incremental continual learning, a network has to sequentially learn a set of n task map-
pings {xk → ok }k≤n . The network’s weights are shared across tasks, except for the readouts,
{WRk }k≤n , which are task-specific. For a given task k < m, consider the pre-readout activations
                               ⊤        ⊤
hk such that ok = σ(hk WR        k + bRk ), σ is a non-linear activation function and b is the readout

bias. While learning on the new task m, we can decompose the change in activations, ∆hk as
∆hk CC⊤ + ∆hk NN⊤ , where C and N are the range and null-space matrices of WRk , and
CC⊤ and NN⊤ are the corresponding projection matrices. These two components can provide us
insights into the stability-plasticity trade-offs of a given learning algorithm.
First, changes in the activations in the range of the readout (∆hk CC⊤ ) could disrupt stability as
∆hk CCT WRk = ∆hk WRk . A naive algorithm could preserve stability by ensuring that changes
in activations do not happen in the range of the readouts. However, if the non-linearity σ performs
a many-to-one mapping, it can effectively negate the influence of those “degenerate” activation
changes on the output. Smarter algorithms could change activations in the range of the readouts,
even though their performance on previous tasks, i.e. stability, would be unchanged. In this case,
the change of activations in the “effective range” (of the readout plus the further non-linearities),


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


would still be predicted to be zero. However, estimating effective range analytically is non-trivial,
so this is harder to analyze.
Second, changes in the activations in the null space of the readout (∆hk NN⊤ ) have no effect on
                             ⊤
stability, as ∆hk NNT WR       k = 0. However, there could be a link between the changes in null
space and learning on new tasks. As seen in previous work (Davari & Belilovsky, 2021; Anthes
et al., 2023), without any learning constraints, changes in the prior tasks’ activations are observed
during learning. To maintain stability there is no incentive to reduce the activation change in the
readout null space. A reduction in those changes in the null space could instead signal a reduced
degree of learning on new tasks. In contrast, non-linearities upstream to hk could perform many-
to-one mapping in a way that weight changes do not get reflected in the changes in the activations
in the null space, even if the changes in the range are clamped by a stability-preserving algorithm.
Whether such many-to-one mappings occur in practice is an empirical question.
Given the above considerations, in RDAC we consider the following Cases to diagnose the stability-
plasticity trade-off by considering the decomposed activation changes during task-incremental learn-
ing with a given continual learning algorithm:
      1. Stability (preserved), range clamping (on): Aligns with the central principle of RDAC.
      2. Stability (preserved), range clamping (off): The algorithm can access the effective range
         of the readout and the loss function combined, and/or the algorithm can access information
         related to previous data to encourage backward transfer.
      3. Stability (hampered), range clamping (on): This is impossible.
      4. Stability (hampered), range clamping (off): One way to gain stability is to modify the
         algorithm to lead to range clamping.
      5. Plasticity (preserved), null space clamping (on): The upstream non-linearities create de-
         generate solutions for prior task mappings such that further learning can continue.
      6. Plasticity (preserved), null space clamping (off): Aligns with central principle of RDAC.
      7. Plasticity (hampered), null space clamping (on): The algorithm might be trading-off plas-
         ticity by clamping null space. We need to peer into the details of the algorithm to ascertain
         if the null space clamping could be removed.
      8. Plasticity (hampered), null space clamping (off): If the null space is large enough, the
         algorithm has the capacity to learn but does not due to other causes, e.g. high learning rate.
Thus, monitoring these two components of the activation changes can provide us with valuable
insights into the inner workings of continual learning algorithms.

4     A SSESSING EXISTING CONTINUAL LEARNING ALGORITHMS WITH RDAC
Using the RDAC framework, we present an assessment of how a variety of continual learning algo-
rithms allow changes in the activations and how those changes relate to the observed performance-
based stability-plasticity trade-offs. First, we outline the network architecture and task setting. Then,
we present the results comparing the different learning algorithms: three regularization methods -
Synaptic Intelligence (SI; Zenke et al. (2017)), EWC, and Learning without Forgetting (LwF; Li
& Hoiem (2017)) - and two rehearsal methods - Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM; Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato (2017)) and data replay1 (Rebuffi et al., 2017). In addition to them being popular, these
algorithms were chosen due to the availability of their implementations through the Avalanche li-
brary (Carta et al., 2023).

4.1    N ETWORK AND TASK

We considered a VGG-like neural network, similar to the one used in Zenke et al. (2017), which
maps CIFAR images (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) to their classes (The exact architecture and optimiza-
tion procedure is described in Appendix A.1.1). We considered the split-CIFAR-110 setting, where
    1
      In data replay and LwF, contrary to the usual setting, we fixed readouts after training on a task and allowed
the rest of the network to train further. This was done because in all the other methods, the prior readouts are
frozen.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Continual learning in deep non-linear neural networks learning to classify CIFAR images.
(A) With increasing regularization strength, replay buffer size, and memory strength (indicated with
darkening hues), the stability of all the algorithms increases. However, the rehearsal algorithms,
GEM, and data replay maintain high plasticity, whereas the regularization algorithms do not do
so. (B) In the pre-readout activation space, the activation change is quantified as the difference
between task 1 activations after training on task 1 and after training on all 11 tasks (displacement).
With increasing regularization strength, the regularization algorithms reduce the activation change
in both the range and null space of task 1 readout, which corresponds to the observed maintenance of
stability and loss of plasticity. With increasing replay buffer size (and memory strength in the case
of GEM), the rehearsal algorithms maintain high activation change in both the range and null space
of the task 1 readout, which ensures plasticity. The use of non-linear, many-to-one mapping loss
functions by these algorithms allows for changes in the range that are not detrimental to stability.
These results illustrate the utility of the RDAC framework as a diagnostic tool to understand the
stability-plasticity trade-offs of continual learning algorithms. The diagonal dotted line in panel B
and the two insets indicates the expected ratio of displacement in null space and range of a readout
if activations were to move uniformly in all dimensions of the pre-readout layer.


the network is first trained on CIFAR-10, and then sequentially trained on ten equal task splits from
CIFAR-100 (we ran the analysis 3 times with randomly chosen assignments of classes to splits, and
show the results averaged across those seeds). Images were subjected to augmentations. Separate
readouts were trained for each of the tasks, with softmax activation and cross-entropy loss. Af-
ter training on task 1 (CIFAR-10), we computed the projection matrices CC⊤ and NN⊤ , using
singular value decomposition (SVD).

4.2   R ESULTS

We assessed the stability-plasticity trade-offs of the CL algorithms from the perspective of the RDAC
framework. We considered the performance on task 1 (measure of stability) and on task 11 (measure
of plasticity) after training on all 11 tasks. The changes (displacement) of the task 1 activations after
task-1 training to after task-11 training, decomposed into the range and null space of the trained task
1 readouts, were assessed. Results are shown in Figure 2 (panels A & B).
First, in terms of desired behavior, all the algorithms gain stability, with increasing regularization
strength for regularization algorithms, EWC, SI, and LwF, and with increasing replay buffer size
(and memory strength in the case of GEM) for the rehearsal algorithms, GEM and data replay.
However, there are differences between the regularization and rehearsal algorithms in how this sta-
bility is achieved. In the regularization algorithms, the activation changes in the range decreased
with increasing stability (Case 1). In the rehearsal algorithms, the activation changes did not de-


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


crease similarly (Case 2). This is attributable to GEM and data replay being able to utilize the
many-to-one, non-linear loss function (cross-entropy loss between the prediction and 1−hot targets)
to allow movement outside the effective range which is smaller than the readout range. Additionally,
in GEM, the activation changes in the range increased with increasing stability. This is related to
the backward transfer constraint - GEM encourages gradients for the new task to point towards the
gradients estimated (with the replay buffer) for prior tasks, to jointly reduce the loss on all the tasks.
Moving along task 1 gradients, which point into the task 1 readout range, leads to a change in the
activations in the range.
Second, in terms of desired behavior, the rehearsal algorithms maintain plasticity with increasing
replay buffer size (and memory strength in the case of GEM). The activation changes in the null
space did not decrease substantially (Case 6). Additionally, in GEM, the activation changes in the
null space increased while plasticity did not decrease substantially. As mentioned earlier, GEM
encourages gradients to point into all the gradients estimated with the readouts until task n − 1 while
training on task n. The readouts of task 2 to task n − 1 occupy some of the null space of the task 1
readout. Thus GEM also leads to activation change into the task 1 readout null space.
Third, in terms of undesired behavior, the regularization algorithms lose plasticity with increasing
regularization strength. The activation changes in the null space decreased substantially (Case 7).
In the case of EWC and SI, each weight in the network is assigned an importance score based on
either the gradients for task k post task k training (used to estimate Fisher information in EWC) or
the integration of gradients across task k training (SI). During training on new tasks, a constraint
is introduced - the weights during training on task n should be similar to the weights post task
k training, weighted by the importance scores of those weights for that task, over all tasks k <
n. This procedure assumes the gradients are sufficiently small such that this importance-based
constraint ensures weight change into directions orthogonal to those that would affect the losses
for the prior tasks. Viewing the results from our framework, we speculate that either the gradients
are not small enough or the importance score computation is not sufficiently constrained to only
span the union of the ranges of the prior readouts, thus over-constraining the null spaces of the
prior readouts. Extensions to EWC and SI should allow for null space activation change in order to
maintain plasticity.
The case of LwF is intriguing. LwF generates pseudo-labels (not 1−hot) for the current task in-
puts on the prior readouts, before training on the task. During training, the algorithm enforces the
constraint that the predictions onto the prior readouts should match the pseudo-labels. Doing so
reduces the activation changes of the prior tasks’ inputs in the prior readout range. As the constraint
is imposed based on prior task readouts, we would expect that there is no pressure to restrict the
activation changes in the null space. However, we observed a decrease in null space activations with
increasing strength of the constraint. A possible explanation is that the range of the readout relies
on a substantial part of the upstream network (i.e. discriminative features for a task rely on a lot of
combinations of low-level features). In asking the range to be clamped, the gradients inadvertently
end up clamping the space outside the range downstream, which is observed as null space clamping.
How a regularization algorithm could get around this issue is an open problem. Such an algorithm
would need to explicitly allow for interaction between the gradients related to the prior readout range
and null space and the gradients related to the new task.
In sum, our results show that the principles laid out in the RDAC framework relating readout-
decomposed activation changes to the stability-plasticity trade-offs provide useful insights into the
inner workings of continual learning algorithms for deep, non-linear neural networks. These patterns
of results were also found to hold in a larger dataset and architecture (see Appendix A.2), making
our insights generalizable.

5    U SING INSIGHTS FROM RDAC TOWARDS BUILDING A CONTINUAL
     LEARNING ALGORITHM

We seek to derive a continual learning algorithm, primarily to empirically validate the link between
the readout decomposition of activation changes and the stability-plasticity trade-off. As a start,
in one-hidden-layer linear neural networks, we show how the activation changes are linked to the
weight updates, and analytically derive a gradient-decomposition-based algorithm to ensure maxi-
mal stability without further throttling plasticity.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The input-output mapping of a one-hidden-layer linear network, with no bias terms, can be written
             ⊤   ⊤
as o = xWH     WR   , where o1×o is the output with o neurons, x1×x is the input with x features,
   h×x                                                                          o×h
WH is the mapping from input to the hidden layer with h neurons, and WR               is the mapping
from the hidden layer to the output. After training on task 1: {x1 → o1 }, we get the trained readout
WR1 . While training on task 2: {x2 → o2 }, we get the gradient ∆WH . In order to maintain
stability, we want the learned task 1: {x1 → o1 } mapping to stay preserved.
Given a projection matrix Ah×h applied to the gradient, we want:
      o1 = x1 (WH + A∆WH )⊤ WR
                             ⊤       1       ⊤ ⊤
                               1 =⇒ x (A∆WH ) WR1 = 0 =⇒ WR1 A = 0                                         (1)

One solution is A = NN⊤ , where N is the null space matrix of WR1 . Projecting the gradient
for the WH into the null space of WR1 will ensure stability. Meanwhile, the hidden layer activa-
tions h1 are free to change in the null space of WR1 which allows plasticity. This is our gradient
decomposition algorithm for one hidden layer linear networks.
To allow full control over the stability-plasticity trade-off, we can consider A = αCC⊤ + βNN⊤ ,
where α (termed “range weight”) and β (termed “null space weight”) are scalars that weigh the
projections into range and null space of WR1 . WR1 A = 0 only if the range weight α = 0, which
ensures stability. Stability does not rely on the null space weight β but plasticity does as, if β is
reduced while α = 0, the gradient becomes smaller, and learning the new task becomes slower. In
Section 6, we empirically test this relationship between the range and null space weights, and the
stability-plasticity trade-off.
Could we analytically derive a similar algorithm for deep, non-linear networks? The introduc-
tion of non-linearities and multiple hidden layers makes the procedure seen in Eq. 1 non-trivially
complex. Backpropagation needs to be used to estimate the upstream gradients, and the simplest
resulting solutions require the estimation of multiple null spaces at every iteration of training. This
makes the implementation inefficient. The multiple hidden layer linear network case is analyzed in
Appendix A.3. The non-linear case is analytically more complex to analyze, as the simple decom-
position of the task mapping into the old mapping and the change in that mapping, as seen in Eq. 1,
is not possible.

6     A SSESSING THE GRADIENT DECOMPOSITION ALGORITHM WITH RDAC
Using the RDAC framework, we present an assessment of the stability-plasticity trade-offs of the
gradient decomposition algorithm. First, we outline the network architecture and task settings.
Second, we present the results assessing our decomposed-activation-space-derived control over the
stability-plasticity trade-off. Third, to understand the complexity of the network and task setting, we
assess the stability-plasticity trade-offs of EWC in this setting. We chose EWC due to its popularity,
its being a regularization algorithm, the relative ease of its implementation outside the Avalanche
library, and because it has only one regularization parameter.

6.1   N ETWORK AND TASK

We considered a neural network with one hidden layer with 11 neurons with no bias terms, which
maps MNIST images (LeCun et al., 1998) to their classes (The exact architecture and optimization
procedure is described in Appendix A.1.2). We considered the split-MNIST setting where the first
task is to classify the first five digits (0-4), and the second task is to classify the last five digits (5-9).
Images were subjected to augmentations. Separate readouts were trained for the two tasks, with
softmax activation and cross-entropy loss. After training on task 1, we computed the projection
matrices CC⊤ and NN⊤ , using SVD.

6.2   R ESULTS

First, we assessed if the gradient decomposition algorithm managed to maintain stability without
trading off plasticity, and whether varying the range and null space weights (α and β) led to the
control over the stability-plasticity trade-off outlined in the RDAC framework. As seen in Figure 3A,
when α = 0 and β = 1, the performance on both task 1 (stability) and on task 2 (plasticity) was


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Continual learning in one hidden-layer linear neural networks learning to classify MNIST
digits. (A) The gradient decomposition algorithm can maintain both stability and plasticity when
the gradients are projected into the null space of the previous readout (α = 0, β = 1). Allow-
ing the gradients to be projected into the range of the readouts (α > 0) is detrimental to stability,
whereas restricting the gradients from being projected into the null space of the readouts (β < 1) is
detrimental to plasticity. Additionally, Elastic weight consolidation (EWC) trades off plasticity for
stability, indicating that this problem is non-trivial from a continual learning standpoint. Darker hues
correspond to higher values of α, β, and the EWC regularization strength λ. (B) In the hidden-layer
activation space, the gradient decomposition algorithm effectively restricts changes in the activations
for task 1 to the null space of the task 1 readout. Restricting the change in the null space is detri-
mental to plasticity, as seen in the case of EWC and when we set β < 1. These results illustrate the
utility of the RDAC framework in informing the construction of new continual learning algorithms.


high. We also observed no task 1 activation change in the readout 1 range, but observed substantial
change in the null space which corresponds to the network learning task 2 (Figure 3B). Increasing α
to 1 increased the activation change in the readout range, thereby reducing the stability. On the other
hand, lowering β to 0 decreased the activation change in the readout null space, thereby reducing
the plasticity. These simulations both show the efficacy of the gradient decomposition algorithm and
confirm the control over the stability-plasticity trade-off outlined in the RDAC framework.
Next, to assess the complexity of the split-MNIST task in a one-hidden-layer linear network, we
assessed the stability-plasticity trade-offs of EWC. If it is trivial to jointly maintain stability and
plasticity, we reasoned that EWC can fare well on this task as compared to the task in the previous
section. As seen in Figure 3A, increasing the regularization strength of EWC increased the stability
at the expense of plasticity. Analyzing the activation change in the readout range and null space
revealed that EWC ended up restricting change not only in the range (which is useful for stability)
but also in the null space which was detrimental to plasticity (Figure 3B). This indicates that the
network and task settings in use constitute a non-trivial continual learning problem.
These results confirm that the principles of the RDAC framework can be fruitfully put into practice.
Although we do not derive a scalable continual learning algorithm in this work, the insights gained
through the analysis of the one hidden layer neural network validate the RDAC link between the
stability-plasticity trade-offs and the decomposition of activation changes. Future work needs to
solve the challenge of explicitly disentangling the upstream projections of the range and null space
of the prior readouts, to be able to fully establish the link between the decomposed activation changes
and the stability-plasticity trade-off, in deep non-linear networks.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   D ISCUSSION

In this study, we introduced the Readout-Decomposition of Activation Change (RDAC) framework
which provides a unique perspective on the stability-plasticity dilemma in continual learning, by
viewing the continual learning problem from the standpoint of the readout layer. The core insight
is as follows: Readouts span a subspace (the range) in activation space. Restricting learning from
making changes to the projections of the activations of prior tasks to that subspace is sufficient to
ensure stability. Further restricting any change to the activations in the subspace other than that
spanned by the readout (the null space) is detrimental to plasticity. We analyzed popular continual
learning algorithms and provided insights into the trade-offs these algorithms make in terms of
stability and plasticity, and how they relate to changes in the activations for prior tasks from the
perspective of the prior readouts. Additionally, given the insights from the framework, for one-
hidden-layer linear networks, we derived a gradient decomposition algorithm that restricts learning-
induced activation changes to only the null space of prior readouts to maintain plasticity while
ensuring stability, further validating the RDAC link between the stability-plasticity trade-off and
readout-decomposed activation changes.
An intriguing facet of our framework lies in its demonstration that activation changes within the
null space of the readout are linked to learning. We demonstrated this relationship with the diag-
nostic analysis on EWC in Section 4.2, and the analysis of the gradient decomposition algorithm
in Section 6. Now consider the following situation: an observer unaware of the continual learning
algorithm observes the network activations for a fixed set of stimuli over learning. The activations
would keep changing across time which could make the observer wonder how the network reads
out of such a dynamic code. Moreover, in the case where the loss functions used by the algorithm
are non-linear, the resultant degeneracy might make any readout trained by the observer at a time
point harder to generalize to other time points. Such signatures of activation change and the optimal-
readout changing over time have been observed in mammalian brains, and the activation change is
termed “representational drift” (Driscoll et al., 2017). Recently it has been suggested that the rea-
son drift exists is because animals are engaged in learning (Aitken et al., 2022; Masset et al., 2022;
Driscoll et al., 2022; Micou & O’Leary, 2023). This suggestion dovetails with the RDAC framework
under which, drift, especially in the null space of the readout, is essential for continuous adaptation
through the lifetime of an organism.
The RDAC framework is designed with a focus on task-incremental learning, where new readouts
are trained for each task encountered during the continual learning process, and the prior readouts are
frozen. There exist other continual learning scenarios van de Ven et al. (2022), in which the readout
layer can be learnable (Rebuffi et al., 2017) and be shared across multiple tasks with the addition of
a context signal (Cheung et al., 2019). Allowing the readout to adapt to new tasks, or by including
context-signals, enabling the network to distinguish between different tasks and appropriately adjust
its responses, can increase the effective capacity that a learning algorithm can leverage, facilitating
more plasticity and stability (Thorat et al., 2019; Hummos, 2022). However, it is not immediately
clear how the RDAC framework could be extended to these scenarios, but accommodating them is
essential for building a more versatile and adaptable framework for studying continual learning.
In closing, the RDAC framework primarily provides a diagnostic tool to shed light on the intricate
dynamics of stability and plasticity. It also provides analytical insights for the future development
of continual learning algorithms. The journey of continual learning research continues, with our
work offering a valuable contribution towards achieving the delicate balance between preserving
past knowledge and adapting to new challenges in an ever-evolving world of information.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Details about the implementation of the continual learning algorithms are mentioned both in the
Sections 4 and 6, and in the Appendix A.1. The gradient decomposition algorithm is derived and
fully explained in Section 5.

R EFERENCES
Kyle Aitken, Marina Garrett, Shawn Olsen, and Stefan Mihalas. The geometry of representational
  drift in natural and artificial neural networks. PLOS Computational Biology, 18(11):e1010716,


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2022.

Daniel Anthes, Sushrut Thorat, Peter König, and Tim C Kietzmann. Diagnosing catastrophe: Large
  parts of accuracy loss in continual learning can be accounted for by readout misalignment. In
  Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience, pp. 748–751, 2023.

Gail A Carpenter and Stephen Grossberg. A massively parallel architecture for a self-organizing
  neural pattern recognition machine. Computer vision, graphics, and image processing, 37(1):
  54–115, 1987.

Antonio Carta, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Andrea Cossu, Hamed Hemati, and Vincenzo Lomonaco.
  Avalanche: A pytorch library for deep continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01766,
  2023.

Brian Cheung, Alexander Terekhov, Yubei Chen, Pulkit Agrawal, and Bruno Olshausen. Superpo-
  sition of many models into one. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

MohammadReza Davari and Eugene Belilovsky. Probing representation forgetting in continual
 learning. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Appli-
 cations, 2021.

Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Aleš Leonardis, Gregory
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(7):3366–3385, 2021.

Laura N Driscoll, Noah L Pettit, Matthias Minderer, Selmaan N Chettih, and Christopher D Harvey.
  Dynamic reorganization of neuronal activity patterns in parietal cortex. Cell, 170(5):986–999,
  2017.

Laura N Driscoll, Lea Duncker, and Christopher D Harvey. Representational drift: Emerging theo-
  ries for continual learning and experimental future directions. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
  76:102609, 2022.

Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences,
  3(4):128–135, 1999.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.

Ha Hong, Daniel LK Yamins, Najib J Majaj, and James J DiCarlo. Explicit information for category-
  orthogonal object properties increases along the ventral stream. Nature neuroscience, 19(4):613–
  622, 2016.

Ali Hummos. Thalamus: a brain-inspired algorithm for biologically-plausible continual learning
  and disentangled representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11713, 2022.

Tobias Kalb and Jürgen Beyerer. Causes of catastrophic forgetting in class-incremental semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 56–73, 2022.

Dongwan Kim and Bohyung Han. On the stability-plasticity dilemma of class-incremental learning.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  20196–20204, 2023.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.

Yajing Kong, Liu Liu, Zhen Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Balancing stability and plasticity through
  advanced null space in continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  219–236. Springer, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Paul Masset, Shanshan Qin, and Jacob A Zavatone-Veth. Drifting neuronal representations: Bug or
  feature? Biological cybernetics, 116(3):253–266, 2022.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Martial Mermillod, Aurélia Bugaiska, and Patrick Bonin. The stability-plasticity dilemma: Investi-
 gating the continuum from catastrophic forgetting to age-limited learning effects, 2013.
Charles Micou and Timothy O’Leary. Representational drift as a window into neural and behavioural
  plasticity. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 81:102746, 2023.
Martin Mundt, Yongwon Hong, Iuliia Pliushch, and Visvanathan Ramesh. A wholistic view of
 continual learning with deep neural networks: Forgotten lessons and the bridge to active and open
 world learning. Neural Networks, 160:306–336, 2023.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
Vinay V Ramasesh, Ethan Dyer, and Maithra Raghu. Anatomy of catastrophic forgetting: Hidden
  representations and task semantics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07400, 2020.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001–2010, 2017.
Sushrut Thorat, Giacomo Aldegheri, Marcel AJ Van Gerven, and Marius V Peelen. Modulation
  of early visual processing alleviates capacity limits in solving multiple tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.12309, 2019.
Sushrut Thorat, Giacomo Aldegheri, and Tim C Kietzmann. Category-orthogonal object features
  guide information processing in recurrent neural networks trained for object categorization. In
  SVRHM 2021 Workshop @ NeurIPS, 2021.
Gido M van de Ven, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Andreas S Tolias. Three types of incremental learning.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1185–1197, 2022.
Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. A comprehensive survey of continual
  learning: Theory, method and application. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00487, 2023.
Shipeng Wang, Xiaorong Li, Jian Sun, and Zongben Xu. Training networks in null space of feature
  covariance for continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 184–193, 2021.
Zeyuan Yang, Zonghan Yang, Yichen Liu, Peng Li, and Yang Liu. Restricted orthogonal gradient
  projection for continual learning. AI Open, 2023.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3987–3995. PMLR, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhen Zhao, Zhizhong Zhang, Xin Tan, Jun Liu, Yanyun Qu, Yuan Xie, and Lizhuang Ma. Rethinking
  gradient projection continual learning: Stability/plasticity feature space decoupling. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3718–3727,
  2023.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     M ETHODS

A.1.1    A SSESSING EXISTING CONTINUAL LEARNING ALGORITHMS WITH RDAC
For the experiments on the Cifar110 task, we construct 11 datasets (one for each task). The first
task, on which we perform the bulk of our analyses consists of the full Cifar10 dataset (with usual
training and validation splits). For each subsequent task, we sample 10 unique classes from Cifar100.
Experiments are repeated with three different repeats of this procedure, providing some control for
the varying difficulty of the different task splits. Data for all tasks was augmented with random
cropping (padding = 4) and horizontal flipping throughout training. All data was normalized with
means (0.5071, 0.4865, 0.4409) and standard deviations (0.2673, 0.2564, 0.2762) for the RGB
channels.
All networks were trained with Adam (lr = 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) for 60 epochs per task.
Following the findings in Li & Hoiem (2017), we warm up the new readout at the start of each new
task (excluding training on the first task). This has been reported to stabilize representations at the
start of training on a new task (where the randomly initialized new readout is not aligned with the
features of the remainder of the network, causing large gradients). We freeze the weights of all
layers except the new readout for the first 10 epochs of training. Additionally, since our analyses
investigate activation changes relative to the range of previously learned readouts, we freeze all
parameters in old readouts for methods that would otherwise allow changing readout weights for
old tasks (this is the case for LwF and data replay).
The network architecture for these experiments is adopted from Zenke et al. (2017) and has been
slightly altered. It consists of two VGG blocks (32 channels in the first, 64 channels in the second
block each, kernel size 3). Each block of two convolutional layers is followed by a max pool layer
with kernel size and stride 2. The pre-readout dense layer was scaled to have 128 output units
and no dropout was used throughout the network. All layers in the backbone were initialized with
Kaiming-He He et al. (2015) initialization as implemented in PyTorch.
After performing initial sweeps for the hyperparameters in the tested algorithms to determine the
rough effective ranges, we performed additional sweeps for each algorithm in order to generate the
data points in Figure 2. Each data point visualized is the average over three experiments with the
same hyperparameter settings, but different seeds (and therefore task splits as described above).
Hyperparameters were swept as follows:

        • For EWC, λ was varied between 10−1 - 105 .
        • For SI, ϵ was fixed to 1 and λ was varied between 10−2 and 105 .
        • For LwF, we fixed the temperature to 1 and varied alpha between 0.01 and 10.
        • For data replay, we used replay buffer sizes between 0 and 60000 samples, with the default
          replay buffer style as implemented in Avalanche (as of version 0.3.1).
        • For GEM, we varied the memory strength parameter (γ in the original publication) between
          0 and 1 and varied the number of patterns stored per experience to estimate the gradient
          projection between 0 and 20000.

A.1.2    A SSESSING THE GRADIENT DECOMPOSITION ALGORITHM WITH RDAC
The linear system described in section 6 is a one-hidden layer network without biases and 11 units
in its hidden layer. The network has two separate linear readouts with 5 units each, to accommodate
the split MNIST task. For all experiments, the network was trained for 30 epochs per task, with
plain stochastic gradient descent and a learning rate 5.10−4 and batch size 16.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Movement in range and null space for gradient decomposition (surface) and EWC (scatter
points). Points and contours are coloured by plasticity, stability and ”capacity” computed as plastic-
ity + stability.


Since the Split MNIST task is very easy, even for a small linear network we increase the diffi-
culty of the dataset slightly by applying a number of transformations to the dataset once at the
time of constructing the dataset. This increases the effect of catastrophic forgetting while keeping a
fixed dataset, allowing for easy experimentation. The transformations were implemented using the
torchvision transforms package. Images of digits were augmented with random rotations (±10 de-
grees), translations (±10 percent of image size in both axes), scaled between 90-110% of the original
size and randomly cropped with padding = 4. Finally, we applied the ’ColorJitter’ transformation
with parameters brightness = 0.1, contrast = 0.1, saturation = 0.1, and hue = 0.1. Transformations
are only applied to training data for both tasks.
For EWC, we approximate the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix for the hidden layer pa-
rameters as the square of the gradients for the first task over the whole dataset for task 1.


                                                         2
                                                P
                                                   N (∆w)
                                         Fw =
                                                      Nb
,
for N batches of data (with b samples each). We sweep 1000 values for the scalar multiplier λ
governing regularization strength on a log scale between 0 and 105 .
To illustrate our gradient decomposition result, we swept the space of possible decompositions in
a grid with 33 linear spaced values between 0 and 1 for α and β. In Figure 3 we visualized the
extremes of this search, and the results of the full space are included in Figure 4 for completeness.


A.2   RDAC ASSESSMENT OF CONTINUAL LEARNING ON A LARGER NETWORK AND DATASET

To assess whether our findings on the Cifar110 scale to larger tasks and stimuli, we repeat our anal-
ysis of EWC and data replay (previous readouts frozen) on the TinyImagenet dataset Le & Yang
(2015), adapting the slimmed ResNet18 as reported in Lopez-Paz & Ranzato (2017) and imple-
mented in Avalanche Carta et al. (2023). TinyImagenet consists of 64x64x3 images belonging to
200 classes, which we split into 5 unique subsets of 40 classes per task.
As before, we sweep over regularisation strengths for both EWC and Replay. For EWC, we sweep
lambda in [1 .. 100000], for Replay we vary replay buffer sizes in [1000 .. 50000]. To allow for
estimation of movement in the nullspace and range of previous readouts, we freeze all parameters in
the readout layers for previously trained tasks.
All networks were trained for 60 epochs per task, using the Adam optimizer with the same settings
as used for our earlier experiment. For tasks 2 to 5, we only train the new readout for the first 10
epochs, to align the new readout with the rest of the network before propagating gradients.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Stability-Plasticity tradeoff as observed after training on 5 splits of the TinyImagenet
dataset. (A) Displacement of representations of the first task after training on all 5 tasks, decomposed
into nullspace and range movement using our readout decomposition method. (B). Analogous to the
results observed in Cifar110, we see that replay can achieve high stability while sacrificing less
plasticity compared to the regularisation-based method EWC. As observed before, higher plasticity
observed in replay correlates with more movement of previous task representations. EWC strongly
restricts the movement of previously learned representations and cannot maintain high plasticity as
regularisation strength increases.


A.3   C ONTINUAL LEARNING IN A THREE - LAYER LINEAR NEURAL NETWORK

In order to demonstrate the complexity of deriving an efficient gradient decomposition algorithm
(cf. Section 5) for multi-layer linear networks, we consider the case of a three-hidden layer linear
                    ⊤    ⊤      ⊤     ⊤
network: o = xWH      1
                        WH 2
                             WH   3
                                    WR  .
After training on task 1: {x1 → o1 }, we get the trained readout WR1 . While training on task 2:
{x2 → o2 }, we get the gradient ∆WH . In order to maintain stability, we want the learned task 1:
{x1 → o1 } mapping to stay preserved.
We want: o1 = x1 (WH1 + ∆WH1 )⊤ (WH2 + ∆WH2 )⊤ (WH3 + ∆WH3 )⊤ WR
                                                               ⊤
                                                                 1 , implying:

       ⊤    ⊤    ⊤      ⊤     ⊤    ⊤      ⊤    ⊤     ⊤      ⊤     ⊤     ⊤
 x1 (∆WH 1
           WH 2
                WH 3
                     + WH 1
                            ∆WH 2
                                  WH 3
                                       + WH 1
                                              WH 2
                                                   ∆WH 3
                                                         + WH 1
                                                                ∆WH 2
                                                                      ∆WH 3
                                                                            +
   ⊤    ⊤     ⊤       ⊤     ⊤    ⊤       ⊤     ⊤     ⊤     ⊤
 ∆WH 1
       WH 2
            ∆WH 3
                  + ∆WH 1
                          ∆WH 2
                                WH 3
                                     + ∆WH 1
                                             ∆WH 2
                                                   ∆WH 3
                                                         )WR 1 = 0                                  (2)

There could be multiple ways of constraining the gradients to satisfy Eq. 2. However, we explored
if, parsimoniously, a solution could only constrain the pre-readout gradient ∆WH3 and let backprop-
agation take care of the rest.
Using backpropagation we can write out the gradients in terms of the derivative of the loss function,
              2
eo = ∂L(o,o
          ∂o
                )
                  (assuming batch size 1 here, mapping x2 → o2 ). eo , and not ∆WH3 , is propa-
gated back for upstream gradient computations as it is independent of the network activations. The
gradients are computed as follows:
                                  ⊤
                                ∆WH 1
                                      = (x2 )⊤ eo WR2 WH3 WH2
                                  ⊤
                                ∆WH 2
                                      = WH1 (x2 )⊤ eo WR2 WH3
                                  ⊤
                                ∆WH 3
                                      = WH2 WH1 (x2 )⊤ eo WR2

We would like to know the transformation eo → Aeo which satisfies the constraint in Eq. 2, when
this transformed eo is backpropagated. As a first step, we can ignore the interactions between the
terms of Eq. 2 by asking them to be independently 0. The resulting transformation is jointly subject
to 3 constraints:
                                                         ⊤
      1. In order to maintain a non-zero gradient ∆WH      3
                                                             , while zeroing the terms associated with
                                                                                 ⊤
         it in Eq. 2, A should project gradients into the null space of WR1 WR     2


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    ⊤
     2. In order to maintain a non-zero gradient ∆WH  2
                                                        , while zeroing the remaining terms
        associated with it in Eq. 2, A should also project gradients into the null space of
                      ⊤     ⊤
        WR1 WH3 WH      3
                          WR  2

                                                     ⊤
     3. In order to maintain a non-zero gradient ∆WH   1
                                                         , while zeroing the remaining term
        associated with it in Eq. 2, A should also project gradients into the null space of
                            ⊤    ⊤    ⊤
        WR1 WH3 WH2 WH        2
                                WH 3
                                     WR 2


Intuitively, this is similar to canceling the propagation of eo into readout 1 (through all of the 3
paths listed above) i.e. any errors that would be induced in readout 1 by changing any of the weights
would become zero due to such a projection, Aeo . This algorithm would ensure stability, however,
it is unclear how much plasticity can be leveraged after the said projection - if the intersection of
the null spaces spans a very low-dimensional space, plasticity will be hampered. This needs to be
studied empirically for a variety of datasets.
This parsimonious algorithm is computationally expensive as compared to the gradient decompo-
sition algorithm for the one-hidden layer network discussed in Section 5. In the current algorithm,
during every weight update, the 3 null spaces need to be computed, as the weights keep changing.
Additionally, the number of null spaces to be computed scales with the number of hidden layers n
and with the number of tasks k, as n(k − 1). With increasing n and k, the intersections of the null
spaces would get smaller and plasticity would be hampered. How much of this is a problem for
existing continual learning datasets needs to be tested empirically.


                                                 15
