Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROVABLY E FFICIENT CVA R RL IN L OW- RANK MDP S
 Yulai ZhaoвҲ—                                                     Wenhao ZhanвҲ—
 Princeton University                                            Princeton University
 yulaiz@princeton.edu                                            wenhao.zhan@princeton.edu

 Xiaoyan HuвҲ—                                                     Ho-fung Leung
 The Chinese University of Hong Kong                             Independent Researcher
 xyhu21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk                                          ho-fung.leung@outlook.com

 Farzan Farnia                                                               Wen Sun
 The Chinese University of Hong Kong                                         Cornell University
 farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk                                                      ws455@cornell.edu

 Jason D. Lee
 Princeton University
 jasonlee@princeton.edu



                                                  A BSTRACT

             We study risk-sensitive Reinforcement Learning (RL), where we aim to maximize
             the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) with a fixed risk tolerance П„ . Prior theo-
             retical work studying risk-sensitive RL focuses on the tabular Markov Decision
             Processes (MDPs) setting. To extend CVaR RL to settings where state space is
             large, function approximation must be deployed. We study CVaR RL in low-rank
             MDPs with nonlinear function approximation. Low-rank MDPs assume the un-
             derlying transition kernel admits a low-rank decomposition, but unlike prior linear
             models, low-rank MDPs do not assume the feature or state-action representation
             is known. We propose a novel Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) bonus-driven al-
             gorithm to carefully balance the interplay between exploration, exploitation, and
             representation learning
                                    in    CVaR  RL. We prove that our algorithm achieves a sam-
                                    H 7 A2 d4
             ple complexity of OМғ     П„ 2 Пө2   to yield an Пө-optimal CVaR, where H is the length
             of each episode, A is the capacity of action space, and d is the dimension of rep-
             resentations. Computational-wise, we design a novel discretized Least-Squares
             Value Iteration (LSVI) algorithm for the CVaR objective as the planning oracle
             and show that we can find the near-optimal policy in a polynomial running time
             with a Maximum Likelihood Estimation oracle. To our knowledge, this is the first
             provably efficient CVaR RL algorithm in low-rank MDPs.


1       I NTRODUCTION
As a widely adopted framework to deal with challenging sequential decision-making problems, Re-
inforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has demonstrated many empirical successes, e.g.,
popular strategy games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019). However, the classical RL
framework often prioritizes the maximization of the expected cumulative rewards solely, which ren-
ders it not suitable for many real-world applications that face possible failure or safety concerns. In
high-stake scenarios such as autonomous driving (Isele et al., 2018; Wen et al., 2020), finance (Davis
& Lleo, 2008; Wang et al., 2021; Filippi et al., 2020) and healthcare (Ernst et al., 2006; Coronato
et al., 2020), optimizing only the expected cumulative rewards can produce policies that underesti-
mate the risks associated with rare but catastrophic events. To mitigate this limitation, risk-sensitive
decision-making has recently grown more popular (Hu & Leung, 2023).
    вҲ—
        Equal contribution. Listing order is random.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To this end, risk measures like Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar et al., 2000) have
been integrated into the RL-based systems as a performance criterion, yielding a more balanced
approach that encourages policies to avoid high-risk outcomes. As a popular tool for managing risk,
the CVaR metric is widely used in robust RL (Hiraoka et al., 2019), distributional RL (Achab et al.,
2022), and portfolio optimization (Krokhmal et al., 2002). CVaR quantifies the expected return
in the worst-case scenarios.1 For a random variable X with distribution P and a confidence level
П„ вҲҲ (0, 1), the CVaR at confidence level П„ is defined as
                             CVaRП„ (X) = sup b вҲ’ В·EXвҲјP (b вҲ’ X)+

                                               bвҲҲR
        +
where x = max(x, 0). In this paper, we consider the random variable X as the cumulative reward
of a specific policy where randomness comes from the MDP transitions and the policy itself. We
aim to maximize this objective to capture the average worst values of the returns distribution at a
certain risk tolerance level П„ .
The most related works to this paper are Bastani et al. (2022) and Wang et al. (2023). Specifically,
Bastani et al. (2022) proved the first regret bounds for risk-sensitive RL with CVaR metric (CVaR
RL), and Wang et al. (2023) improved the results to achieve the minimax optimal regret. However,
their algorithms are restricted to the tabular setting, so they are inefficient when the state space is
large. To overcome such limitation, we introduce function approximation to the MDP structure and
consider low-rank MDPs (Jiang et al., 2017) in this paper.
In low-rank MDPs, the key idea is to exploit the (high-dimensional) structure in the model transitions
of the MDP by representing them with a lower-dimensional structure. This is often implemented by
assuming the MDP transition kernels admit a low-rank factorization, i.e., there exist two unknown
mappings ПҲ(sвҖІ ), П•(s, a), such that the probability of transiting to the next state sвҖІ under the current
state and action (s, a) is P (sвҖІ |s, a) = ПҲ(sвҖІ )вҠӨ П•(s, a). Low-rank MDPs generalize popular RL
models including tabular MDPs, linear MDPs (Jin et al., 2020) and block MDPs (Du et al., 2019;
Efroni et al., 2021), and are widely applied in practice (Zhang et al., 2020; 2021; Sodhani et al.,
2021; 2022).
Unlike linear MDPs, since the underlying ПҲ and П• are unknown, we need to carefully balance rep-
resentation learning, exploration, and worst-case failure stakes in low-rank MDPs. The application
of non-linear function approximation further complicates the problem, for controlling model errors
state and action-wise becomes much harder (Wang et al., 2023). Moreover, even within a given
MDP, planning in CVaR RL is not a straightforward task as the CVaR metric exhibits a non-linear
structure2 (in stark contrast to standard risk-neutral RL), which results in extra computational over-
head. All of these challenges call for a more comprehensive algorithm design for the risk-sensitive
RL in low-rank MDPs.
In this paper, we aim to fill a gap in the existing body of knowledge by exploring the interplay
between risk-averse RL and low-rank MDPs. We summarize our contributions as follows.

Contributions. First, we design an oracle-efficient representation learning algorithm called ELA
(REprensentation Learning for CVAR), which optimizes the CVaR metric in low-rank MDPs. ELA
leverages an MLE oracle to learn the model dynamics while simultaneously constructing Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB)-type bonuses to encourage exploration of the unknown environment. We
provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis of the algorithm, demonstrating that ELA would pro-
vide an Пө-optimal CVaR with OМғ(1/Пө2 ) samples. To the best of our knowledge, ELA is the first
provably sample-efficient algorithm for CVaR RL in low-rank MDPs.
Second, to improve the computational complexity of ELA planning, we introduce a computationally
efficient planning oracle, which, when combined with ELA, leads to the ELLA (REprensentation
Learning with LSVI for CVAR) algorithm. This algorithm leverages least-squares value iteration
with discretized rewards to find near-optimal policies via optimistic simulations within the learned
model. Importantly, the computational cost solely depends on the dimension of representations
rather than the state space size. We show that ELLA requires a polynomial running time in addition
to polynomial calls to the MLE oracle.
   1
     Standard CVaR definition considers average worst-case loss, thus a lower value is more desirable. How-
ever, in this work, we aim to obtain a higher CVaR in the RL context as we are maximizing rewards.
   2
     In RL, planning refers to determining the optimal policy and optimal value function within a given MDP.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Low-rank MDPs. Theoretical benefits of low-rank structure in MDPs have been broadly explored
in various works (Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Du et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2023). In a contextual decision process (a generic RL model with rich observations and func-
tion approximation) with a low Bellman rank, OLIVE (Jiang et al., 2017) yielded a near-optimal
policy with polynomial samples. Additionally, Sun et al. (2019) introduced provably efficient algo-
rithms based on a structural parameter called the witness rank, demonstrating that the witness rank
is never larger than the Bellman rank (Jiang et al., 2017). Despite their provable efficiency, these
algorithms lack computational efficiency.
Leveraging Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) as its computation oracle, Flambe (Agarwal
et al., 2020) proposed the first computationally efficient algorithm that was also provably efficient
in low-rank MDPs. Following a similar setup, Rep-UCB (Uehara et al., 2022) improves the sample
complexity dependencies of Flambe. The key to the improvements is a careful tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation by combining the reward signal and exploration bonus.
CVaR RL. There is a long line of works studying (static) CVaR in RL, which refers to the CVaR
of accumulative reward beyond a certain risk threshold (Chow & Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Chow et al.,
2015; Tamar et al., 2015; Bastani et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). For tabular MDPs, much work has
been done on value-based algorithms (Chow et al., 2015; Stanko & Macek, 2019). However, these
results often require the planner to know the model transitions of the MDPs, which is generally in-
feasible. Recently, there has been a growing interest in the more general setting where the unknown
model transitions are learned through online interactions (Yu et al., 2018; Bastani et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023). However, their results are restricted to the tabular setting and cannot be combined with
function approximation, where the state space is often enormous.
Prior works have also studied risk-sensitive RL in the context of other risk measures. Specifically, Du
et al. (2022) proposed Iterated CVaR RL, also known as dynamic CVaR, and Chen et al. (2023)
demonstrates regret guarantees for Iterated CVaR RL with general function approximations. How-
ever, iterated CVaR is intrinsically different from the static CVaR in our setting. Iterated CVaR
quantifies the worst П„ -percent performance at each step of decision-making. Such a definition al-
lows the agent to control the risk throughout the decision process tightly, whereas our setting aims to
maximize the CVaR of the total reward. Therefore, their algorithm designs and analysis techniques
do not apply to our tasks.
Our work also focuses on the static CVaR in RL. Specifically, we present the first sample-efficient
algorithm for optimizing the static CVaR metric that carefully balances the interplay between risk-
averse RL and low-rank MDP structure. Furthermore, we design a computationally efficient plan-
ning oracle that makes our algorithm only require polynomial running time with an MLE oracle.

3     P RELIMINARIES
Notations. We will frequently use [H] to denote the set {1, В· В· В· , H}. Denote вҲҶ(S) as the distribu-
tion over space S. Let U (A) be the uniform distribution over the action space. In this work, we use
the standard O(В·), в„Ұ(В·) and Оҳ(В·) notations to hide universal constant factors and use OМғ(В·) to hide
logarithmic factors. Please see Table 1 for a comprehensive list of notations used in this work.

3.1   L OW- RANK E PISODIC MDP

We consider an episodic MDP M with episode length H вҲҲ N , state space S, and a finite action
space A. At each episode k вҲҲ [K], a trajectory П„ = (s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , В· В· В· , sH , aH ) is generated by an
agent, where (a) s1 вҲҲ S is a fixed starting state,3 (b) at step h, the agent chooses action according to a
history-dependent policy ah вҲј ПҖ(В·|П„hвҲ’1 , sh ) where П„hвҲ’1 := (s1 , a1 , В· В· В· , ahвҲ’1 ) denotes the history
and (c) the model transits to the next state sh+1 вҲј PhвҲ— (В·|sh , ah ). The agent repeats these steps till the
end of the episode. For each time step, operators PhвҲ— : S Г— A вҶ’      вҲ’ вҲҶ(S) denote the (non-stationary)
transition dynamics, whereas rh : S Г— A вҶ’      вҲ’ вҲҶ([0, 1]) is the (immediate) reward distribution the
  3
    Note that any H-length episodic MDP with a stochastic initial state is equivalent to an (H + 1)-length
MDP with a dummy initial state s0 .


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


agent could receive from deploying a certain action at a specific state. We use О  to denote the class
of all history-dependent policies. Below, we proceed to the low-rank MDP definition.
Definition 3.1 (Low-rank episodic MDP). The transition kernel P вҲ— = {PhвҲ— : S Г—A 7вҶ’ вҲҶ(S)}hвҲҲ[H]
admits a low-rank decomposition with rank d if there exist two embedding functions П•вҲ— := {П•вҲ—h :
S Г— A 7вҶ’ Rd }hвҲҲ[H] and ПҲ вҲ— := {ПҲhвҲ— : S 7вҶ’ Rd }hвҲҲ[H] such that
                                PhвҲ— (sвҖІ |s, a) = вҹЁПҲhвҲ— (sвҖІ ), П•вҲ—h (s, a)вҹ©                 (1)
        вҲ—
where вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 for all (h, s, a) вҲҲ [H] Г— S вҲҡГ— A, and for any function g : S 7вҶ’ [0, 1]
and h вҲҲ [H], it holds that вҲҘ sвҲҲS ПҲhвҲ— (s)g(s)dsвҲҘ2 вүӨ d. Low-rank episodic MDP admits such a
                            R
decomposition of P вҲ— .
We study the function approximation setting where the state spaces S can be enormous and even
infinite. To generalize across states, assume access to two embedding classes ОЁ вҠӮ {S Г— A вҶ’  вҲ’ Rd }
                   d                                                   вҲ—   вҲ—
and ОҰ вҠӮ {S вҲ’  вҶ’ R }, which are used to identify the true embeddings (ПҲ , П• ). Formally, we need the
following realizability assumption, which is proven essential for obtaining performance guarantees
independent of the state space size in low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2020).
Assumption 3.2. There exists a model class F = (ОЁ, ОҰ) such that ПҲhвҲ— вҲҲ ОЁ, П•вҲ—h вҲҲ ОҰ, вҲҖh вҲҲ [H].
We expect to obtain sample complexity that scales logarithmically with the (finite) cardinality of the
model class F. Extensions to the infinite function classes with complexity measures are possible.
See more discussions in (Agarwal et al., 2020).

3.2   R ISK -S ENSITIVE RL AND AUGMENTED MDP

We study risk-sensitive RL with the CVaR metric. Throughout the paper, let П„ вҲҲ (0, 1] be a fixed
risk tolerance. First, we recall the classical definition: for a random variable X вҲҲ [0, 1] is from
distribution P , the conditional-value-at-risk (CVaR) corresponding to the risk tolerance П„ is defined
as
                         CVaRП„ (X) := sup c вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 В· EXвҲјP [(c вҲ’ X)+ ]

                                                                                                    (2)
                                          cвҲҲ[0,1]
           + :=
where (x)       max(x, 0) for any x вҲҲ R. Interestingly, the supremum in the expression is achieved
when c is set as the П„ -th percentile (unknown before planning), also known as value-at-risk (VaR),
i.e., xП„ = inf{x вҲҲ R : P (X вүӨ x) вүҘ П„ }.
In risk-sensitive RL, X represents the stochastic cumulative reward accumulated over H successive
                                     PH
actions and state transitions: X = h=1 rh . This multi-step nature of risk-sensitive RL brings the
dynamic planning structure to the setting and makes it difficult. We may make an intuitive insight
of c by considering it as a initial budget, which affects the agentвҖҷs action selection and needs to
be carefully managed during the planning. Particularly, after receiving a random reward rh at each
timestep h вҲҲ [H], the learner deducts it from the current budget, i.e., ch+1 = ch вҲ’ rh where ch is the
remaining budget and c1 = c. The main task of risk-sensitive RL is to interplay carefully between
policy planning, exploration, and budget control. Inspired by this observation, we incorporate the
available budget as an additional state variable that could impact the agentвҖҷs choice of action. Formal
descriptions of the augmented MDP are introduced below.
Augmented MDP. We introduce the augmented MDP framework (BaМҲuerle & Ott, 2011) to study
CVaR RL, which augments the state space S in classic episodic MDP to SAug = S Г— [0, H] that
includes the budget variable as an additional state. The transition kernel of the state and the imme-
diate reward distribution are the same as the original MDP M. Inspired by the observation above,
we consider policies defined on the augmented state space О Aug := {ПҖ : SAug вҶ’   вҲ’ вҲҶ(A)}.
In the augmented MDP, the agent rolls out an augmented policy ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug with initial budget c1 вҲҲ
[0, H] as follows. At the beginning of an episode, the agent observes the augmented state (s1 , c1 ),
selects action a1 вҲј ПҖ(В·|s1 , c1 ), receives reward r1 вҲј r1 (s1 , a1 ), and transits to s2 вҲј P1вҲ— (В·|s1 , a1 ).
Most importantly, the available budget is also updated: c2 = c1 вҲ’ r1 . The agent then chooses an
action based on the (s2 , c2 ) pair. The procedure repeats for H times until the end of the episode.
For any ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug , the (augmented) Q-function is defined as
                                        пЈ®
                                                H
                                                                !+                         пЈ№
                                               X
            QПҖh,P вҲ— (s, c, a) := EПҖ,P вҲ— пЈ° ch вҲ’     rt (st , at )   sh = s, ch = c, ah = aпЈ» .
                                                    t=h



                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for any (h, s, c, a) вҲҲ [H] Г— S Г— [0, H] Г— A and the (augmented) value function is defined as
                               ПҖ
                                                        ПҖ
                              Vh,P вҲ— (s, c) := E       Qh,P вҲ— (s, c, a)                                     (3)
                                                    aвҲјПҖh (В·|s,c)

for any (h, s, c) вҲҲ [H] Г— S Г— [0, H]. The Bellman equation is given by
                         QПҖh,P вҲ— (s, c, a) =               E
                                                                             ПҖ
                                                                            Vh+1 (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r).
                                               sвҖІ вҲјPhвҲ— (В·|s,a),rвҲјrh (s,a)


Goal metric. In this paper, we aim to find the optimal history-dependent policy to maximize the
CVaR objective, i.e.,

                 вҲ—                                         вҲ’1                    +
          CVaRП„ := max CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ)) = sup            c вҲ’ П„ В· min E[(c вҲ’ R(ПҖ)) ]
                          ПҖвҲҲО                          cвҲҲ[0,H]                   ПҖвҲҲО 

where R(ПҖ) is the random cumulative reward of policy ПҖ in M. Nevertheless, it is known that
minПҖвҲҲО  {П„ вҲ’1 В· E[(c вҲ’ R(ПҖ))+ ]} can be attained by an augmented policy ПҖ вҲ— вҲҲ О Aug with initial
budget c (Wang et al., 2023). Thus we can indeed focus on searching within ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug :

            CVaRвҲ—П„ = max c вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 В· min V1,P      ПҖ
                                                    вҲ— (s1 , c)   := CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ вҲ— , cвҲ— ))  (4)
                          cвҲҲ[0,H]                 ПҖвҲҲО Aug

where ПҖ вҲ— вҲҲ О Aug is the optimal augmented policy and cвҲ— вҲҲ [0, H] is the optimal initial budget,
and we overload R(ПҖ, c) to denote the stochastic cumulative reward when the agent rolls out the
augmented policy ПҖ with initial budget c in augmented MDP.

4     A LGORITHM
In this section, we present the ELA algorithm for risk-sensitive RL in low-rank MDPs. The pseudo-
code is listed in Algorithm 1. The algorithm is iterative in nature, where the k-th episode proceeds
in three folds: (1) we collect new data by rolling in with the exploration policy ПҖ kвҲ’1 starting from
the initial budget ckвҲ’1 . (2) Then, all transitions collected so far are used in two aspects. First, we
pass all transition tuples to the MLE oracle (Line 11). The MLE oracle returns embedding functions
(ПҲbh , П•bh ) for each h, which determine the model. Second, we compute the exploration bonus using
the latest learned representation П•.b (3) The algorithm performs VI on the learned model with the
bonus-enhanced reward signal to obtain the exploration policy-budget pair (ПҖ k , ck ) we use in the
next iteration. After K iterations, we output the current model and all policy-budget pairs. Next, we
illustrate more details about these steps.

4.1   DATA C OLLECTION

During training, we collect two (disjoint) sets of transition tuples to compute the bonus terms and
estimate the transition kernels. These two datasets are different in their (marginalized) distributions
and facilitate the regret analysis in Section 4.3. Next, we clarify how data are collected and added
to the two sets.
To collect a new transition tuple for each dataset Dh and D           eh (вҲҖh вҲҲ [H вҲ’ 1]), at the k-th itera-
tion, the algorithm roll outs policy ПҖ kвҲ’1 with initial budget ckвҲ’1 to obtain two trajectories. The
difference occurs at the (h вҲ’ 1)-th timestep. Particularly, to obtain (sh , ah , sМғh+1 ) for Dh , the algo-
rithm keeps on to execute policy ПҖ kвҲ’1 for one more step and observes state sh . Then, a uniform
action ah вҲј U (A) is taken to receive the next-state sМғh+1 вҲј PhвҲ— (В·|sh , ah ). However, to obtain
(sМғh , aМғh , sвҖІh+1 ) for D
                         eh , the algorithm takes two consecutive uniform actions at timesteps h вҲ’ 1 and
                                      вҲ—
h, i.e., ahвҲ’1 вҲј U (A), sМғh вҲј PhвҲ’1         (В·|shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ), aМғh вҲј U (A), and receives state sвҖІh+1 . Intuitively,
dataset Dh reveals the behavior of the exploration policy-budget pair (ПҖ k , ck ) up to the h-th timestep,
which facilitates the design of bonus terms (cf. Lemma C.2). Meanwhile, dataset D            eh enhances the
exploration and leads to improved estimates of transition kernels (cf. Lemma E.3).
At first sight, the data collection procedure requires 2(H вҲ’ 1) trajectories per iteration (i.e., one
trajectory for Dh and one trajectory for D eh ). To save sample (trajectory) complexity, we collect


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transition tuples for Dh and D
                             eh at the h, (hвҲ’1) steps in one go, respectively (Lines 8-10). Therefore,
the algorithm only requires H trajectories per iteration. For both sets, new transition tuples are
concatenated with the existing data to perform representation learning, i.e., learning a factorization
and a representation by MLE (Line 11).

4.2   R EPRESENTATION L EARNING AND B ONUS - DRIVEN VALUE I TERATION

MLE oracle. In the function approximation setting, the agent must estimate the model structure as
accurately as possible. Collected transition tuples are used to compute model transitions through the
MLE oracle. As a general approach used to estimate the parameters of a probability model, MLE is
also gaining more focus in low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2020; Uehara et al., 2022).
Value Iteration. Based on the learned model, the algorithm runs Value-Iteration (VI) with the
exploration bonus term. In risk-sensitive RL, for any ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug and (h, s, c) вҲҲ [H] Г— S Г— [0, H],
we define value function enhanced with exploration bonus bh : S Г— A вҶ’   вҲ’ R as
                                                        +
                         пЈ®                             !                                     пЈ№
                                  XH                        H
                                                            X
     ПҖ
   Vh,P,b (s, c) := EПҖ,P пЈ° ch вҲ’        rhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ )   вҲ’   bhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) sh = s, ch = cпЈ» (5)
                                   hвҖІ =h                    hвҖІ =h

where we deduct the exploration bonus term because the agent desires to minimize the value func-
tion (4) in risk-sensitive RL. Such a value function is used to perform VI and update policy on the
learned model Pb, since the learner has no prior knowledge of the real model transitions. Therefore,
obtaining an accurate estimation of the model determines the quality of the output policy.
In Algorithm 1, we assume the learner has access to exact VI (Line 15). However, we remark
that this step is not computationally efficient due to the continuity of c and potentially large state
space S. To overcome such a computational barrier arising from the nature of controlling risk while
planning, in Section 5, we provide a computationally efficient planning oracle that performs LSVI
with discretized reward function (with sufficiently high precision). We rigorously prove that we only
need polynomial running time with the MLE oracle to output a near-optimal CVaR.

4.3   M AIN R ESULTS

In this subsection, we are ready to demonstrate our theoretical guarantees that characterize the regret
and sample complexity bounds.
Theorem 4.1. Fix Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1). Set the parameters in Algorithm 1 as:

                      p                        |F|Hk                          |F|Hk
            Оұk = O       H 2 (|A| + d2 ) log             , О»k = O d log                   .
                                                 Оҙ                               Оҙ
We have two equivalent interpretations of the theoretical results. In terms of PAC bound, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the regret is bounded by
            K
            X                                                    вҲҡ
                  CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) = OМғ П„ вҲ’1 H 3 Ad2 K В· log (|F|/Оҙ) .
                                                                     p

            k=1

Alternatively, we can interpret in terms of sample complexity: w.p. at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, to present an Пө-
optimal policy and budget pair s.t. CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(b   c)) вүӨ Пө. The total number of trajectories
                                                       ПҖ, b
required is upper bounded by              7 2 4
                                         H A d log (|F|/Оҙ)
                                     OМғ                        .
                                                П„ 2 Пө2

Proof. The proof can be found in Appendix C.

In Theorem 4.1, we present the first regret/sample complexity bounds for CVaR RL with function
approximation, in which exploring the unknown action/space spaces posits extra difficulty. We
explicitly characterize the number of samples required to output an Пө-optimal CVaR in terms of the
length of the episode H, the action space size A, the representation dimension d, and confidence
level П„ . The theorem has no explicit dependence on state space S, proving nice guarantees even in


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 ELA
Require: Risk tolerance П„ вҲҲ (0, 1], number of iterations K, parameters {О»k }kвҲҲ[K] and {Оұk }kвҲҲ[K] ,
    models F = {ОЁ, ОҰ}, failure probability Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1).
 1: Set datasets Dh , D   eh вҶҗ вҲ… for each h вҲҲ [H вҲ’ 1].
 2: Initialize the exploration policy ПҖ 0 вҶҗ {ПҖh0 (s, c) = U (A), for any (s, c) вҲҲ S Г— [0, H]}hвҲҲ[H] .
 3: Initialize the budget c0 вҶҗ 1.
 4: for iteration k = 1, . . . , K do
 5:    Collect a tuple (sМғ1 , aМғ1 , sвҖІ2 ) by taking aМғ1 вҲј U (A), sвҖІ2 вҲј P1вҲ— (В·|sМғ1 , aМғ1 ).
 6:    Update D  e1 вҶҗ D   e1 вҲӘ {(sМғ1 , aМғ1 , sвҖІ )}.
                                              2
 7:    for h = 1, В· В· В· , H вҲ’ 1 do
 8:       Collect two transition tuples (sh , ah , sМғh+1 ) and (sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 , sвҖІh+2 ) by first rolling out
          ПҖ kвҲ’1 starting from (s1 , ckвҲ’1 ) into state sh , taking ah вҲј U (A), and receiving sМғh+1 вҲј
          PhвҲ— (В·|sh , ah ), then taking aМғh+1 вҲј U (A) and receiving sвҖІh+2 вҲј Ph+1         вҲ—
                                                                                           (В·|sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 ).
 9:       Update Dh вҶҗ Dh вҲӘ {(sh , ah , sМғh+1 )}.
10:       Update D   eh+1 вҶҗ D   eh+1 вҲӘ {(sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 , sвҖІ )} if h вүӨ H вҲ’ 2.
                                                           h+2
11:       Learn representations via MLE
                                                               X
                 Pbh := (ПҲbh , П•bh ) вҶҗ arg max                                 log вҹЁПҲ(sh+1 ), П•(sh , ah )вҹ©
                                          (ПҲ,П•)вҲҲF
                                                    (sh ,ah ,sh+1 )вҲҲ{Dh +D
                                                                         eh }

                                             bh = P                           вҠӨ   k
12:       Update empirical covariance matrix ОЈ     (s,a)вҲҲDh П•h (s, a)П•h (s, a) + О» Id .
                                                             b        b
13:       Set the exploration bonus:
                                  пЈұ     q
                                  пЈІmin Оұk П•b (s, a)ОЈ  вҲ’1 b       вҠӨ
                     bbh (s, a) вҶҗ              h
                                                    b
                                                      h П•h (s, a) , 2    hвүӨH вҲ’2
                                   0                                     h=H вҲ’1
                                  пЈі

14:    end for                                                n                            o
15:    Run Value-Iteration (VI) and obtain ck вҶҗ arg maxcвҲҲ[0,H] c вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 minПҖ V1,ПҖP,
                                                                                 bb (s
                                                                                   b 1
                                                                                       , c) .
16:   Set ПҖ k вҶҗ arg minПҖ V1,ПҖP,
                             bb (s , ck ).
                               b 1
17: end for
Ensure: Uniformly sample k from [K], return (b  c) = (ПҖ k , ck ).
                                             ПҖ, b


the infinite-state setting. As far as we are concerned, the only existing theoretical guarantees in the
field of risk-averse CVaR RL were provided in the tabular setting (Bastani et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023), where representations are known. Moreover, these results explicitly depend on |S|, thus
can not apply to the function approximation setting with enormous state space. Given the above,
our work accomplishes a great leap by incorporating exploration in the comprehensive function
approximation setting, which evidently better aligns with real-world applications than the tabular
and/or linear MDP settings.
As for the sample complexity, the dependencies on A and d match the same rates as the analysis of
risk-neutral RL in low-rank MDP (Uehara et al., 2022), showing our algorithm overcomes the extra
hardness of balancing exploration and budget control even with a large action space. Our sample
complexity matches the dependency on П„ with the rates in the CVaR-UCBVI algorithm with the
Hoeffding bonus (Wang et al., 2023) and  UCB algorithm (Bastani et al., 2022). On the other hand,
the sample complexity enjoys an в„Ұ П„1Пө2 lower bound(Wang et al., 2023, Theorem 3.1). Tightening
the dependency on П„ is left as future work.
Our theoretical guarantees have a slightly worse dependency on H 7 while Rep-UCB (Uehara et al.,
2022) scales as H 5 , since we do not assume the trajectory reward is normalized to 1. If we adopt
this reward normalization, our PAC bound can be improved to OМғ(H 5 ), and thus matching the rate.
In addition, we point out that it might be possible to reduce another H 2 dependency by utilizing a
Bernstein-type bonus in the algorithm instead of the Hoeffding-type bonus, which is left for future
work.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     P LANNING O RACLE : CVaR-LSVI
                                                        n                              o
In Algorithm 1, we need to calculate ck вҶҗ arg maxcвҲҲ[0,H] c вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 minПҖ V1,ПҖP,
                                                                           bbb
                                                                               (s1 , c)  (Line 15),
which is not naively computationally efficient since the objective c вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 minПҖ V1,ПҖP,   bb (s , c) is not
                                                                                            b 1
concave. In this section, we introduce a feasible planning oracle for this step and provide the cor-
responding theoretical guarantees. For simplicity, we assume the reward distribution r is discrete
and rh (s, a) only takes value in iП… where П… > 0 and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲ1/П…вҢү. For a continuous r, we
can discretize it with sufficiently high precision so that all the analysis still applies. The details are
deferred to Appendix B.
Since the supremum of the CVaR objective (2) is attained at П„ -th quantile of the cumulative reward
distribution, which is also discrete when the reward rh is discrete, we can only search ck within the
grid in Line 15 of Algorithm 1:

                       k                           вҲ’1            ПҖ
                      c вҶҗ П… В· arg max iП… вҲ’ П„            min V1,P,     (s , iП…) .
                                                                     b 1
                                                              ПҖвҲҲО Aug
                                                                   bb
                                    0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү

Nevertheless, if we run standard value iteration to calculate minПҖвҲҲО Aug V1,ПҖP,bb (s , iП…), our sample
                                                                                b 1
complexity will scale with the size of the state space |S|, which can be infinite in low-rank MDPs.
To circumvent such dependency on |S|, we introduce a novel LSVI-UCB algorithm for the CVaR
objective in this subsection, called CVaR-LSVI. In the following discussion, we fix i1 where 0 вүӨ
i1 вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү and aim at calculating minПҖвҲҲО Aug V1,ПҖP,  bb  (s , i П…). We will drop the subscript P
                                                      b 1 1
                                                                                               b and bb
when it is clear from the context. We use V вҲ— to denote minПҖвҲҲО 
                                                      h               VПҖ
                                                                       Aug
                                                                             and (P,
                                                                             h,P,
                                                                               bbb
                                                                                   b r) to denote the
MDP model whose transition is P
                              b and reward distribution is r.
First, recall that the discrete reward distribution rh (s, a) only takes values of iП… where 0 вүӨ i вүӨ
вҢҲ1/П…вҢү. This means that it is always linear with respect to a (вҢҲ1/П…вҢү + 1)-dimension vector:
                                   rh (iП…|s, a) = вҹЁП•h,r (s, a), ПҲh,r (iП…)вҹ©,
where (П•h,r (s, a))i = rh (iП…|s, a) and ПҲh,r (iП…) = ei for all 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲ1/П…вҢү and s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A, h вҲҲ
[H]. Since Pbh (sвҖІ |s, a) = вҹЁП•bh (s, a), ПҲbh (sвҖІ )вҹ©, this implies that for all s, sвҖІ вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A, h вҲҲ [H], 0 вүӨ
i вүӨ вҢҲ1/П…вҢү, we have
                            Pbh (sвҖІ |s, a)rh (iП…|s, a) = вҹЁП•h (s, a), ПҲ h (sвҖІ , iП…)вҹ©,
where П•h (s, a) = П•bh (s, a) вҠ— П•h,r (s, a) and ПҲ h (sвҖІ , iП…) = ПҲbh (s, a) вҠ— ПҲh,r (iП…).
The linearity of transition and reward implies that we can utilize LSVI to compute QПҖh (s, c, a). More
specifically, we propose an iterative algorithm consisting of the following steps:
вҖў Step 1: Ridge Regression. In the t-th iteration, denote the trajectories collected before t-th
  iteration by {(sjh , ajh , rjh )H    tвҲ’1         t
                                  h=1 }j=1 . Let VH+1 (s, iП…) = iП… for all s вҲҲ S and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү. From
  h = H to h = 1, for each 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, we first compute:
                                               XtвҲ’1                   h                        i
                        wht (iП…) вҶҗ (Оӣth )вҲ’1          П•h (sjh , ajh ) В· Vh+1
                                                                        t
                                                                            (sjh+1 , iП… вҲ’ rhj ) ,
                                                j=1
                         PtвҲ’1        j    j        j    j вҠӨ
    where Оӣth = О»I +        j=1 П•h (sh , ah )(П•h (sh , ah )) .
    Then for any j вҲҲ [tвҲ’1], a вҲҲ A and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, we can estimate the value function Vht (sjh , iП…)
    as:
                                                                     вҠӨ
       Qth (sjh , iП…, a) = Clip[вҲ’H,H] вҲ’ bbh (sjh , a) + П•h (sjh , a) wht (iП…) вҲ’ ОІ П•h (sjh , a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 ,
                                                                                                  h


      Vht (sjh , iП…) = min Qth (sjh , iП…, a).
                       aвҲҲA

    Note that although we do not compute Qth (s, iП…, a) for all s вҲҲ S (which will incur computation
    cost scaling with |S|), they can be implicitly expressed via wht (iП…), i.e., for all s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A, 0 вүӨ
    i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, we know

          t
                                                              вҠӨ t
       Qh (s, iП…, a) = Clip[вҲ’H,H] вҲ’ bh (s, a) + П•h (s, a) wh (iП…) вҲ’ ОІ П•h (s, a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 . (6)
                                         b
                                                                                              h


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               et (w.r.t. the estimated
вҖў Step 2: Sample Collection. In the t-th iteration, simulate the greedy policy ПҖ
                 t
  Q function Qh (s, iП…, a)) with the initial budget c1 = i1 П… in the MDP model (P, b r) and collect a
               t    t    t H
  trajectory (sh , ah , rh )h=1 . Then, go back to the first step.
вҖў Step 3: Policy Evaluation. After repeating the above two steps for T1 iterations, we simulate each
         et with initial budget c1 = i1 П… in (P,
  policy ПҖ                                    b r) for T2 episodes. Suppose the collected trajectories
                          H  T 2
  are    st,j   t,j t,j
           h , ah , rh                                                            et as follows:
                                  and we estimate the empirical value function of ПҖ
                            h=1    j=1


                                        T2        H
                                                                  !+   H
                    t               1  X          X  t,j t,j  t,j
                                                                       X
                                                                         bbh (st,j , at,j ).
                Vb1ПҖe (s1 , i1 П…) =        i1 П… вҲ’   rh (sh , ah )    вҲ’         h      h
                                    T2 j=1
                                                      h=1                          h=1


                                       t
    Then we simply use maxtвҲҲ[T1 ] Vb1ПҖe (s1 , i1 П…) as a surrogate for V1вҲ— (s1 , i1 П…).

The details of CVaR-LSVI are stated in Algorithm 2 (cf. Appendix B). Note that in Line 16 of Algo-
rithm 1, we can also use the above CVaR-LSVI algorithm to compute ПҖ k . Combining Algorithm 1
and 2, we can derive a computationally efficient algorithm, called ELLA, for CVaR objective in
low-rank MDPs, which is shown in Algorithm 3 (cf. Appendix B). Now, we are ready present the
computational complexity of ELLA. Particularly, the following theorem characterizes the computa-
tional cost for finding an Пө-optimal policy:
Theorem 5.1 (Informal). Let the parameters in Algorithm 1 and 2 take appropriate values, then
we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ that CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(b                     ПҖ, b c)) вүӨ Пө where (bПҖ, b
                                                                                                             c) is the
returned
         policy    and  initial
                                 budget     by  Algorithm    3. In total,
                                                                          the  sample    complexity
                                                                                                    is upper bounded
                     |F |                                                            |F |
        H 7 A2 d4 log Оҙ                                                 H 7 A2 d4 log Оҙ
by OМғ         П„ 2 Пө2        .  The   MLE       oracle   is called  OМғ         П„ 2 Пө2         times and the rest of the

                                                |F |
                              H 19 A3 d12 log Оҙ
computation cost is OМғ             П… 10 П„ 6 Пө6        .

Theorem 5.1 is a special case of the continuous reward setting, whose formal statement is in Theo-
rem B.3 and the proof is deferred to Appendix D. Theorem 5.1 indicates that Algorithm 3 is able to
find a near-optimal policy with polynomial sample complexity and polynomial computational com-
plexity given an MLE oracle. Note that calling CVaR-LSVI in Line 17 and 20 of Algorithm 3 will
not increase the sample complexity because we are only simulating with a known model (P, b r) and
do not need to interact with the ground-truth environment.


6     C ONCLUDING R EMARKS

The paper proposes ELA, the first provably efficient algorithm for risk-sensitive reinforcement learn-
ing with the CVaR objective in low-rank MDPs. ELA achieves a sample complexity of OМғ(1/Пө2 ) to
find an Пө-optimal policy. To improve computational efficiency, we propose the ELLA algorithm,
which leverages least-squares value iteration upon discretized reward as the planning oracle. Given
the MLE oracle, we prove this algorithm only requires a polynomial computational complexity.
Regarding future work, we believe establishing lower bounds for CVaR RL in low-rank MDPs is an
exciting and challenging direction due to the complexity of the risk landscape and the non-linearity
in function approximation methods used. We point out that even for standard episodic RL, which is a
well-studied area, we have only recently seen some results on sample lower bounds in the context of
low-rank MDPs (Cheng et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). However, these results do not directly apply
to the CVaR
           risk landscape. We suppose the sample complexity lower bound may take the form of
в„Ұ HAdП„Пө2  according to the lower bounds in low-rank MDPs (Cheng et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023)
and tabular CVaR RL (Wang et al., 2023), which implies that our algorithm has a loose dependency
on H and П„ . Such a gap might be alleviated if we use the Hoeffding-type bonus instead of the
Bernstein-type bonus in the bonus-driven exploration. We leave it as future work to tighten the
dependencies.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mastane Achab, Reda Alami, Yasser Abdelaziz Dahou Djilali, Kirill Fedyanin, Eric Moulines, and
 Maxim Panov. Distributional deep q-learning with cvar regression. In Deep Reinforcement Learn-
 ing Workshop NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural complex-
  ity and representation learning of low rank MDPs. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20095вҖ“20107, 2020.
Osbert Bastani, Jason Yecheng Ma, Estelle Shen, and Wanqiao Xu. Regret bounds for risk-sensitive
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36259вҖ“36269,
  2022.
Nicole BaМҲuerle and Jonathan Ott. Markov decision processes with average-value-at-risk criteria.
  Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 74:361вҖ“379, 2011.
Yu Chen, Yihan Du, Pihe Hu, Siwei Wang, Desheng Wu, and Longbo Huang. Provably efficient iter-
  ated cvar reinforcement learning with function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02842,
  2023.
Yuan Cheng, Ruiquan Huang, Jing Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Improved sample complexity for
  reward-free reinforcement learning under low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10859,
  2023.
Yinlam Chow and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Algorithms for CVaR optimization in MDPs. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Yinlam Chow, Aviv Tamar, Shie Mannor, and Marco Pavone. Risk-sensitive and robust decision-
  making: a CVaR optimization approach. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28,
  2015.
Antonio Coronato, Muddasar Naeem, Giuseppe De Pietro, and Giovanni Paragliola. Reinforcement
  learning for intelligent healthcare applications: A survey. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 109:
  101964, 2020.
Mark Davis and SeМҒbastien Lleo. Risk-sensitive benchmarked asset management. Quantitative Fi-
 nance, 8(4):415вҖ“426, 2008.
Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient RL with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665вҖ“1674. PMLR, 2019.
Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in RL. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826вҖ“2836. PMLR, 2021.
Yihan Du, Siwei Wang, and Longbo Huang. Provably efficient risk-sensitive reinforcement learning:
  Iterated cvar and worst path. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Yonathan Efroni, Dipendra Misra, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Lang-
  ford. Provable rl with exogenous distractors via multistep inverse dynamics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.08847, 2021.
Damien Ernst, Guy-Bart Stan, Jorge Goncalves, and Louis Wehenkel. Clinical data based optimal
  STI strategies for HIV: a reinforcement learning approach. In Proceedings of the 45th IEEE
  Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 667вҖ“672. IEEE, 2006.
Carlo Filippi, Gianfranco Guastaroba, and Maria Grazia Speranza. Conditional value-at-risk beyond
  finance: a survey. International Transactions in Operational Research, 27(3):1277вҖ“1319, 2020.
Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Tatsuya Mori, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka.
  Learning robust options by conditional value at risk optimization. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaoyan Hu and Ho-Fung Leung. A tighter problem-dependent regret bound for risk-sensitive re-
  inforcement learning. In Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
  206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5411вҖ“5437. PMLR, 25вҖ“27 Apr 2023.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/hu23b.html.

Audrey Huang, Jinglin Chen, and Nan Jiang. Reinforcement learning in low-rank MDPs with den-
  sity features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02252, 2023.

David Isele, Alireza Nakhaei, and Kikuo Fujimura. Safe reinforcement learning on autonomous
  vehicles. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
  pp. 1вҖ“6. IEEE, 2018.

Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are PAC-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704вҖ“1713. PMLR, 2017.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137вҖ“2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Pavlo Krokhmal, Jonas Palmquist, and Stanislav Uryasev. Portfolio optimization with conditional
  value-at-risk objective and constraints. Journal of risk, 4:43вҖ“68, 2002.

R Tyrrell Rockafellar, Stanislav Uryasev, et al. Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal
  of risk, 2:21вҖ“42, 2000.

Ayush Sekhari, Christoph Dann, Mehryar Mohri, Yishay Mansour, and Karthik Sridharan. Ag-
  nostic reinforcement learning with low-rank MDPs and rich observations. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:19033вҖ“19045, 2021.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484вҖ“489, 2016.

David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
  without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354вҖ“359, 2017.

Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9767вҖ“9779. PMLR,
  2021.

Shagun Sodhani, Franziska Meier, Joelle Pineau, and Amy Zhang. Block contextual MDPs for
  continual learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 608вҖ“623. PMLR,
  2022.

Silvestr Stanko and Karel Macek. Risk-averse distributional reinforcement learning: A CVaR opti-
   mization approach. In IJCCI, pp. 412вҖ“423, 2019.

Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 RL in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898вҖ“2933. PMLR, 2019.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

Aviv Tamar, Yonatan Glassner, and Shie Mannor. Optimizing the CVaR via sampling. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015.

Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline
 RL in low-rank MDPs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=J4iSIR9fhY0.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, MichaeМҲl Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350вҖ“354, 2019.
Kaiwen Wang, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Near-minimax-optimal risk-sensitive reinforcement
  learning with CVaR. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
  Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 35864вҖ“35907.
  PMLR, 23вҖ“29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/wang23m.
  html.
Zhicheng Wang, Biwei Huang, Shikui Tu, Kun Zhang, and Lei Xu. Deeptrader: a deep reinforce-
  ment learning approach for risk-return balanced portfolio management with market conditions
  embedding. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp.
  643вҖ“650, 2021.
Lu Wen, Jingliang Duan, Shengbo Eben Li, Shaobing Xu, and Huei Peng. Safe reinforcement
  learning for autonomous vehicles through parallel constrained policy optimization. In 2020 IEEE
  23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 1вҖ“7. IEEE, 2020.
Pengqian Yu, William B Haskell, and Huan Xu. Approximate value iteration for risk-aware markov
  decision processes. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(9):3135вҖ“3142, 2018.
Amy Zhang, Clare Lyle, Shagun Sodhani, Angelos Filos, Marta Kwiatkowska, Joelle Pineau, Yarin
 Gal, and Doina Precup. Invariant causal prediction for block MDPs. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 11214вҖ“11224. PMLR, 2020.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learn-
 ing invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=-2FCwDKRREu.
Canzhe Zhao, Ruofeng Yang, Baoxiang Wang, Xuezhou Zhang, and Shuai Li. Learning adversarial
  low-rank markov decision processes with unknown transition and full-information feedback. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     N OTATIONS



                                                  Table 1: List of Notations
Basics
A = |A|                                                               cardinality of the action space
[H] = {1, В· В· В· , H}
вҲҶ(В·)                                                                  probability simplex
  ПҖ
ZP,c 1
                                                                      return distribution of rolling ПҖ with initial
                                                                      budget c1 in an MDP with P
  ПҖ
Vh,P,b   : S Г— [0, H] 7вҶ’ [0, H]                                       defined in (5)
 (ПҖ,c1 )      (ПҖ,c )
dh,P (s), dh,P 1 (s, a)                                               occupancy of s and (s, a) at step h when
                                                                      rolling ПҖ with initial budget c1 in an MDP
                                                                      with P
 (ПҖ,c1 )            (ПҖ,c )        (ПҖ,c1 )              (ПҖ,c )
dh         (s) = dh,P вҲ—1 (s), dh            (s, a) = dh,P вҲ—1 (s, a)   occupancy of s and (s, a) at step h when
                                                                      rolling ПҖ with initial budget c1 in the (true)
                                                                      environment
In-Algorithm
Initialization
F = {ОЁ, ОҰ}                                                            model class
О»k = O(d
     p log(|F|Hk/Оҙ))                                                  regularizer at iteration k
Оұk = H 2 (A + d2 ) log(|F|Hk/Оҙ)                                       parameter at iteration k
Datasets (at the end of the k-th episode)
                                                                               iвҲ’1
Dhk = {(sih , aih , sМғih+1 )}iвҲҲ[k]                                    sih вҲј dh,c
                                                                              ПҖ          i
                                                                                  iвҲ’1 , ah вҲј U (A)
                                                                                iвҲ’1
e k = {(sМғi , aМғi , sвҖІi )}iвҲҲ[k]
D                                                                     sМғih вҲј dhвҲ’1,c
                                                                              ПҖ                     вҲ— i
                                                                                     iвҲ’1 Г— U (A) Г— Ph , aМғh вҲј U (A)
 h        h h h+1

Estimations (at the end of the k-th episode)
 {(ПҲbhk , П•bkh )}hвҲҲ[H]                                                learned representations
 bk = {Pbk }hвҲҲ[H]
 P                                                                    empirical transition kernel
               h
 bk = P
 ОЈ                      bk bk вҠӨ + О»k I
                      k П•h (П•h )                                      empirical covariance matrix
   h           (s,a)вҲҲDh
bbk = {bbk }hвҲҲ[H]                                                     bonus term
             h

In-Analysis
            PkвҲ’1 i
ПҒkh (s) = k1 i=0 dПҖh,ci (s)                                           occupancy of s in dataset Dhk
               PkвҲ’1 i
ПҒkh (s, a) = k1 i=0 dПҖh,ci (s, a)
О·hk (s) = sвҖІ ,aвҖІ ПҒkhвҲ’1 (sвҖІ )U (aвҖІ )PhвҲ’1вҲ—
                                          (s|sвҖІ , aвҖІ )                                          ek
           P
                                                                      occupancy of s in dataset Dh
                                         вҠӨ
ОЈПҒkh Г—U (A),П• = kEsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) [П•П• ] + О»k I
ОЈПҒkh ,П• = kE(s,a)вҲјПҒkh [П•П•вҠӨ ] + О»k I
b k = kE(s,a)вҲјDk [П•П•вҠӨ ] + О»k I
ОЈ                                                                     unbiased estimate of ОЈПҒkh Г—U (A),П•
  h,П•                 h
О¶ k = log(|F|Hk/Оҙ)/k
fhk (s, a) = вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ1                          estimation error in L1 norm
  (ПҖ,c )
Пүh,P 1 (В·|s, a)                                                       the distribution of the remaining budget at
                                                                      h for any (s, a) when rolling out (ПҖ, c1 ) in
                                                                      an MDP with P
  (ПҖ,c1 )                (ПҖ,c )
Пүh          (В·|s, a) = Пүh,P вҲ—1 (В·|s, a)                               the distribution of the remaining budget at
                                                                      h for any (s, a) when rolling out (ПҖ, c1 ) in
                                                                      the true MDP


                                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     ELLA FOR C ONTINUOUS R EWARD

Now, we extend the analysis in Section 5 to continuous reward distribution.

B.1   D ISCRETIZED R EWARD

Inspired by Wang et al. (2023), we discretize the reward rh and the budget ch at each step. In this
way, we only need to plan over a finite grid. More specifically, suppose the precision is П… > 0,
then we round up the reward r to U (r) := вҢҲr/П…вҢүП…. In the following discussion, we use M to
denote the MDP which shares the same transition as M while its reward r is discretized from the
original reward distribution r of M, i.e., r = U (r). Since the supremum of the CVaR objective (2)
is attained at П„ -th quantile of the return distribution, which is also discretized in (P,
                                                                                        b r), we can only
         k
search c within the grid for (P,  b r) in Line 15 of Algorithm 1:
                                              (                                   )
                                                                       ПҖ
                        ck вҶҗ П… В· arg max        iП… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 min V 1,P,
                                                                  bbb (s1 , iП…) ,                    (7)
                                0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү                ПҖвҲҲО Aug

                                                                            ПҖ
where О Aug is the augmented policy class of augmented M and V h,P,b is the value function of
(P, r) with bonus b:
                              пЈ®
                                     H
                                                !+   H
                                                                                      пЈ№
         ПҖ                           X               X
       V h,P,b (s, c) := EПҖ,P пЈ° ch вҲ’   U (rhвҖІ )    вҲ’   bhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) sh = s, ch = cпЈ» .
                                        hвҖІ =h                  hвҖІ =h

Similarly, the Q function of (P, r) with bonus b is defined as:
                          пЈ®
                                     H
                                                !+       H
                                                                                                   пЈ№
   ПҖ                                X                   X
 Qh,P,b (s, c, a) := EПҖ,P пЈ° ch вҲ’        U (rhвҖІ )    вҲ’       bhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) sh = s, ch = c, ah = aпЈ» .
                                    hвҖІ =h                 hвҖІ =h



 To stay consistent with Line 15, we also derive the optimal augmented policy of (P,
                                                                                  b r) with bonus
bb in Line 16 of Algorithm 1, i.e.,
                                                          ПҖ
                                  ПҖ k вҶҗ arg min V 1,P,
                                                    bb
                                                               k
                                                      b (s1 , c ).
                                                ПҖвҲҲО Aug


Note that in Line 8 of Algorithm 1 we need to roll out ПҖ k in M to collect samples. Since ПҖ k вҲҲ О Aug
works only within the grid, we discretize the reward we observe when executing ПҖ k in M, which is
equivalent to playing the following augmented policy ПҖ k вҲҲ О Aug in M:
                                hвҲ’1
                                       !                   hвҲ’1
                                                                      !
                                 X                         X
                      k      k                k      k
                    ПҖ h s, c вҲ’       rt = ПҖh s, c вҲ’            U (rt ) , вҲҖh вҲҲ [H].                (8)
                                  t=1                          t=1


Planning within a discretized grid via (7) will inevitably incur errors compared to the original ob-
jective. Nevertheless, we can show that if the precision П… is sufficiently small, the discretized MDP
M will be an excellent approximation to M and thus the induced error of planning via (7) will be
negligible. Formally, let R(ПҖ, c) denote the return of executing ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug with initial budget c = iП…
(0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү) in M, then we have the following properties from the literature (Wang et al.,
2023):
Proposition B.1. For any 0 < П„ < 1,П… > 0, policy ПҖ вҲҲ О Aug and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, we have
                                            вҲ—
                  (1) CVaRвҲ—П„ вүӨ CVaRП„ :=                  max           CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ, iП…)),
                                                 ПҖвҲҲО Aug ,0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү
                                                                            HП…
                  (2)    0 вүӨ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ, iП…)) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ, iП…)) вүӨ             .
                                                                             П„

                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   CVaR-LSVI

With discretization, we only need to search within the grid of c in each iteration. For each discrete
value iП…, we apply the CVaR-LSVI algorithm as planning oracle as introduced in Section 5. The
only difference is that now we simulate with the discretized reward model r. The full algorithm is
                                                                  t
shown in Algorithm 2. In particular, in Line 12 we can express Qh with wht :

        t                                                  вҠӨ t
      Qh (s, iП…, a) = Clip[вҲ’H,H] вҲ’ bh (s, a) + П•h (s, a) wh (iП…) вҲ’ ОІ П•h (s, a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 . (9)
                                      b
                                                                                                                            h



Moreover, note that we can bound the norm of the newly-constructed feature vectors as follows:

                                                       X       Z                                    вҲҡ
                     П•h (s, a) 2 вүӨ 1,                                  ПҲ h (sвҖІ , iП…)ds вүӨ (1 + вҢҲ1/П…вҢү) d.
                                                  0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲ1/П…вҢү        S

This bound will be useful in our analysis.

Algorithm 2 CVaR-LSVI
Require: MDP transition model and reward (P           b = (П•,b ПҲ),
                                                                b r), bonus bb, initial budget i1 П…, number
    of iterations T1 , parameters О» and ОІ, number of policy evaluation episodes T2 .
 1: Compute П•h (s, a) = П•      bh (s, a) вҠ— П•h,r (s, a) for all h вҲҲ [H], s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A where П•h,r (s, a) вҲҲ
      вҢҲ1/П…вҢү+1
    R           and (П•h,r (s, a))i = rh (iП…|s, a) for all 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲ1/П…вҢү.
 2: for t = 1, В· В· В· , T1 do
                     t
 3:    Initialize V H+1 (s, iП…) вҶҗ iП… for all s вҲҲ S and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү.
 4:    for h = H, В· В· В· , 1 do       PtвҲ’1
 5:       Compute Оӣth вҶҗ О»I + j=1 П•h (sjh , ajh )(П•h (sjh , ajh ))вҠӨ .
                                           PtвҲ’1                 h t                     i
 6:       Calculate wht (iП…) вҶҗ (Оӣth )вҲ’1 j=1 П•h (sjh , ajh )В· V h+1 (sjh+1 , iП… вҲ’rjh ) , вҲҖ0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү.
 7:       for j = 1, В· В· В· , t вҲ’ 1 do
 8:          Compute for all a вҲҲ A, 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү:

                 t                                                                 вҠӨ
               Qh (sjh , iП…, a) вҶҗ Clip[вҲ’H,H]           bh (sjh , a) + П•h (sjh , a) wht (iП…) вҲ’ ОІ П•h (sjh , a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 .
                                                      вҲ’b
                                                                                                                                h

              t                      t
 9:         V h (sjh , iП…) вҶҗ minaвҲҲA Qh (sjh , iП…, a).
10:      end for
11:   end for                                     t
12:   Simulate the greedy policy ПҖ    et (w.r.t. Qh (s, iП…, a) defined in (9)) with the initial budget c1 =
      i1 П… in the MDP (P,  b r) and collect a trajectory (st , at , rt )H .
                                                              h h h h=1
13: end for
14: for t = 1, В· В· В· , T1 do
15:   Simulate ПҖ   et with initial budget c1 = i1 П… in (P,  b r) for T2 episodes and collect trajectories
                            H  T 2
          st,j    t,j t,j
            h , ah , r h             .
                              h=1   j=1
                        et
                        ПҖ           PT2          PH                         + P
                                                                                H
16:   Compute Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҶҗ T12 j=1  i1 П… вҲ’ h=1 rt,jh (s t,j
                                                              h   , at,j
                                                                     h   )   вҲ’ h=1 bbh (st,j  t,j
                                                                                         h , ah ).
17: end for
                                       et
                                       ПҖ                                     et
                                                                             ПҖ
18: Return: value estimate min       Vb (s , i П…) and policy arg min t Vb (s , i П…)
                                        tвҲҲ[T1 ]       1    1   1                                  ПҖ
                                                                                                  e      1    1     1


           вҲ—                                      ПҖ
Now let V h,P,
            bbb denote minПҖвҲҲО Aug V h,P, b . Then we have the following theorem indicating that
                                       bb

Algorithm 2 can do planning in (P,
                                b r) accurately with appropriate T1 and T2 :
Theorem B.2. Let
                                        3   1
                                                !                                                                   !
                                                                       H 5 d3 О№                       H 2 log TОҙ1

                                    H 2 dО№ 4
               О» = 1, ОІ = OМғ                          , T1 = OМғ                       , T2 = OМғ                         ,
                                       П…                               П… 3 Оө2                             Оө2


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where О№ = log2 HdT
                П…Оҙ , we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ that
                   1


                                      вҲ—                       вҲ—                   3
                          (1)      Vb 1,P, b (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ V 1,P, b (s1 , i1 П…) + Оө,
                                                                                  4
                                         bb                     bb

                                        вҲ—                      ПҖ
                                                               b                    1
                          (2)        Vb 1,P, b (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1,P, b (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ Оө.
                                                               e
                                                                                    4
                                          bb                     bb

                             t                                                    t
                         ПҖ                    вҲ—
where ПҖ
                         e
       e = arg minПҖet Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…) and Vb 1,P,                       b ПҖe
                                                  b (s1 , i1 П…) := minПҖ
                                                                      et V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) are the returned
       b                                        bb
values of CVaR-LSVI.

The proof is deferred to Appendix D.1.

B.3    C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

Equipping ELA with CVaR-LSVI, we can derive ELLA, which is shown in Algorithm 3. Based on
the above discussions about discretization and CVaR-LSVI, the computational complexity of ELLA
for finding an Пө-policy can be characterized as follows:
Theorem B.3. Let

             k
                      p
                              2            2
                                                    |F|Hk             k               |F|Hk
            Оұ =O          H (|A| + d ) log                        , О» = O d log                ,
                                                       Оҙ                                 Оҙ
                                             !                                        !
                      H 6 A2 d4 log |FОҙ |
                                                                               3    1
                                                       ПөП„                    H 2 dО№ 4
            K = OМғ                              ,П… =        , О» = 1, ОІ = OМғ             ,
                                П„ 2 Пө2                3H                        П…
                                                                !
                                                  H 2 log TОҙ1
                      5 3
                       H d О№
            T1 = OМғ                   , T2 = OМғ                   .
                       П… 3 П„ 2 Пө2                    П„ 2 Пө2
Then we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                     CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(b      c)) вүӨ Пө.
                                                           ПҖ, b

                                                                             |F |
                                                             H 7 A2 d4 log Оҙ
In total, the sample complexity is upper bounded by OМғ             П„ 2 Пө2           . The MLE oracle is called

                  |F |                                                                          |F |
     H 7 A2 d4 log Оҙ                                                             H 29 A3 d12 log Оҙ
OМғ           2
           П„ Пө 2         times and the rest of the computation cost  is   OМғ            16
                                                                                       П„ Пө  16        .

The proof is deferred to Appendix D.2. Theorem B.3 indicates that even when the reward is contin-
uous, Algorithm 3 can still achieve polynomial sample complexity and polynomial computational
complexity given an MLE oracle.

C     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
Proof Sketch Recall that ПҖ k and ck are the exploration policy and initial budget output from Line
16 of Algorithm 1 at the end of the k-th iteration, respectively. In the proof, we show that, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds that
                                               s
                                            вҲҡ

                                    вҲ’1 3  2                  K           |F|Hk
                   Regret(K) вүІ П„ H Ad K log 1 + 1 log                                         (10)
                                                            dО»              Оҙ
which is formalized in Lemma C.1. Once it is established, the suboptimality of the uniform mixture
of {(ck , ПҖ k )} satisfies that
                                                           s
                    K
         вҲ—      1 X               k k        вҲ’1 3   2 вҲ’2 1             K            |F|Hk
  CVaRП„ вҲ’               CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ , c )) вүІ П„ H Ad K         log 1 + 1 log                    (11)
               K                                                      dО»               Оҙ
                 k=1

Let the RHS smaller than Пө, we have that when
                                6 2 4
                                H A d             K       |F|Hk
                      KвүіO                 log 1 + 1 log
                                  П„ 2 Пө2         dО»         Оҙ

                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 ELLA
Require: Risk tolerance П„ вҲҲ (0, 1], number of iterations K, parameters {О»k }kвҲҲ[K] and {Оұk }kвҲҲ[K] ,
    models F = {ОЁ, ОҰ}, failure probability Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), discretization precision П…, CVaR-
    LSVIparameters О», ОІ, T1 , T2 .
 1: Set datasets Dh , D eh вҶҗ вҲ… for each h вҲҲ [H вҲ’ 1].
 2: Calculate the discretized reward distribution r.
 3: Initialize the exploration policy ПҖ 0 вҶҗ {ПҖh0 (s, iП…) = U (A), for any s вҲҲ S, 0 вүӨ i вүӨ
    вҢҲH/П…вҢү}hвҲҲ[H] .
 4: Initialize the budget i0 вҶҗ вҢҲH/П…вҢү.
 5: for iteration k = 1, . . . , K do
 6:    Collect a tuple (sМғ1 , aМғ1 , sвҖІ2 ) by taking aМғ1 вҲј U (A), sвҖІ2 вҲј P1вҲ— (В·|sМғ1 , aМғ1 ).
 7:    Update D  e1 вҶҗ D  e1 вҲӘ {(sМғ1 , aМғ1 , sвҖІ )}.
                                              2
 8:    for h = 1, В· В· В· , H вҲ’ 1 do
 9:       Collect two transition tuples (sh , ah , sМғh+1 ) and (sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 , sвҖІh+2 ) by first rolling out
          ПҖ kвҲ’1 (defined in (8)) starting from (s1 , ikвҲ’1 П…) into state sh , taking ah вҲј U (A), and
          receiving sМғh+1 вҲј PhвҲ— (В·|sh , ah ), then taking aМғh+1 вҲј U (A) and receiving sвҖІh+2 вҲј
            вҲ—
          Ph+1  (В·|sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 ).
10:       Update Dh вҶҗ Dh вҲӘ {(sh , ah , sМғh+1 )}.
11:       Update D  eh+1 вҶҗ D   eh+1 вҲӘ {(sМғh+1 , aМғh+1 , sвҖІ )} if h вүӨ H вҲ’ 2.
                                                           h+2
12:       Learn representations via MLE
                                                               X
                Pbh := (ПҲbh , П•bh ) вҶҗ arg max                                  log вҹЁПҲ(sh+1 ), П•(sh , ah )вҹ©
                                                 (ПҲ,П•)вҲҲF
                                                           (sh ,ah ,sh+1 )вҲҲ{Dh +D
                                                                                eh }

                                              bh = P                           вҠӨ   k
13:        Update empirical covariance matrix ОЈ     (s,a)вҲҲDh П•h (s, a)П•h (s, a) + О» Id .
                                                              b        b
14:        Set the exploration bonus:
                                   пЈұ     q
                                   пЈІmin Оұk П•b (s, a)ОЈ  вҲ’1 b       вҠӨ
                      bbh (s, a) вҶҗ              h
                                                     b
                                                       h П•h (s, a) , 2    hвүӨH вҲ’2
                                    0                                     h=H вҲ’1
                                   пЈі

15:     end for
16:     for i = 0, 1, В· В· В· , вҢҲH/П…вҢү do
17:       Run CVaR-LSVI (Algorithm 2) with MDP model (Pb, r), bonus bb, initial budget iП… and
                                                                                        вҲ—
          parameters (О», ОІ, T , T ) and let the returned value estimate and policy be Vb (s , iП…) and
                                    1    2                                                                    1   1
          ПҖ
          e(i).
          b
18:     end for
                                                  вҲ—

19:     Obtain ik вҶҗ arg max0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү iП… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 Vb 1 (s1 , iП…) and ПҖ k вҶҗ ПҖ
                                                                        e(ik ).
                                                                        b

20: end for
Ensure: Uniformly sample k from [K], return (b  c) = (ПҖ k , ik П…).
                                             ПҖ, b



the uniform mixture of {(ПҖ k , ck )} is an Пө-optimal policy. Finally, noting that H trajectories are
collected per iteration, we conclude the proof of Theorem 4.1. To establish (10), we decompose the
suboptimality of the k-th iteration into

  CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck ))
                вҲ—
                                                                                                                 вҲ—

=cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— ) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) + CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ вҲ— , cвҲ— )) вҲ’ cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— )

                k
                                                                                ПҖвҲ—                                      вҲ—
вүӨck вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , ck ) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) + cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,P                     вҲ—
                                                                                   вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вҲ’      cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— )
       k                                                        вҲ—
                                   ПҖk                                                       ПҖвҲ—
вүӨП„ вҲ’1 V1,P
         ПҖ               k
            вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вҲ’ V        k
                                  1,P ,b
                                    b   bk (s1 , ck
                                                    )   +П„ вҲ’1
                                                                V ПҖ
                                                                      k
                                                                 1,P ,b
                                                                    b   bk (s1 , cвҲ—
                                                                                    ) вҲ’  V 1,P
                                                                                                            вҲ—
                                                                                                вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c )

     |                        {z                      }       |                      {z                        }
                              (i)                                                     (ii)



                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the first inequality holds by the fact that ПҖ k is greedy (Line 16 of Algorithm 1) and the last
inequality holds by
 CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) = sup t вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 ERвҲјR(ПҖk ,ck ) [(t вҲ’ R)+ ] вүҘ ck вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 ERвҲјR(ПҖk ,ck ) [(ck вҲ’ R)+ ]

                                     tвҲҲR

Utilizing simulation lemma C.3 for risk-sensitive RL, we further upper bound terms (i) and (ii) by
the error in estimating the transition kernel and the bonus terms, i.e.,
                                              h         i
                                               bk
                                                                                      k
                term (i) вүӨ E        (ПҖ k ,ck ) bh (s, a) + 3H В· E         (ПҖ k ,ck ) fh (s, a)
                             (s,a)вҲјdh                             (s,a)вҲјdh
                                                        h                            i
                         term (ii) вүӨ E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) H В· fhk (s, a) вҲ’ bbkh (s, a)
                                                                   bk
                                                                 h,P


where fhk (s, a) := вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ1 . By the analysis in Lemma C.1 and C.2, we prove the
inequality (10).
Before proceeding to the detailed proofs, we first introduce the essential regret decomposition.
Lemma C.1 (Regret). With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have that
                                                          s
    K
                                                       вҲҡ

   X
             вҲ—                 k k        вҲ’1 3       2                  K            |F|Hk
        CVaRП„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ , c )) вүІ П„ H Ad K log 1 + 1 log                                       (12)
                                                                       dО»              Оҙ
        k=1


Proof. Letting fhk (s, a) = вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ, we condition on the event that for all (k, h) вҲҲ
[K] Г— [H], the following inequalities hold
                              h             2 i                        h           2 i
              EsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) fhk (s, a)        вүӨ О¶ k , EsвҲјО·hk ,aвҲјU (A) fhk (s, a)     вүӨ О¶k
                                         вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ(ОЈ
                                                   bk       вҲ’1   = Оҳ(вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ(ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П• )вҲ’1 )
                                                    h,П• )                                   h

By Lemmas E.1 and E.2, this event happens with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. For any iteration k, we have that
For a fixed iteration k, we have that
  CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck ))
                вҲ—
                                                                                                              вҲ—

=cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— ) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) + CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ вҲ— , cвҲ— )) вҲ’ cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— )

                k
                                                                             ПҖвҲ—                                    вҲ—
вүӨck вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , ck ) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) + cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,P                   вҲ—
                                                                                 вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вҲ’   cвҲ— вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— )
       k                                                       вҲ—
                                   ПҖk                                                      ПҖвҲ—
вүӨП„ вҲ’1 V1,P
         ПҖ               k
            вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вҲ’ V             (s
                                         bk 1
                                    b k ,b
                                  1,P
                                              , ck
                                                   )  + П„ вҲ’1
                                                               V ПҖ
                                                                1,P
                                                                          (s
                                                                        bk 1
                                                                   b k ,b    , cвҲ—
                                                                                  )  вҲ’  V        (s
                                                                                          1,P ,0 1
                                                                                               вҲ—     , cвҲ—
                                                                                                          )          (13)
                                                             |            p
                                                                                    {z                      }
                                                                                      вүӨ         H 2 AО¶ k by Lemma C.2

where the first inequality holds by the fact that ПҖ k is greedy (Line 15 of Algorithm 1) and the last
inequality holds by
 CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck )) = sup t вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 ERвҲјR(ПҖk ,ck ) [(t вҲ’ R)+ ] вүҘ ck вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 ERвҲјR(ПҖk ,ck ) [(ck вҲ’ R)+ ]

                                     tвҲҲR

Therefore, it remains to bound the first term, which by simulation lemma C.3, can be further written
as
        k                            k
   ПҖ              k       ПҖ
 V1,P вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вҲ’ V
                         1,P
                                   (s , ck )
                                 bk 1
                            b k ,b
           пЈ®
                      H
                                         !+ пЈ№         пЈ®
                                                             H
                                                                            !+   H
                                                                                                          пЈ№
                      X                                      X                   X
=EПҖk ,P вҲ— пЈ° ck вҲ’           rh (sh , ah ) пЈ» вҲ’ EПҖk ,Pbk пЈ° ck вҲ’   rh (sh , ah )   вҲ’   bbk (sh , ah ) c1 = ck пЈ»
                                                                                     h
                               h=1                                                    h=1                           h=1
    H
    X               h                       i                    H
                                                                 X
            EПҖk ,Pbk bbkh (sh , ah ) c1 = ck + H В·
                                                                                              k
вүӨ                                                                      E       (ПҖ k ,ck )    fh (s, a)
                                                                        (s,a)вҲјdh
    h=1                                                          h=1
    H
    X                       h          i       H
                                               X
                               k
                                                                                        k
вүӨ           E         k  k
                    (ПҖ ,c )  b
                             b
                               h (s, a)  +3H В·   E                       (ПҖ k ,ck )    fh (s, a)                          (14)
              (s,a)вҲјdh                                            (s,a)вҲјdh
    h=1                                                 h=1
    |                    {z                   }         |                     {z                      }
                         (i)                                                  (ii)


                                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last inequality holds by the simulation Lemma E.5 for risk-neutral RL and the fact that
                                                      k
вҲҘbbkh вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 2. where the last inequality holds by вҲҘVh,ПҖPbk ,r+bbk вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 2. We first consider term (i). By
Lemma E.4 and noting that the bonus term bbk is O(1), we have              h
    HвҲ’1
    X                             h         i
            E                      bk
                        (ПҖ k ,ck ) bh (s, a)
             (s,a)вҲјdh
    h=1
    HвҲ’1
    X
вүІ           E           (ПҖ k ,ck )    min Оұk вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                                  ,2
             (s,a)вҲјdh                                                          ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                                                                         bk
    h=1                                                                         h          h
 v                          "                                                                 #
 u
 u
вүӨ A В· (Оұ ) В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) вҲҘП•bk1 (s, a)вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1
 t      k 2
                                                                           ПҒk        bk
                                                                            1 Г—U (A),П•1

        HвҲ’2
                                         "                                                             #
        X
                                              k
    +           E           (ПҖ k ,ck )    Оұ       вҲҘП•bkh+1 (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                    (s,a)вҲјdh+1                                     k       ПҒ                bk
                                                                                     Г—U (A),П•
        h=1                                                                    h+1           h+1
                                     пЈ®                                v                                               "                                           #         пЈ№
    HвҲ’2
    X
                                                                      u
                                                                      u
вүӨ           E           (ПҖ k ,ck )
                                     пЈ°вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘ вҲ’1                 tk(Оұk )2 A В· E
                                                                                                  sвҲјПҒk                     вҲҘП•bkh+1 (s, a)вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                        + 4О»k dпЈ»
             (s,a)вҲјdh                             ОЈ
                                                             ПҒk ,П•вҲ—                                  h+1 ,aвҲјU (A)
                                                              h                                                                               ПҒk          bk
                                                                                                                                                   Г—U (A),П•
    h=1                                                                                                                                        h+1          h+1
     v                            "                                                                #
     u
     u
    + A В· (Оұk )2 В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) вҲҘП•bk1 (s, a)вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1
     t
                                                                                  ПҒk        bk
                                                                                   1 Г—U (A),П•1

                                                                  HвҲ’2
    r
        dA(Оұk )2
                          q                                       X
вүӨ                +            dA(Оұk )2 + 4О»k d В·                         E                (ПҖ k ,ck )    вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                                  (15)
           k                                                                   (s,a)вҲјdh                                   ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                                                                                           h
                                                                  h=1
where the last inequality holds by
                  "                                                    #                                     n                                   oвҲ’1
kВ·E k               вҲҘП•bk (s, a)вҲҘ2 вҲ’1
        sвҲјПҒh ,aвҲјU (A)                h             ОЈ k
                                                                           = kTr EПҒkh Г—U (A) [П•bkh (П•bkh )вҠӨ ] kEПҒkh Г—U (A) [П•bkh (П•bkh )вҠӨ ] + О»k       вүӨd
                                                             bk
                                                    ПҒ Г—U (A),П•
                                                     h         h

Similarly, for term (ii), we have that
        HвҲ’1
        X                                  k
                E           (ПҖ k ,ck )    fh (s, a)
                  (s,a)вҲјdh
        h=1
        r                                h                  2 i
    вүӨ A В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A)                    f1k (s, a)
            HвҲ’2
                                             "                                  r                                                                        #
            X                                                                                                         h                 2 i
        +           E           (ПҖ k ,ck )    вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                        kA В· EsвҲјПҒkh+1 ,aвҲјU (A)                k (s, a)
                                                                                                                          fh+1                + 4О»k d
                      (s,a)вҲјdh                                        ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
            h=1                                                        h

     q            HвҲ’2
                  X
    вүӨ AО¶1k + Оұk В·     E                              (ПҖ k ,ck )    вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                     ,                                                 (16)
                                         (s,a)вҲјdh                                         ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                              h=1                                                          h


where the last step uses                                          s
                                                         k                                       |F|Hk
                                                      Оұ вүІ              H 2 Ad2 log                      .
                                                                                                   Оҙ
Combining (13), (14), (15), and (16) we obtain
     XK
          CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ck ))

  П„
            k=1
     K
                r                                         !      K HвҲ’2
                     dA(Оұk )2 p 2 k                                X
     X                                                           X
 вүІ                           + H AО¶                            +       2H В· Оұk В· E                               (ПҖ k ,ck )  вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                        k                                                                                  (s,a)вҲјdh                             ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                                                                                                                 h
     k=1                                                           k=1 h=1


                                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          K q
          X                                  HвҲ’2
                                             X
     +              dA(Оұk )2 + 4О»k d                E           (ПҖ k ,ck )  вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                    (s,a)вҲјdh                             ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
          k=1                                 h=1                                         h
                    s
                     K HвҲ’2
              |F|Hk X X
                3
                                                вҲ—
 вүІH 2 Ad 2              log E         k  k
                                    (ПҖ ,c )  вҲҘП• h (s, a)вҲҘ вҲ’1
                                                         ОЈ k вҲ—
                Оҙ            (s,a)вҲјdh                     ПҒ ,П•
                                                           h
                    k=1 h=1
           s
         вҲҡ

                    K         |F|Hk
 вүІH 3 Ad2 K log 1 + 1 log
                   dО»            Оҙ
where the last inequality holds by (Uehara et al., 2022, Lemma 18), i.e.,
                  K                                            s
                  X
                                            вҲ—                              K
                     E        (ПҖ k ,ck )  вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1      вүӨ dK log 1 + 1
                       (s,a)вҲјdh                       ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                       h
                                                                          dО»
                          k=1

Therefore, we conclude the proof.
Lemma C.2 (Almost Optimism at the Initial Distribution). Consider an episode k вҲҲ [K] and set
      s
 k                          |F|Hk                                   |F|Hk                1       |F|Hk
Оұ = H 2 (A + d2 ) log                      , О»k = O d log                     , О¶k = O     log
                                 Оҙ                                     Оҙ                 k         Оҙ
                                                                                                       (17)
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have that
                               вҲ—
                                                      ПҖвҲ—
                                                                          p
                          V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— ) вҲ’ V1,P             вҲ—
                                                         вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c ) вүӨ   H 2 AО¶ k                   (18)

Proof. Similar to the proof of Lemma C.1, letting fhk (s, a) = вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ1 , we con-
dition on the event that for all (k, h) вҲҲ [K] Г— [H], the following inequalities hold
                               h            2 i                        h           2 i
               EsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) fhk (s, a)       вүӨ О¶ k , EsвҲјО·hk ,aвҲјU (A) fhk (s, a)     вүӨ О¶k
                                        вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ(ОЈ
                                                  bk     вҲ’1     = Оҳ(вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ(ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П• )вҲ’1 )
                                                    h,П• )                            h


From Lemmas E.1 and E.2, this event happens with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Note that bkH (s, a) =
 k
fH (s, a) := 0 for any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A. Then, for any policy ПҖ, from the simulation Lemma C.3, we
have that
      вҲ—                                вҲ—
 V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— ) вҲ’ V1,P
                             ПҖ              вҲ—
                                вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c )
             пЈ®
                          H
                                            !+   H
                                                                          пЈ№            пЈ®
                                                                                              H
                                                                                                             !+ пЈ№
                         X                       X                                            X
=EПҖвҲ— ,Pbk пЈ° cвҲ— вҲ’            rh (sh , ah )      вҲ’   bbk (sh , ah ) c1 = cвҲ— пЈ» вҲ’ EПҖвҲ— ,P вҲ— пЈ° cвҲ— вҲ’
                                                     h                                          rh (sh , ah ) пЈ»
                              h=1                       h=1                                                            h=1
    HвҲ’1
    X                      h                            i
вүӨ         E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) H В· fhk (s, a) вҲ’ bbkh (s, a)                                                                            (19)
                           bk
                         h,P
    h=1

For any h + 1 вҲҲ {2, В· В· В· , H вҲ’ 1}, by Lemma E.3 and noting that вҲҘfh+1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 2, we have that

                            k
  E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) [fh+1    (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
                h+1,P  bk
                       "                                        r                                                                              #
                                                                                                  h                    2 i
вүӨE  (s,a)вҲјd
            (ПҖ вҲ— ,cвҲ— )   вҲҘП•bk (s, a)вҲҘ вҲ’1
                                  h         ОЈ k             В·     kA В· EsвҖІ вҲјО·h+1
                                                                             k   ,aвҖІ вҲјU (A)
                                                                                                       k (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )
                                                                                                      fh+1                   + 4О»k d + 4kО¶ k
                  bk
                h,P                                   bk
                                             ПҒ Г—U (A),П•
                                              h         h


Hence,
                                                    p
                                 k
       вҲ’ E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) [fh+1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] вүҘ вҲ’ ОІ k В· E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                                       (20)
                                  bk
                              h+1,P                                                bk
                                                                                 h,P                         ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                                                                                                       bk
                                                                                                              h          h

where
                                      ОІ k := kAО¶ k + О»k d + kО¶ k вүІ (A + d2 ) log(|F|Hk/Оҙ)


                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining (19) and (20), we further derive
      вҲ—                        вҲ—
  V1,ПҖPbk ,bbk (s1 , cвҲ— ) вҲ’ V1,P
                              ПҖ              вҲ—
                                 вҲ— ,0 (s1 , c )


      HвҲ’1
      X                      h           i p               HвҲ’2
                                                           X
            E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) bbkh (s, a) + H 2 AО¶ k + H В·
                                                                                  k
вүӨвҲ’                                                             E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) fi+1 (s, a)
                         bk
                       h,P                                                                       bk
                                                                                             i+1,P
      h=1                                                                  i=1
   HвҲ’1
   X                    h         i HвҲ’2
                                     X                                                                                     p
                          k
вүӨвҲ’     E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) bh (s, a) +
                         b              E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖвҲ— ,cвҲ— ) min Оұk вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                                    , 2 + H 2 AО¶ k
                         bk
                       h,P                                            bk
                                                                    h,P                               ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                                                                                                bk
      h=1                                          h=1                                                 h         h
 p
вүІ H 2 AО¶ k
Therefore, we conclude the proof.
Lemma C.3 (Simulation lemma for risk-sensitive RL). Given two episodic MDPs (H, P =
{Ph }hвҲҲ[H] , r) and (H, P
                        b = {Pbh }hвҲҲ[H] , r), for any fixed c вҲҲ [0, 1] and policy ПҖ = {ПҖh :
S Г— [0, H] 7вҶ’ вҲҶ(A)}hвҲҲ[H] , we have that
                                                                       H
                                                                       X
                         ПҖ
                       V1,P,0 (s1 , c) вҲ’ V1,ПҖP,0
                                             b (s1 , c) вүӨ H В·                E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c) [fh (s, a)]                 (21)
                                                                                            h,P
                                                                       h=1

where fh (s, a) := вҲҘPh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ Pbh (В·|s, a)вҲҘ1 for any (h, s, a) вҲҲ [H] Г— S Г— A.

Proof. By definition, we derive that
   ПҖ
 V1,P,0 (s1 , c) вҲ’ V1,ПҖP,0
                       b (s1 , c)
                     n                                                                 h                       io
                                                  (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r1 ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPb1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,ПҖP,0   вҖІ
                                            ПҖ
=Ea1 вҲјПҖ1 (В·|s1 ,c),r1 EsвҖІ вҲјP1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,P,0                                            b   (s  , c вҲ’ r1 )
                     (
                                          h                                              i
                                             ПҖ
=Ea1 вҲјПҖ1 (В·|s1 ,c),r1 EsвҖІ вҲјPb1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,P,0 (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r1 ) вҲ’ V2,ПҖP,0   вҖІ
                                                                       b (s , c вҲ’ r1 )

                                                                                                                       )
                                                      (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r1 ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPb1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,P,0 (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r1 )
                                                ПҖ                                            ПҖ
                         + EsвҖІ вҲјP1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,P,0
                                          h                                           i
                                             ПҖ
вүӨEa1 вҲјПҖ1 (В·|s1 ,c),r1 EsвҖІ вҲјPb1 (В·|s1 ,a1 ) V2,P,0 (sвҖІ , c вҲ’ r1 ) вҲ’ V2,ПҖP,0 вҖІ
                                                                       b (s , c вҲ’ r1 ) + H В· E(s,a)вҲјdПҖ
                                                                                                     1,P
                                                                                                         [f1 (s, a)]
                H
                X
вүӨВ·В·В· вүӨ H В·            E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c) [fh (s, a)]
                                   h,P
                h=1

which concludes the proof.

D     P ROOFS FOR A PPENDIX B
D.1       P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.2
                                    j
In the following discussion we use П•h to denote П•h (sjh , ajh ) and (P
                                                                     bh V )(s, iП…, a) to denote

                                         ErвҲјrh (В·|s,a),sвҖІ вҲјPbh (В·|s,a) [V (sвҖІ , iП… вҲ’ r)].

We also use Gt,h denote the filtration generated by {(sjhвҖІ , ajhвҖІ , rjhвҖІ )H      tвҲ’1     t     t      t hвҲ’1
                                                                          hвҖІ =1 }j=1 вҲӘ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ , r hвҖІ )hвҖІ =1 вҲӘ
  t    t
(sh , ah ).
First, note that we have the following concentration lemma:
Lemma D.1. For all h вҲҲ [H], t вҲҲ [T1 ], 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, with probability at 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/4, we have
     tвҲ’1                                                                    3
                                                                               r           !
     X     j
             h t
                      j           j         t     j        j
                                                              i         H   2d       HdT 1
         П•h V h+1 (sh+1 , iП… вҲ’ rh ) вҲ’ Pbh V
                                            h+1 (sh , iП…, ah )  вүӨ OМғ             log         .
     j=1
                                                                           П…          П…Оҙ
                                                                                 (Оӣth )вҲ’1


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The proof is deferred to Appendix D.3. Let E1 denote the event in Lemma D.1.
                                                                               ПҖ
On the other hand, we can further bound the difference between Qh (s, iП…, a) and вҲ’bbh (s, a) +
           вҠӨ
 П•h (s, a) wht (iП…) as follows:
Lemma D.2. For any policy ПҖ, conditioned on E1 , we have for all s вҲҲ S, 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, a вҲҲ
A, h вҲҲ [H], t вҲҲ [T1 ] that
                         вҠӨ          ПҖ
                                                      t
                                                   bh V h+1 вҲ’ V ПҖh+1 (s, iП…, a) + Оҫht (s, iП…, a),
вҲ’bbh (s, a) + П•h (s, a) wht (iП…) вҲ’ Qh (s, iП…, a) = P

where |Оҫht (s, iП…, a)| вүӨ ОІ П•h (s, a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 .
                                                 h


The proof of Lemma D.2 follows the same arguments in the proof of Jin et al. (2020)[Lemma B.4]
and thus is omitted here.
                                                                        t
With Lemma D.2, we can prove that the estimated Q function Q is optimistic:
Lemma D.3. Conditioned on event E1 , we have for all s вҲҲ S, 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, h вҲҲ [H], t вҲҲ [T1 ]
       t             вҲ—                 вҲ—                  ПҖ
that V h (s, iП…) вүӨ V h (s, iП…) where V h (s, iП…) = supПҖ V h (s, iП…).

The proof is deferred to Appendix D.4.
Combining Lemma D.2 and Lemma D.3,we can bound the regret of Algorithm 2 as follows:
Lemma D.4. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, we have
                   T1
                                                             r             !
                  X     et
                        ПҖ                 вҲ—                    H 5 d3 T1 О№
                      V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ OМғ                 ,
                  t=1
                                                                   П…3

where О№ = log2 HdT
                П…Оҙ .
                   1



The proof is deferred to Appendix D.5. Denote the event in Lemma D.4 by E2 .
                                            5 3
Lemma D.4 implies that by setting T1 = OМғ HП…3dОө2 О№ , we have conditioned on event E2 that

                                             et
                                             ПҖ            вҲ—
                                min V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ Оө/2.
                               tвҲҲ[T1 ]


                                 et
                                 ПҖ                                                                H 2 log
                                                                                                            T1
Let t1 denote arg mintвҲҲ[T1 ] V 1 (s1 , i1 П…). Then on the other hand, by setting T2 = OМғ              Оө2
                                                                                                             Оҙ
                                                                                                                  ,
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2 we have that for all t вҲҲ [T1 ],
                                         t
                                     ПҖ
                                     e                 et
                                                       ПҖ
                                  Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ Оө/4.

                                                                    t
                                                            ПҖ
                                                            e
Denote the above event by E3 and let ПҖ
                                     e denote arg minПҖet Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…). Then conditioned on event
                                     b
E2 вҲ© E3 , we have
                                      t1
  bПҖ
   e                 вҲ—                  ПҖ
                                        e                 вҲ—                 e t1
                                                                            ПҖ                 вҲ—              Оө 3
Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ Vb 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) + вүӨ Оө.
                                                                                                             4 4

D.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.3

First, we show that Algorithm 3 can achieve sublinear regret in the discretized MDP M. Let
  вҲ—
(ПҖdis , iвҲ— ) := arg maxПҖвҲҲО Aug ,0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ, iП…)). Note that from (4) we have
                                             вҲ—            ПҖвҲ—
                                 CVaRП„ = iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,P
                                                        dis             вҲ—
                                                            вҲ— ,0 (s1 , i П…).


This implies that
        вҲ—
  CVaRП„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…))


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                ПҖвҲ—                                                                       вҲ—
                                                                                       ПҖdis

= iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) + iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,P                   вҲ—
                                                                                            вҲ— ,0 (s1 , i П…)


                       ПҖвҲ—

 вҲ’ iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…)
                ПҖвҲ—
                                                                          ПҖвҲ—                                 вҲ—
                                                                                                            ПҖdis

= iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) + П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вҲ’ V 1,P                 вҲ—
                                                                                                                 вҲ— ,0 (s1 , i П…)

                                                                                                                     (22)

                                                вҲ—
Suppose in k-th iteration, CVaR-LSVI returns Vb 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) for the initial budget iвҲ— П…. Then
from Theorem B.2, we know
                                   ПҖвҲ—                             вҲ—                       П„
                                 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вүҘ Vb 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вҲ’ Пө.
                                                                                          8
This implies that
                                     ПҖвҲ—                                               вҲ—                  Пө
                     iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вүӨ iвҲ— П… вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 Vb 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) +
                                                                                                         8
                                                                                  вҲ—             Пө
                                                          вүӨ ik вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 Vb 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , ik П…) +
                                                                                                8
                                                                        ПҖk                      Пө
                                                          вүӨ ik вҲ’ П„ вҲ’1 V 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , ik П…) + ,                   (23)
                                                                                                6
where the last step is due to Theorem 5.1.
On the other hand, from (2) we know
                                                                             ПҖk
                                CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) вүҘ ik вҲ’ V 1,P вҲ— ,0 (s1 , ik П…).                                 (24)

Plug Equation (23) and (24) into (22), we have
                                              k
            вҲ—                k k         вҲ’1     ПҖ               k          ПҖk              k
      CVaRП„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ , i П…)) вүӨП„           V 1,P вҲ— ,0 (s1 , i П…) вҲ’ V 1,Pbk ,bbk (s1 , i П…)
                                                 ПҖвҲ—                             вҲ—
                                                                               ПҖdis
                                                                                                      Пө
                                        + П„ вҲ’1 V 1,disPbk ,bbk (s1 , iвҲ— П…) вҲ’ V 1,P              вҲ—
                                                                                    вҲ— ,0 (s1 , i П…)  +
                                                                                                       6
Then, following the same arguments in the proof of Theorem 4.1, we can obtain
       K
       X         вҲ—
                                                            вҲҡ   p             KПө
             CVaRП„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) вүӨ OМғ П„ вҲ’1 H 3 Ad2 K В· log (|F|/Оҙ) +   .                                   (25)
                                                                               6
       k=1


Next we bridge CVaRП„ and CVaRП„ via Proposition B.1. Note that from Proposition B.1 we have
       K                                                K
       X                                                X                вҲ—                                   KHП…
             CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) вүӨ                  CVaRП„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) +                   .   (26)
                                                                                                              П„
       k=1                                              k=1


Combining (25) and (26), we have
    K
    X                                                     вҲҡ                 KПө KHП…
          CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) вүӨ OМғ П„ вҲ’1 H 3 Ad2 K В· log (|F|/Оҙ) +
                                                              p
                                                                               +   .
                                                                             6   П„
    k=1

Substituting the values of the parameters, we will obtain
                                          K
                                   1 X
                                       CVaRвҲ—П„ вҲ’ CVaRП„ (R(ПҖ k , ik П…)) вүӨ Пө.
                                   K
                                       k=1

                                                 k k   K
                                   policy of {(ПҖ
This implies that the uniformly mixed           , i П…)}k=1 is Пө-optimal. The total number of
                                                              |F |
                                              H 7 A2 d4 log
collected trajectories is KH = OМғ                   П„ 2 Пө2
                                                               Оҙ
                                                                     .


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, we discuss the computational complexity. The MLE oracle is called KH times. For the rest of
the computation, the cost is dominated by running CVaR-LSVI in Line 17 of Algorithm 3. In CVaR-
LSVI, we compute (Оӣth )вҲ’1 by the Sherman-Morrison formula, then the computational complexity of
                                                                    2
CVaR-LSVI is dominated by Line 6 of Algorithm 2, which requires O( d П…AT
                                                                       2
                                                                         1
                                                                           ) time per step and leads
                                                        d2 AH 2 T 2
to a total computational complexity of O( П…3 1 ) for each call of CVaR-LSVI. Note that CVaR-
LSVI is called totally KH
                        П… times in Algorithm 3 and thus the total computation cost of Algorithm 3
is
                                                                         !
                             Kd2 AH 3 T12          H 29 A3 d12 log |FОҙ |

                         O                  = OМғ                           .
                                  П…4                     П„ 16 Пө16

D.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA D.1

The proof largely follows the proof of Jin et al. (2020)[Lemma B.3]. We first bound wht (iП…). Note
that we have for any vector v вҲҲ Rd where d := d(1 + вҢҲ1/П…вҢү) that
                                        tвҲ’1
                     вҠӨ
                                        X                     j
                 v       wht (iП…)   вүӨ         v вҠӨ (Оӣth )вҲ’1 П•h В· H
                                        j=1
                                      vпЈ«                   пЈ¶пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                                      u
                                      u XtвҲ’1                   tвҲ’1        вҠӨ
                                                               X      j          j
                                    вүӨ tпЈӯ     v вҠӨ (Оӣt )вҲ’1 v пЈё пЈӯ       П•h (Оӣt )вҲ’1 П•h пЈё В· H
                                      u
                                                          h                         h
                                              j=1                      j=1
                                                        v
                                                 r      u tвҲ’1
                                                     t u X j вҠӨ              j
                                    вүӨ HвҲҘvвҲҘ             В·t      П•h (Оӣth )вҲ’1 П•h .
                                                     О»    j=1

                                                 PtвҲ’1   j  вҠӨ t вҲ’1 j
Note that with Lemma E.6 we have                  j=1 П•h    (Оӣh ) П•h вүӨ d and therefore we can obtain that
for all v вҲҲ Rd
                                                                        s
                                                                             td
                                                 v вҠӨ wht (iП…) вүӨ HвҲҘvвҲҘ            ,
                                                                             О»
                                              q
                                                  td
which implies that вҲҘwht (iП…)вҲҘ вүӨ H                 О».

To utilize Lemma E.7, we further need to bound the covering number of the class of estimated value
                                                      t
functions. Fix h вҲҲ [H], it can be observed that all V h (В·, В·) where t вҲҲ [T1 ] belongs to the following
function class V parametrized by w and A:
          n                                  вҠӨ                                             o
            V | V (s, iП…) = min Clip[вҲ’H,H] П•h (s, a)w(iП…) вҲ’ bbh (s, a) вҲ’ вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘA ,
                             a
                        q
where вҲҘw(iП…)вҲҘ вүӨ H td                      2
                          О» and вҲҘAвҲҘ вүӨ ОІ /О». Then for any V1 (parametrized by w1 , A1 ) and V2
(parametrized by w2 , A2 ), we know
         sup             |V1 (s, iП…) вҲ’ V2 (s, iП…)|
   sвҲҲS,0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү
                                             вҠӨ
         вүӨ               sup              П•h (s, a)(w1 (iП…) вҲ’ w2 (iП…)) вҲ’ (вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘA1 вҲ’ вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘA2 )
             sвҲҲS,aвҲҲA,0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү
                                         вҠӨ
         вүӨ           sup                П• (w1 (iП…) вҲ’ w2 (iП…)) + sup вҲҘП•вҲҘA1 вҲ’A2
             вҲҘП•вҲҘвүӨ1,0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү                                           вҲҘП•вҲҘвүӨ1
                                                  p
         вүӨ       sup         вҲҘw1 (iП…) вҲ’ w2 (iП…)вҲҘ + вҲҘA1 вҲ’ A2 вҲҘF .
             0вүӨiвүӨвҢҲH/П…вҢү


This indicates that the covering number of V with respect to в„“вҲһ norm can be upper bounded by the
covering number of w and A. More specifically, let N (Пө) denote the covering number of V with


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


respect to в„“вҲһ norm, then we have
                                                             Hd2

                                      H      HT1 d                   HT1 d
                 log N (Пө) вүӨ O d(d + ) log            вүӨO         log         .
                                      П…        ПөО»             П…2     ПөО»П…
Substituting the above bound into Lemma E.7 concludes the proof.

D.4       P ROOF OF L EMMA D.3
                                                                                                                  t
The proof is conducted via induction. For the base case, when h = H + 1, we have V H+1 (s, iП…) =
  вҲ—
V H+1 (s, iП…) = iП… for all s вҲҲ S and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү.
                                t                   вҲ—
Then suppose we have V h+1 (s, iП…) вүӨ V H+1 (s, iП…) for all s вҲҲ S and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү. For any
                                              t                        t                вҲ—
s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, if Qh (s, iП…, a) = вҲ’H, then Qh (s, iП…, a) вүӨ Qh (s, iП…, a)
naturally holds. Otherwise, from Lemma D.2 we know
  t               вҲ—                                     вҠӨ                                 вҲ—
Qh (s, iП…, a) вҲ’ Qh (s, iП…, a) вүӨ вҲ’bbh (s, a) + П•h (s, a) wht (iП…) вҲ’ ОІ П•h (s, a) (Оӣt )вҲ’1 вҲ’ Qh (s, iП…, a)
                                                                                 h
                                    t
                              вүӨ P bh V h+1 вҲ’ V ПҖh+1 (s, iП…, a) вүӨ 0.
                           t                  вҲ—
Therefore we have Qh (s, iП…, a) вүӨ Qh (s, iП…, a) for all s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү, which
           t             вҲ—
leads to V h (s, iП…) вүӨ V h (s, iП…) for all s вҲҲ S and 0 вүӨ i вүӨ вҢҲH/П…вҢү as well. This concludes our
proof.

D.5       P ROOF OF L EMMA D.4
                                                        вҲ—                        t
First note that from Lemma D.3 we have V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүҘ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) for all t вҲҲ [T1 ]. This indicates
that conditioned on E1 ,
                   T1                                                 T1
                   X       et
                           ПҖ                  вҲ—                       X        et
                                                                               ПҖ                     t
                         V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ                 V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…).             (27)
                   t=1                                                 t=1

Fix t вҲҲ [T1 ] and then we know
                      et
                      ПҖ                   t                       et
                                                                  ПҖ                             t
                   V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) = Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вҲ’ Q1 (s1 , i1 П…, at1 ).
      t                                            et
                                                   ПҖ                                 t
If Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) = H, then we know Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вҲ’ Q1 (s1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вүӨ 0. Otherwise, we have
   et                                           et
   ПҖ                       t                    ПҖ
                                                                                         D t             E     t
Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вҲ’ Q1 (s1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вүӨ Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) + bbh (st1 , at1 ) вҲ’ П•1 , wht (i1 П…) + ОІвҲҘП•1 вҲҘ(Оӣt1 )вҲ’1 .
Then with Lemma D.2, we know
     et
                                                     ПҖet
     ПҖ                      t
                                                  bh V 2 вҲ’ V t2 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) + 2ОІвҲҘП•t1 вҲҘ(Оӣt )вҲ’1 . (28)
   Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вҲ’ Q1 (s1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вүӨ P                                            1

     t
                          PhвҲ’1 t                  t H   T1
Let ih П… denote i1 П… вҲ’ hвҖІ =1 rh and let {(О¶h )h=1 }t=1 denote the following random variable:
       пЈұ
       пЈІ 0, if there exists some hвҖІ вүӨ h s.t. Qt вҖІ (st вҖІ , it вҖІ П…, at вҖІ ) = H,
 t                                                    h  h
                                                           eht     h
О¶h :=           ПҖet
              Pbh V h+1 вҲ’ V th+1 (st , it П…, at ) вҲ’ V ПҖh+1                            t
                                                                (st , it П…) вҲ’ V 2 (st , it П…) , otherwise.
                                               h   h         h                           h+1   h+1          h+1       h+1
       пЈі
                                                                                                 T1
It can be easily observed that О¶ht вҲҲ Gt,h+1 and E[О¶ht |Gt,h ] = 0, which means that {(О¶ht )Hh=1 }t=1 is a
                                                 t
martingale with respect to {Gt,h }. Then when Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) Мё= H, Equation (28) is equivalent to
          et
          ПҖ                     t                           et
                                                            ПҖ                            t                        t
      Q1 (st1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вҲ’ Q1 (s1 , i1 П…, at1 ) вүӨ V 2 (st2 , it2 П…) вҲ’ V 2 (st2 , it2 П…) + О¶ht + 2ОІвҲҘП•1 вҲҘ(Оӣt1 )вҲ’1 .
                                                                  t
Repeat such expansion till a step ht such that Qht (stht , itht П…, atht ) = H or ht = H + 1. Then we
have
                                      H           t вҲ’1
                                                 hX                       H           H
     et
     ПҖ                t               X                  t                X           X   t
  V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ   О¶ht + 2ОІ       вҲҘП•h вҲҘ(Оӣth )вҲ’1 вүӨ       О¶ht + 2ОІ   вҲҘП•h вҲҘ(Оӣth )вҲ’1 .
                                         h=1                     h=1                           h=1        h=1
                                                                                                                            (29)

                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore combining (28) and (29), we know
                T1                                               T1 X
                                                                    H                  T1 X
                                                                                          H
                X       et
                        ПҖ                    вҲ—                   X                     X            t
                      V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вҲ’ V 1 (s1 , i1 П…) вүӨ                   О¶ht + 2ОІ             вҲҘП•h вҲҘ(Оӣth )вҲ’1 .           (30)
                t=1                                              t=1 h=1               t=1 h=1

For the first term of the RHS of (30), from Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, we have with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2 that
                                    XT1 X H         q
                                              t             1
                                             О¶h вүӨ 2H T1 HО№ 2 .
                                              t=1 h=1

For the second term, we can utilize the elliptical potential lemma (Lemma E.8 in Appendix E),
which yields
                                            v                                s
           T1 X
              H                   H p       u T1 H                                    1
          X         t             X         u  X   X     t             t       2dT1 О№ 2
                  вҲҘП•h вҲҘ(Оӣth )вҲ’1 вүӨ     T1 В· t          (П•h )вҠӨ (Оӣth )вҲ’1 П•h вүӨ H            .
          t=1                                  t=1
                                                                                 П…
                 h=1                     h=1                          h=1

Plug the above two inequalities into (30) leads to the result in Lemma D.4.

E    AUXILIARY L EMMAS
Lemma E.1 (MLE guarantees). For any fixed (h, k) вҲҲ [H] Г— [K], with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
we have that
                                                                                     log(|F|/Оҙ)
          EsвҲј{0.5ПҒkh +0.5О·hk },aвҲјU (A) [вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ21 ] вүӨ О¶, О¶ :=            . (31)
                                                                                          k
Using union bound, a direct corollary is: with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ the following holds for all
h вҲҲ [H], k вҲҲ [K]
                                                                                       log(|F|Hk/Оҙ)
    EsвҲј{0.5ПҒkh +0.5О·hk },aвҲјU (A) [вҲҘPbhk (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвҲ— (В·|s, a)вҲҘ21 ] вүӨ 0.5О¶ k , О¶ k :=                .     (32)
                                                                                             k
Lemma E.2 (Concentration of the bonus term). Set О»k = Оҳ(d log(kH|F|/Оҙ)) at the k-th episode.
Define
                                                                             X
    ОЈПҒkh ,П• = kEsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) [П•(s, a)П•вҠӨ (s, a)] + О»k I, ОЈ       b k,П• =           П•(s, a)П•вҠӨ (s, a) + О»k I.
                                                                                       s,aвҲҲDh
                                                             +
With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have for any k вҲҲ N , h вҲҲ [H], П• вҲҲ ОҰ,

                            вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ(ОЈb k )вҲ’1 = Оҳ   вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                    h,П•                                ПҒk ,П•
                                                                                        h

Lemma E.3 (One-step back inequality for the learned model). Let ПҖ = {ПҖh : S Г— [0, H] 7вҶ’
вҲҶ(A)}hвҲҲ[H] denote any policy on the augmented state. Fix an initial budget c1 вҲҲ [0, 1]. Take any
g : S Г— A 7вҶ’ R such that вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B. We condition on the event where the MLE guarantee (32):
                                             EsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) [fhk (s, a)] вүІ О¶ k
holds for any h вҲҲ [H]. For h = 1, we have that
                                                                 q
                             E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(s, a)] вүӨ          A В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)]
                                        bk
                                      1,P

For any h + 1 вҲҲ {2, В· В· В· , H} and policy ПҖ, we have that

  E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
              h+1,P bk
                                                    q
вүӨE(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                         kA В· EsвҖІ вҲјО·h+1
                                                                     k   ,aвҖІ вҲјU (A)     [g 2 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + B 2 О»k d + kB 2 О¶ k
                bk
              h,P                    ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                               bk
                                      h         h
                                                                                                                           (33)
where ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П•bk = kEsвҲјПҒkh ,aвҲјU (A) [П•bkh (П•bkh )вҠӨ ] + О»k I.
          h            h


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. For h = 1, we have that
                                                         s
                                                                       d1 (s)ПҖ1 (a|s, c1 )
                  E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(s, a)] вүӨ                 max                          EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)]
                                   bk
                                 1,P                            s,a       ПҒk1 (s)U (a)
                                                         q
                                                     вүӨ        A В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)]

                                                                                                     ПҖi
                                                                                              PkвҲ’1
where we use the fact that d1 = ПҒk1 . Recall that ПҒkh (s) = k1                                  i=0 dh,ci (s) is the (expected) occu-
                                                                 (ПҖ,c )
pancy of any s вҲҲ S in dataset Dh . Let Пүh,P 1 : S Г— A 7вҶ’ вҲҶ([0, 1]) denote the distribution of the
remaining budget ch at timestep h conditioned on any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A when rolling policy ПҖ in an
MDP with transition kernel P and the initial budget c1 . For any h вҲҲ {1, В· В· В· , H вҲ’ 1}, we have that
      E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
                       bk
                   h+1,P

  =E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) EsвҖІ вҲјPbk (В·|s,a) EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
             bk           h                bk                  h+1
           h,P                           h,P
                                  Z
                       k        вҠӨ      k вҖІ                                                  вҖІ вҖІ      вҖІ
  =E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) П•h (s, a)
                     b                ПҲh (s ) В· EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(s , a )]ds
                                      b
             bk                                            bk              h+1
           h,P                      S                   h,P
                   "
  вүӨE                  bk
           (ПҖ,c1 ) вҲҘП• (s, a)вҲҘ вҲ’1
        (s,a)вҲјd                  h             ОЈ k       bk
                   bk
                 h,P                            ПҒ Г—U (A),П•
                                                 h         h

                                     Z                                                                                                                   #
                             В·            ПҲbhk (sвҖІ ) В· EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ             вҖІ
                                                                                                                вҖІ
                                                                                                           [g(s , a )]ds    вҖІ       вҖІ
                                                                  bk                   h+1 (В·|s ,cвҲ’r)
                                      S                         h,P                                                                     ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П•bk
                                                                                                                                          h         h


where the last inequality is because of CS inequality. For any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, we have that
   Z                                                                     2
      ПҲbhk (sвҖІ )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]dsвҖІ
                           bk                         h+1
       S                 h,P                                                                   ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П•bk
                                                                                                    h          h
   Z                                                                  вҠӨ n                                               o
        k вҖІ                                                 вҖІ вҖІ    вҖІ
вүӨ      ПҲh (s )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(s , a )]ds
       b                                                                   В· kEsМғвҲјПҒkh ,aМғвҲјU (A) [П•bkh (П•bkh )вҠӨ ] + О»k I
                    bk                   h+1
     S            h,P
      Z
           k вҖІ                                                 вҖІ вҖІ      вҖІ
   В·     ПҲh (s )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(s , a )]ds
          b
                         bk                h+1
       S             h,P
                  " Z                                                                                       2 #
                               k   вҖІ вҠӨ   k                                                   вҖІ   вҖІ       вҖІ
вүӨk В· E k   sМғвҲјПҒh ,aМғвҲјU (A)   ПҲb (s ) П•b (sМғ, aМғ)E
                                           h           (ПҖ,c1 )
                                                        h             вҖІcвҲјПү      вҖІ        [g(s , a )]ds
                                                                                  (В·|s,a),r,a вҲјПҖh+1 (В·|s ,cвҲ’r)
                                                                                                                 + B 2 О»k d
                                      S                                     bk
                                                                          h,P


where we use the assumption
                     X
                    вҲҘ    EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ                                 вҖІ        [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]вҲҘ вүӨ B,
                                                   bk                        h+1 (В·|s ,cвҲ’r)
                                                 h,P
                                     aвҖІ

and                                                  Z                                    вҲҡ
                                                            вҲҘПҲbhk (sвҖІ )y(sвҖІ )dsвҖІ вҲҘ2 вүӨ          d,
                                                        S

for any y : S 7вҶ’ [0, 1]. Note that ПҲbhk (sвҖІ )П•bkh (sМғ, aМғ) = Pbhk (sвҖІ |sМғ, aМғ). Further, we derive that
                        " Z                                                                            2 #
                              k вҖІ                                                           вҖІ вҖІ     вҖІ
  k В· EsМғвҲјПҒkh ,aМғвҲјU (A)     Ph (s |sМғ, aМғ)EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(s , a )]ds
                            b                                                                              + B 2 О»k d
                                                                    bk                    h+1
                                      S                           h,P
                             "                                                                                         2 #
                                                                                                                    вҖІ           вҖІ
вүӨk В· EsМғвҲјПҒkh ,aМғвҲјU (A)               EsвҖІ вҲјPhвҲ— (В·|sМғ,aМғ) EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ            (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r)
                                                                                                           [g(s , a )]     + B 2 О»k d + kB 2 О¶ k
                                                                   bk                   h+1
                                                                 h,P

                                                                                                                        2
вүӨk В· EsМғвҲјПҒkh ,aМғвҲјU (A),sвҖІ вҲјPhвҲ— (В·|sМғ,aМғ) EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) (В·|s,a),r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ                      вҖІ             [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + B 2 О»k d + kB 2 О¶ k
                                                           bk                     h+1 (В·|s ,cвҲ’r)
                                                         h,P

вүӨkA В· EsМғвҲјПҒkh ,aМғвҲјU (A),sвҖІ вҲјPhвҲ— (В·|sМғ,aМғ),aвҖІ вҲјU (A) [g 2 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + B 2 О»k d + kB 2 О¶ k


                                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that sМғ вҲј ПҒkh , aМғ вҲј U (A), sвҖІ вҲј PhвҲ— (В·|sМғ, aМғ) is equivalent to sвҖІ вҲј О·h+1
                                                                            k
                                                                                . Therefore,
  E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
              h+1,P bk
                    пЈ®                                                                                                                                  пЈ№
                                                             Z X
вүӨE(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) пЈ°вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                                     ПҲbhk (sвҖІ )Ec,rh [ПҖh+1 (aвҖІ |sвҖІ , c вҲ’ rh )] g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )dsвҖІ
                 пЈҜ                                                                                                                                     пЈә
                                                                                                                                                       пЈ»
                 bk
               h,P                         ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                                     bk
                                                                S aвҖІ
                                            h          h
                                                                                                                                      ОЈПҒk Г—U (A),П•bk
                                                           q                                                                              h        h


вүӨE(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) вҲҘП•bkh (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                              kA В· EsвҖІ вҲјО·h+1
                                                                          k
                                                                                           2 вҖІ вҖІ         2 k      2 k
                                                                              ,aвҖІ вҲјU (A) [g (s , a )] + B О» d + kB О¶
                 bk
               h,P                         ПҒk Г—U (A),П•
                                                     bk
                                            h          h

which concludes the proof.
Lemma E.4 (One-step back inequality for the true model). Let ПҖ = {ПҖh : S Г— [0, H] 7вҶ’
вҲҶ(A)}hвҲҲ[H] denote any policy on the augmented state. Fix an initial budget c1 вҲҲ [0, 1]. Take
any g : S Г— A 7вҶ’ R such that вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B. Then for h = 1, we have that
                                               q
                    E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(s, a)] вүӨ A В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)]
                                            1


For h + 1 вҲҲ {2, В· В· В· , H}, we have that
                                                                                         q
E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(s , a )] вүӨ E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                           вҖІ   вҖІ
                                                                                             kA В· EsвҖІ вҲјПҒkh+1 ,aвҖІ вҲјU (A)   [g 2 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + О»k dB 2
            h+1                                      h                          ПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                                                 h



Proof. For h = 1, we have that
                            s
                              d1 (s)ПҖ1 (a|s, c1 )                               q
E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(s, a)] вүӨ        k
                                                  EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)] вүӨ A В· EsвҲјПҒk1 ,aвҲјU (A) [g 2 (s, a)]
        1                        ПҒ1 (s)U (a)
      (ПҖ,c )             (ПҖ,c )
Let Пүh 1 := Пүh,P вҲ—1 denote the distribution of the remaining budget ch at timestep h conditioned
on any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A when rolling policy ПҖ in the (true) environment and the initial budget c1 . For
h + 1 вҲҲ {2, В· В· В· , H}, by CS inequality, we derive that
   E(sвҖІ ,aвҖІ )вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
                   h+1

 =E(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) ,sвҖІ вҲјP вҲ— (В·|s,a) EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
          h                                            h+1
                   пЈ® h                 h
                                                                                                                                         пЈ№
                                            Z
 вүӨE(s,a)вҲјd(ПҖ,c1 ) пЈ°вҲҘП•вҲ—h (s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                ПҲhвҲ— (sвҖІ )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]dsвҖІ                             пЈ»
               h                            ПҒk ,П•вҲ—                          h                  h+1
                                             h           S                                                                     ОЈПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                                                                                                  h


For any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, we obtain that
       Z                                                              2
           ПҲhвҲ— (sвҖІ )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]dsвҖІ
                                   h             h+1
           S                                                                             ОЈПҒk ,П•вҲ—
                                                                                           h
        Z                                                              вҠӨ n                                    o
            вҲ— вҖІ                                          вҖІ вҖІ        вҖІ
    вүӨ      ПҲh (s )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(s , a )]ds          kE(sМғ,aМғ)вҲјПҒkh [П•вҲ—h (П•вҲ—h )вҠӨ ] + О»k I
                        h               h+1
         S
         Z
      В·     ПҲhвҲ— (sвҖІ )EcвҲјПү(ПҖ,c1 ) ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (В·|sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]dsвҖІ
                                       h             h+1
               S
    вүӨkE(sМғ,aМғ)вҲјПҒkh ,sвҖІ вҲјPhвҲ— (В·|sМғ,aМғ) EcвҲјПүhПҖ ,r,aвҖІ вҲјПҖh+1 (aвҖІ ,sвҖІ ,cвҲ’r) [g 2 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + О»k dB 2
    вүӨkA В· EsвҖІ вҲјПҒkh+1 ,aвҖІ вҲјU (A) [g 2 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] + О»k dB 2

where the last inequality holds by the fact that (sМғ, aМғ) вҲј ПҒkh , sвҖІ вҲј PhвҲ— (sМғ, aМғ) is equivalent to sвҖІ вҲј ПҒkh+1
and importance sampling. Therefore, we conclude the proof.

Lemma E.5 (Simulation lemma for risk-neutral RL). Let M       c and M be to MDPs with the same
                                                                                         rh , Pbh )H
state and action spaces, but they have different reward and transition functions, i.e., (b         h=1 and


                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(rh , Ph )H                                                   вҲ’ вҲҶ(A)}hвҲҲ[H] , denote {Vh,ПҖM
          h=1 , respectively. Consider any policy ПҖ = {ПҖh : S вҶ’
                                                                                           H
                                                                                         c}h=1
and {VhПҖ }H
          h=1 be the value functions. Then we have that
                             H
                             X                                         D                                    E
V1,ПҖM          ПҖ
    c(s1 ) вҲ’ V1 (s1 ) =
                                                                                                     ПҖ
                                   E(s,a)вҲјdПҖ c rbh (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a) + Pbh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ Ph (В·|s, a), Vh+1 (В·)
                                           h,M
                             h=1

Equivalently, we have that
                             H
                             X                                        D                                       E
V1,ПҖM          ПҖ
    c(s1 ) вҲ’ V1 (s1 ) =
                                                                                                    ПҖ
                                   E(s,a)вҲјdПҖh rbh (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a) + Pbh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ Ph (В·|s, a), Vh+1,Mc (В·)
                             h=1

       ПҖ
where VH+1 = VbH+1,M
                   c = 0 (as the episode ends at H).


Proof. Recall that dПҖh (s, a) and dПҖh,M
                                      c(s, a) are the occupancy measures of any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A at

timestep h вҲҲ [H] when executing policy ПҖ in M and M,    c respectively. By definition, we have that

    V1,ПҖM          ПҖ
        c(s1 ) вҲ’ V1 (s1 )
                                                                                                                    !
    X                                               X
=        ПҖ1 (s1 , a) rb1 (s1 , a) вҲ’ r1 (s1 , a) +         Pb1 (sвҖІ |s1 , a)Vb2,ПҖM
                                                                               c (sвҖІ
                                                                                     ) вҲ’ P 1 (sвҖІ
                                                                                                 |s1 , a)V2
                                                                                                           ПҖ вҖІ
                                                                                                            (s )
     a                                              sвҖІ
            h                        D                                   E D                                    Ei
=E(s,a)вҲјdПҖ c rb1 (s, a) вҲ’ r1 (s, a) + Pb1 (В·|s, a), Vb2,ПҖM (В·) вҲ’ V 2
                                                                    ПҖ
                                                                      (В·) + Pb1 (В·|s, a) вҲ’ P 1 (В·|s, a), V2
                                                                                                           ПҖ
                                                                                                             (В·)
             1,M
                                                         c
           H
           X                h                        D                                     Ei
                                                                                   ПҖ
=В·В·В· =           E(s,a)вҲјdПҖ c rbh (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a) + Pbh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ Ph (В·|s, a), Vh+1 (В·)
                          h,M
           h=1

Equivalently, we have that
 V1,ПҖM           ПҖ
     c(s1 ) вҲ’ V1 (s1 )
            h                       D                                  E D                                     Ei
=E(s,a)вҲјdПҖ1 rb1 (s, a) вҲ’ r1 (s, a) + P1 (В·|s, a), Vb2,ПҖM
                                                       c (В·) вҲ’ V2
                                                                 ПҖ
                                                                   (В·)  +  b1 (В·|s, a) вҲ’ P1 (В·|s, a), Vb ПҖ (В·)
                                                                           P                            2,M
                                                                                                          c
           H
           X               h                        D                                         Ei
                                                                                   ПҖ
=В·В·В· =           E(s,a)вҲјdПҖh rbh (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a) + Pbh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ Ph (В·|s, a), Vbh+1,Mc (В·)
           h=1

which concludes the proof.
                                     Pt     j  j вҠӨ            d
Lemma E.6. Let Оӣt = О»I +               j=1 П• (П• ) where П•i вҲҲ R , О» > 0, d > 0, then we have

                                              t
                                              X   j       j
                                                (П• )вҠӨ ОӣвҲ’1
                                                       t П• вүӨ d.
                                              j=1


Proof. Please refer to (Jin et al., 2020, Lemma D.1).
                                                                                        вҢҲH/П…вҢү
Lemma E.7. Let {xj }вҲһ
                    j=1 be a stochastic process on the space (S, {iП…}i=0                        ) with corresponding
filtration {Gj }вҲһ              вҲһ          d
                j=0 . Let {П•j }j=0 be an R -valued stochastic process where П•j вҲҲ GjвҲ’1 , and вҲҘП•j вҲҘ вүӨ
                     PtвҲ’1       вҠӨ
1. Let Оӣt = О»I + j=1 П•j П•j . Then for any Оҙ > 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for all t вүҘ 0,
and any V вҲҲ V so that supx |V (x)| вүӨ H, we have:
                                                    2
          tвҲ’1
                                                                                                    8t2 Пө2

          X                                                      2       d       t+О»         NПө
                П•j V (xj ) вҲ’ E[V (xj )|GjвҲ’1 ]             вүӨ 4H             log         + log      +        ,
          j=1
                                                                         2        О»          Оҙ        О»
                                                    ОӣвҲ’1
                                                     t


where NПө is the Пө-covering number of V with respect to the в„“вҲһ -norm supx |V (x) вҲ’ V вҖІ (x)|.

Proof. Please refer to (Jin et al., 2020, Lemma D.4).


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma E.8. Suppose П•t вҲҲ Rd and вҲҘП•t вҲҘ вүӨ 1 for all t вүҘ 0. For any t вүҘ 0, we define Оӣt =
   Pt    вҠӨ
I + j=1 П•j П•j . Then we have
                                t
                                X      вҠӨ                       det(Оӣt )
                                      П•j ОӣвҲ’1
                                          jвҲ’1 П•j вүӨ 2 log                 .
                                j=1
                                                               det(Оӣ0 )

Proof. Please refer to (Jin et al., 2020, Lemma D.2).


                                                 30
