Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ECHANISTICALLY ANALYZING THE EFFECTS OF FINE -
TUNING ON PROCEDURALLY DEFINED TASKS

 Samyak Jain1,∗ , Robert Kirk2,∗ , Ekdeep Singh Lubana3,4,∗ , Robert P. Dick3 ,
 Hidenori Tanaka4,5 , Edward Grefenstette2 , Tim Rocktäschel2 , David Krueger1
 1
   University of Cambridge, UK
 2
   University College London, UK
 3
   EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
 4
   Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
 5
   Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA



                                              A BSTRACT
         Fine-tuning large pre-trained models has become the de facto strategy for develop-
         ing both task-specific and general-purpose machine learning systems, including
         developing models that are safe to deploy. Despite its clear importance, there
         has been minimal work that explains how fine-tuning alters the underlying ca-
         pabilities learned by a model during pretraining: does fine-tuning yield entirely
         novel capabilities or does it just modulate existing ones? We address this ques-
         tion empirically in synthetic, controlled settings where we can use mechanistic
         interpretability tools (e.g., network pruning and probing) to understand how the
         model’s underlying capabilities are changing. We perform an extensive analysis
         of the effects of fine-tuning in these settings, and show that: (i) fine-tuning rarely
         alters the underlying model capabilities; (ii) a minimal transformation, which we
         call a ‘wrapper’, is typically learned on top of the underlying model capabilities,
         creating the illusion that they have been modified; and (iii) further fine-tuning on
         a task where such “wrapped capabilities” are relevant leads to sample-efficient
         revival of the capability, i.e., the model begins reusing these capabilities after only
         a few gradient steps. This indicates that practitioners can unintentionally remove a
         model’s safety wrapper merely by fine-tuning it on a, e.g., superficially unrelated,
         downstream task. We additionally perform analysis on language models trained on
         the TinyStories dataset to support our claims in a more realistic setup.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on huge, web-crawled text datasets demonstrate extremely
general capabilities (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Bubeck et al., 2023). This has
led to the current paradigm of machine learning, where practitioners often use model adaptation
protocols such as fine-tuning to achieve unprecedented performance on a broad range of downstream
tasks (Raffel et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2022; Reid et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2022).
Relatedly, the generality of an LLM’s capabilities implies the model also learns to exhibit several
undesirable behaviors, e.g., producing sensitive, biased, or toxic outputs in the pursuit of completing a
task (Weidinger et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021; Parrish et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021;
Xu et al., 2021; Welbl et al., 2021). Fine-tuning with different training objectives has again seen
immense usage in mitigating such “unsafe” capabilities, serving as an integral component of current
state-of-the-art alignment approaches like RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022; Go et al., 2023; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022).
Given its ubiquity in the design of both performant and safely deployable models, a natural question
emerges: precisely how does fine-tuning influence a pretrained model’s capabilities to adapt to a
downstream dataset (see Fig. 1)? The generality of an LLM’s capabilities opens the possibility
   ∗
     Co-first authors. samyakjain.cse18@itbhu.ac.in, robert.kirk.3.14@gmail.com,
eslubana@umich.edu.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: How does fine-tuning alter a model’s capabilities? (a) Pretraining on huge, web-crawled
datasets leads to LLMs learning several capabilities that can justifiably process an input. The figure
shows this using an illustrative query, “write a story a 5-year old would understand.” Via careful
prompting, the desired answer can be retrieved, indicating both desired and undesired capabilities
exist in an LLM. (b) Upon fine-tuning, e.g., to avoid use of undesirable capabilities, we hypothesize
that three explanations are possible: (i) a minimal transformation of the original capability is learned,
e.g., a negation of the original capability; (ii) the undesirable capability is deleted altogether; or (iii)
the use of another relevant capability is amplified.

that fine-tuning protocols merely identify the most relevant capabilities and amplify their use for a
given set of inputs, while inhibiting the use of other capabilities. Arguably, results on jailbreaking
alignment-finetuned LLMs via adversarially generated prompts to elicit undesirable behavior support
this hypothesis (Wei et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b); however, a precise study to establish the phenomenology of fine-tuning remains absent from
the literature. It therefore remains unclear how pernicious this problem is.
Motivated by the above, we perform an extensive analysis of the effects of fine-tuning on a pretrained
model’s capabilities in controlled settings where we can use mechanistic interpretability tools to
understand precisely what is happening to the model’s underlying capabilities as it is fine-tuned.
Specifically, we focus on the following two setups: (i) compiled transformer models based on the
Tracr library (Lindner et al., 2023; Weiss et al., 2021), which allows encoding specific computa-
tional programs into a transformer, and (ii) procedurally generated setups involving probabilistic
context-free grammars (PCFGs) (Sipser, 1996; Chomsky, 1956), a formal model designed to capture
syntactic properties of natural and programmatic languages that has recently served as a testbed for
mechanistically understanding language models (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023c; Delétang et al., 2022; Shi
et al., 2022). While Tracr allows us to analyze models with perfectly encoded capabilities, models
trained on PCFGs allow evaluation of the effects of design choices involved in the pretraining pipeline.
Fine-tuning these models via the often-used protocol of further training a pretrained model on a
downstream dataset with a sufficiently small learning rate, we make the following findings.
• Fine-tuning alters pretraining capabilities by minimally transforming them. We find that when
  a relevant pretraining capability is present, the fine-tuned model learns a minimally transformed
  version of it. We call the transformed portion a wrapper.
• Wrappers are generally very localized. We show that the wrappers transforming a model’s
  pretraining capabilities are often extremely localized: e.g., via mere pruning of a few weights or
  neurons, we show the model can start to reuse its pretraining capability and unlearn how to perform
  the downstream task. Relatedly, we find that via a simple linear probe, we are still able to retrieve
  outputs expected from the pretrained model.
• Reverse fine-tuning to “revive” a capability. In scenarios where upon fine-tuning a model
  behaviorally seems to not possesses a capability, we find that further fine-tuning the model on a
  subset of pretraining data leads to a sample-efficient “revival” of the capability. We corroborate
  these results in a realistic setup using the TinyStories dataset (Eldan & Li, 2023).

2    R ELATED W ORK
Fine-tuning in the “foundation model” era. Fine-tuning large-scale foundation models pretrained on
huge datasets, such as LLMs (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) or large vision models (Radford
et al., 2021; Caron et al., 2021), has become the norm in most domains of machine learning.
Accordingly, several fine-tuning methods have been proposed in recent years, e.g., instruction fine-
tuning (Wei et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022b; Askell et al., 2021), parameter-efficient fine-tuning (Houlsby
et al., 2019; Zaken et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), low-rank adaptation (Hu et al., 2021; Pfeiffer


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2020; Lialin et al., 2023), and weight averaging (Gueta et al., 2023; Matena & Raffel, 2022).
The diversity of these protocols makes fine-tuning a general, umbrella term for related methods used
to adapt a pretrained model to elicit its most relevant capabilities. For precision, we restrict this paper
to fine-tuning protocols that continue training of a pretrained model on a smaller downstream dataset
at a learning rate that is often one to three orders of magnitude lower than the average pretraining
one. Such protocols are widely used in practice, e.g., in instruction fine-tuning (Wei et al., 2021).
Understanding fine-tuning. A few papers theoretically analyze fine-tuning (Lampinen & Ganguli,
2018; Tripuraneni et al., 2020; Gerace et al., 2022; Maddox et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022) under
strong assumptions such as relatively simple model classes (e.g., linear functions) or a kernel view of
deep learning, which, as shown by Yang & Hu (2020), trivializes the notion of feature transfer in
fine-tuning / transfer learning (though see Malladi et al. (2023) for a notable exception). Prior works
have also evaluated the effects of fine-tuning via the lens of mode connectivity (Juneja et al., 2022;
Lubana et al., 2022), behavioral evaluations (Lovering et al., 2021), and intrinsic dimensionality of
the loss landscape (Aghajanyan et al., 2020). In contrast, we aim to provide a mechanistic analysis of
how fine-tuning changes model capabilities. Contemporary works by Kotha et al. (2023); Prakash
et al. (2024) claim that fine-tuning is unlikely to alter a model’s capabilities—their results can be seen
as further support for claims made in our work on other experimental setups.
Model interpretability via synthetic tasks. Several recent works have focused on mechanistically
understanding how Transformers learn synthetic language generation tasks, such as learning formal
grammars and board games (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023c; Zhao et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023; Nanda
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022a; Valvoda et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2023; Chan et al.,
2022). The goal of such papers, including ours, is not necessarily to provide accurate explanations
for the success of LLMs, but to develop concrete hypotheses that can be used to develop grounded
experiments or tools for understanding their behavior. For example, in a recent work, Allen-Zhu &
Li (2023a;b) use a synthetically designed setup to develop hypotheses for how “knowledge” about
an entity is stored in a pretrained model, showing such knowledge can often be manipulated via
relatively simple linear transformations. Similarly, Okawa et al. (2023) use a procedurally defined
multimodal dataset to demonstrate that emergent capabilities seen in neural networks are partially
driven by the compositional nature of real world data. In another work, Zhou et al. (2023) utilize
Tracr compiled Transformers to hypothesize and demonstrate that if primitive operations involved in
a formal algorithm can be implemented by a model, length generalization if practically feasible.

3    D EFINING OUR NOTION OF CAPABILITIES
For precision and to motivate our experimental setup, we first discuss the notion of capabilities that we
aim to capture for analyzing how fine-tuning alters a model (see Tab. 2 for a summary of notations).
We use an idealized definition to communicate our primary intuition and emphasize that we do
not expect all capabilities in a pretrained model will act as perfectly as the definition necessitates.
However, for the procedural tasks used in this work, our idealized notion is fairly representative.
Let DPT denote a dataset sampled from a distribution PX over the domain X. We will assume the
domain X can itself be factorized into two domains XI and XD . Correspondingly, a sample x ∈ X
can be divided into a tuple of variables (xi ∈ XI , xd ∈ XD ), where xi identifies which capability a
model should use to process the information encoded by the variable xd . This decomposition captures
the idea that different prompts can force a pretrained LLM to elicit different capabilities, as shown
in Fig. 1. The identifier of capability c is denoted ic . Pretraining on DPT yields us an L-layer model
M(.) : X → Y, where often Y = X for language models. Let Readl (M(.)) denote the action where a
linear layer is trained on intermediate outputs at layer l of model M(.) using DPT . Under this setup,
we define a capability as follows.
Definition 1. (Capability.) Define a surjective map fC : XD → YC , where YC ⊂ Y. Let XC ⊂ X be
a sub-domain s.t. ∀ x ∈ XC , the capability identifier variable is the same, i.e., xi = iC . Then, we say
the model M(.) “possesses a capability C” if for all x ∈ XC , ∃ l ≤ L s.t. Readl (M (x)) = fC (xd ).
A linear readout at an intermediate layer is used in the definition above to emphasize that the notion of
a capability need not correspond to only input–output behavior. Further, the definition is restricted to
a sub-domain of the overall input space, which we argue is important to define a system’s capabilities.
For example, one can claim an 8-bit adder circuit possesses the capability to perform addition, but,
technically, this is true only over the domain of 8-bit numbers; for inputs with more than 8-bit
precision, the circuit will see an overflow error, generating an incorrect but syntactically valid output.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, an LLM may possesses the capability to identify the sentiment of a passage of text in a
specific language, but possibly fail when inputs in a different language are shown. Such structured
failures imply claiming the existence of a capability should account for the input domain.
                                                     FT
We next consider how the fine-tuning distribution PX    over the domain X can interact with capabilities
exhibited in the pretrained model. Our goal here is to capture the fact that a large-scale pretraining
corpora is likely to have non-zero probability under the fine-tuning distribution, i.e., it is unlikely
that a pretrained model will lack any capability relevant to the downstream task. This motivates a
                                                                   FT,E
notion of “relevance of a capability”. Specifically, let DFT ∼ PX       denote the downstream dataset
                               FT,E
used for fine-tuning, where PX is the empirical distribution that captures a subset of the support
                                                FT
with non-zero probability in the distribution PX   .
Definition 2. (Relevance of a Capability.) Assume the capability C in a pretrained model can be
                                                                                                   FT,E
transformed to a map g ◦ fC via fine-tuning on DFT , where |DFT | ≪ |DPT |, such that for all x ∼ PX    ,
                                                         FT
the correct output is produced. Then, if for all x ∼ PX , g ◦ fC yields the correct output, we claim
capability C is strongly relevant to the fine-tuning task; else, we call it weakly relevant.
For example, a weakly relevant capability can
involve the ability to recognize a spurious at-
tribute that the model can learn to exploit to
perform well on the fine-tuning dataset, with-
out enabling generalization to the overall dis-
tribution that the fine-tuning dataset is sampled
from. Meanwhile, a strongly relevant capability
                                                   Figure 2: Capability Relevance. Consider the
is one that extracts a causally relevant feature
                                                   task of completing a passage while maintaining
for that task (see Fig. 2 for an example). When
                                                   its narrative. Herein, the ability to recognize the
a weakly relevant pretraining capability is avail-
                                                   sentiment of a text will be deemed strongly rele-
able, we empirically observe that we can often
                                                   vant and the ability to recognize negative words
identify specific components in the latter half of
                                                   weakly relevant. Such words are often spuriously
the model (e.g., neurons or layers) that seem to
                                                   correlated with a negative sentiment.
implement the transform g in Def. 2. In such
cases, we call g a “wrapper” and g ◦ C a “wrapped capability”. If we intervene on the model by either
removing the wrapper or training it to forget the wrapper, we find the model starts to perform well on
the pretraining task again. In such cases, we say the pretraining capability has been “revived”.

4    B UILDING C APABLE M ODELS : T RACR AND PCFG S

We next describe the setup used in this work for analyzing how fine-tuning alters a model’s capabilities
(see Fig. 3 and App. B). Due to lack of clarity on what capabilities a language model possesses or
what training data it has seen, we primarily focus on procedurally defined setups that enable clear
interpretability. To understand how the relevance of a capability affects fine-tuning, we randomly
embed a predefined spurious attribute into the fine-tuning dataset. Specifically, the attribute correlates
with the features extracted by the pretraining capability—if the attribute is “simple” enough, the
model preferentially exploits it to reduce the downstream loss (Shah et al., 2020; Lubana et al., 2022;
Trivedi et al., 2023).


Figure 3: Experimental setup. We primarily analyze two setups: (i) Tracr “compiled” models
with predefined capabilities and (ii) models trained to learn capabilities defined via a PCFG, follow-
ing Allen-Zhu & Li (2023c). During fine-tuning, we train the model on a dataset DFT that promotes
learning of a capability C ′ . We randomly embed spurious attributes in the fine-tuning dataset that
correlate with features extracted by a pretraining capability C to operationalize capability relevance.

                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Compiled capabilities with Tracr. For a fully controllable system, we use the recently proposed
Tracr library (Lindner et al., 2023). Tracr enables “compiling” a transformer model with a set of pre-
defined computational primitives over a string of characters from the English alphabet. Accordingly,
we define a set of capabilities as a Tracr program and compile it into a Transformer via Tracr (see
App. B.1 for a detailed pipeline). The model is then fine-tuned on a downstream task to which the
compiled capability may either be weakly or strongly relevant. While we analyze two tasks in this
setup, for the main body of the paper, we focus on only the following one.
• Counter: Compile the capability to count the number of occurrences of a token OPT in a string
  into the model; fine-tune to count occurrences of another token OFT . If r(x, O) denotes the number
  of occurrences of a token O in a string x, the spurious correlation is defined by enforcing a constant
  difference in token occurrences, i.e., r(x, OFT ) − r(x, OPT ) = q. See also Alg. 1 and Fig. 12.
As an example, note that in the Counter setup, the model can exploit its pretraining capability and
get the correct output on the fine-tuning dataset by merely adding q to the count of OPT tokens. This
wrapped capability will however perform poorly on samples without the correlation.
Learned capabilities with PCFGs. In this setup, capabilities are “learned”, akin to practical
situations. This allows us to probe the effects of different pretraining design choices, e.g., the
distribution of the pretraining data. Specifically, we follow recent work by Allen-Zhu & Li (2023c)
and train a minGPT model (Karpathy, 2020) via autoregressive training on probabilisitc context-free
grammars (PCFGs), a formal model of language that captures syntactic properties. Broadly, the
data-generating process involves a tree traversal (see Fig. 3), starting from an initial root node and
randomly choosing and navigating a set of production rules of the grammar from start/intermediate
nodes to intermediate/terminal nodes, stopping only when a terminal node is reached. The terminal
nodes reached by all paths starting at the root node will be concatenated to define a string x from
the grammar (see Appendix for more details). We prepend special tokens T and O, called “task
family” and “operand” tokens, that specify a certain task must be performed on the string x; e.g.,
count the occurrences (a task family) of a certain token (operand) in a string. Overall, a specific pair
of the task family and operand tokens instantiates a task in our setup. The ground truth output of
this task and a special token indicating that the output should be produced at the next position are
appended at the end of the string in the training data (see App. B.2 for further details and Fig. 15 for
an example). Our experiments thus involve the following steps. (i) Pretrain a model on a set of task
families. Every sample begins with the task family and operand tokens to specify the task; this ensures
different tasks do not “conflict” (assign different labels to the same input), since, by construction, they
have non-overlapping support. (ii) Fine-tune the model on a task which may or may not have been
included during pretraining. (iii) Evaluate how this fine-tuning affects the model. The data-generating
process involves a uniform prior over task family tokens; meanwhile, the set of operand tokens seen
during pretraining, denoted {OPT }, have a multinomial sampling prior. Specifically, the probability of
sampling a specific token OPT ∈ {OPT } under task T is denoted PT ( OPT ). If this probability is low, the
model may not learn the relevant capability to perform the task specified by the special tokens. While
we analyze the effect of fine-tuning in two broad setups, using a model pretrained on five distinct task
families relating to counting and indexing elements of a string, we focus on only the following one in
the main body of the paper.
• Counter: We intentionally reuse this task to demonstrate the effects of compilation of a capability
  via Tracr versus learning the capability via PCFGs. Specifically, the model is pretrained to learn to
  count the occurrences of tokens from a set of operand tokens {OPT } and is fine-tuned to exclusively
  count occurrences of a token OFT ∈ {OPT }. By making the sampling probability of OFT tokens high
  during pretraining, we can make the model preemptively performant on the downstream task. This
  allows us to model the notion of capability relevance.

5    E XPERIMENTS : M ECHANISTIC ANALYSIS OF F INE - TUNING
We now provide several results indicating that fine-tuning rarely elicits meaningful changes to
pretraining capabilities. To this end, we borrow several protocols commonly used in the field
of mechanistic interpretability for our analysis (see Fig. 4), specifically network pruning (Voita
et al., 2019; Tanaka et al., 2019), attention map visualizations (Serrano & Smith, 2019; Wiegr-
effe & Pinter, 2019; Lai & Tan, 2019), and probing classifiers (Tenney et al., 2019; Voita &
Titov, 2020; Geva et al., 2023; 2022). We use multiple tools for all experiments since each


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tool, individually, is known to suffer from pitfalls (Meister et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2021; Jain &
Wallace, 2019; Belinkov, 2022; Bolukbasi et al., 2021). Demonstrating our claims consistently
hold true across a diverse set of tools improves our conclusions’ robustness to pitfalls of a spe-
cific tool. Additionally, we propose a methodology called reverse fine-tuning (reFT ), wherein
one takes a pretrained model, fine-tunes it on a downstream dataset, and then fine-tunes it again
in the “reverse” direction, i.e., on a dataset sampled from the original pretraining distribution.
We argue if the behavior corresponding to a pretrain-
ing capability is retrieved in a few steps of reFT ,
fine-tuning did not meaningfully alter said capability
(this claim can be formalized using results by Bengio
et al. (2019); Le Priol et al. (2021)).
We primarily focus on the learned capabilities setup
of PCFG counter in the main paper, relegating most
results on compiled capabilities with Tracr to App. G
and other results with PCFGs to App. H—findings
remain consistent across all settings. In the PCFG
counter setup, the model is pretrained, amongst other
tasks, to count occurrences of tokens from the set
{OPT } = {a, b, c} in a given string; during fine-tuning,
the model is trained to count occurrences of OFT = b.
Here, the spurious correlation is defined by enforcing
count of b to be 1 more than that of a. The probability Figure 4: Analysis protocols. We analyze
a datapoint sampled from the train or test fine-tuning how fine-tuning affects a pretrained model’s
dataset contains a spurious correlation is denoted CTr capabilities by (i) reverse Fine-tuning, (ii)
and CTe , respectively. Here, CTr ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0} network pruning, (iii) attention visualization,
and CTe ∈ {0.0, 1.0}. We use three sets of sam- and (iv) probing classifiers. We use (ii)—(iv)
pling probabilities of the task operands in the pre- to show fine-tuning often yields wrapped ca-
training data: PTL = (0.999, 0.001, 0.000), PTM = pabilities. For further evidence, we use (i)
(0.9, 0.1, 0.0), or PTH = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2). These priors and (ii) and find we can “revive” the original
indicate a low/medium/high probability of sampling capabilities, i.e., the model starts perform-
 OFT . We use the following learning rates (LR) for ing well on the pretraining task again. See
fine-tuning, ηM = ηPT/101 and ηS = ηPT/102 , where ηPT App. D for precise details.
is the average pretraining learning rate.

5.1              R ESULTS
Behavioral assessment of fine-tuning. We first evaluate the model’s learning dynamics during
fine-tuning (see Fig. 5 and Tab. 5). When the pretraining prior has low probability of sampling
the token OFT , we see the fine-tuned model performs well only when the spurious correlation is


                               CTr = 0           CTr = 0.5           CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1.0            ηM           ηS
                     CTe = 0              CTe = 1              CTe = 0               CTe = 1               CTe = 0                CTe = 1
           100
            65
            30
Acc. OFT


           100
            65
            30

                 0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K

                                (a) H
                                     T                                   (b) M
                                                                              T                                   (c) LT

Figure 5: Fine-tuning accuracy w.r.t. number of training iterations. We vary the probability of
sampling the token OFT in the pretraining data and the spurious correlation in the fine-tuning datasets.
When the prior is sufficiently high (a, b), we find the model learns to perform well on the downstream
task. Meanwhile, if the prior is low (c), the model learns the downstream task only if a high enough
learning rate is used and the spurious correlation is imperfect. This indicates the ability to extract
information relevant for the downstream task is likely to be exploited during fine-tuning.


                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                      H
                                                                       T             M
                                                                                      T                      LT
           100



Acc. OPT
           65
           30

                 0      2.5K   5K   7.5K 10K        0   2.5K     5K    7.5K 10K           0       2.5K       5K         7.5K 10K        0   2.5K    5K   7.5K 10K
                        (a) CTr = 0, ηM                   (b) CTr = 1, ηM                         (c) CTr = 0, ηS                           (d) CTr = 1, ηS


Figure 6: Impact of sampling prior on the pretraining task’s accuracy as fine-tuning is per-
formed. We plot accuracy on the pretraining task w.r.t. fine-tuning iterations. When the sampling
prior of the OFT is low during pre-training, the pretraining task accuracy quickly plummets, especially
if the spurious correlation is high; having a high sampling prior mitigates this behavior. This indicates
pretraining capabilities are affected the most when they are weakly relevant.
                                                CTr = 0             CTr = 0.5                 CTr = 0.8                        CTr = 1.0
                                    CTe = 0                      CTe = 1                          CTe = 0                                   CTe = 1
                        100
             Acc. OPT


                         65
                         30

                        100
             Acc. OFT


                         65
                         30

                               0    5     10   15            0    5        10   15            0          5         10     15            0   5      10    15
                                                    (a) ηM                                                                     (b) ηS


Figure 7: Pruning a few neurons is sufficient to retrieve pretraining task accuracy. We plot
accuracy w.r.t. number of neurons pruned to improve performance on the pretraining task. We see
when a small learning rate is used for fine-tuning, the pretraining task’s performance improves after
just 5–15 neurons are pruned (top), while the fine-tuning task’s performance reduces correspondingly
(bottom). We argue these neurons serve as a wrapper to minimally alter the weakly relevant pretraining
capability and exploit the spurious correlation present in the fine-tuning data.

present, i.e., CTe = 1. As the sampling probability is increased, however, we observe this behavior
significantly changes. In particular, even if the model is fine-tuned for a high value of CTr , albeit less
than 1, it starts to perform well on the test data regardless of the presence of the spurious attribute.
Note that the performance is not high to begin with, indicating the ability to count OFT was learned
during fine-tuning; however, having a sufficiently large sampling probability for the token during
pretraining leads the model to avoid the spurious correlation. This indicates a pretraining ability to
extract information relevant for the downstream task is likely to be exploited during fine-tuning. This
is further corroborated by the results in Fig. 6, where we observe that when the spurious correlation
is present in the fine-tuning data, accuracy on the pretraining task is affected the most if sampling
prior of the target token was low during pretraining. We next analyze these results mechanistically.
Pruning / Probing fine-tuned models indicates learning of wrapped capabilities. Our results
above indicate the model exploits its weakly relevant capabilities, i.e., the capability that helps exploit
any spurious correlation, to solve the downstream task. We hypothesize that, at a mechanistic level,
the model exploits the weakly relevant capability by learning a wrapper over it. To evaluate this, we
analyze the models fine-tuned with a low sampling prior via network pruning and linear probing (see
App. D for setup details). Specifically, we prune the fine-tuned models to find the most salient weights
for reducing loss on the pretraining task of counting OPT . If the model learns a wrapper on this
capability, the neurons we find should correspond to this wrapper, such that deleting them recovers
the capability to count that token. As shown in Fig. 7, we find this is indeed the case—in a setup with
weak relevance of capabilities, pruning a very small number of neurons is sufficient to revive the
ability to perform well on the original task of counting OPT . To assess this further, we train a linear
probe on the residual output of every block of the transformer model and determine whether the count
of OPT can be accurately computed via the fine-tuned model. As shown in Fig. 8, in the presence of
spurious correlations, a linear probe can retrieve the count of the token OPT , indicating intermediate
outputs relevant to the pretraining capability are still being produced by the fine-tuned model. This
observation is particularly evident when a smaller learning rate is used, which is common in practice.
Overall, these results show that when a weakly relevant capability is present in the pretrained model,
a wrapper, i.e., a localized transformation of the pretraining capability, is learned during fine-tuning.
reFT enables “revival” of pretraining capabilities. To further corroborate our claims above, we
use a model fine-tuned to count OFT and reverse fine-tune it to re-learn the ability to count OPT .

                                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               H
                                                                T             M
                                                                               T                                                                LT
                                              CTr = 0                     CTr = 1                                                                             CTr = 0                                                      CTr = 1
           100


Acc. OPT
            65
            30


           100
Acc. OFT

            65
            30

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                                                       B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                                       B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

           (a) Pre-trained Model                               (b) ηM                                                                                                                           (c) ηS


Figure 8: Probing the presence of pre-training (top) and fine-tuning (bottom) capabilities. We
plot probe accuracy versus the index of the block in the Transformer model. CTe is set to 0. The
pretrained model (left) acts as a baseline for the trend of performance through the model’s blocks. In
most scenarios, we find we can infer the count of OPT with a similar trend as the pretrained model
(left). A drop in performance is observed only when learning rate ηM is used with a weakly relevant
capability (low sampling prior). This indicates pretraining capabilities persist after fine-tuning.


                                                                                                            CTr = 0                                         CTr = 1                       Scr. + FT                         ηM                     ηS
As a baseline, we also report a protocol called                                                 100
Scr. + FT, wherein the model is initialized with                                                 65
                                                                                                 30
parameters pre-trained to count OFT and then fine-

                                                                              Acc. OPT
                                                                                                100
tuned to count OPT . Note that this baseline and the                                             65
reFT protocol differ in their initialization state:                                              30

former is initialized with parameters pretrained to                                                   102             103                                104         102            103             104        102             103             104
                                                                                                                                                                   Iters (Log Scale)
count OFT , while latter is initialized with parame-                                                                (a) H                                                (b) M                                            (c) LT
                                                                                                                         T                                                     T
ters pretrained to count OPT and fine-tuned to count
OFT . Results are shown in Fig. 9. We see the model                          Figure 9: Reverse Fine-Tuning: We set CTe to
starts to perform well on the pre-training task even                         be 0 to test if the model performs well regardless
if a small learning rate is used for reFT , i.e., even                       of a spurious correlation. Models are fine-tuned
minimally changing the fine-tuned model’s parame-                            for 10K iterations. We observe that when a
ters is sufficient to regain the pretraining capability!                     strongly relevant capability is present (a, b), the
Further, increasing the sampling prior of OFT ac-                            model very quickly (0.1–1K iterations) starts to
celerates this behavior. This indicates that when a                          perform well on the task via reFT , even if be-
strongly relevant capability is present, the model                           havior relevant to the capability ceased during
essentially amplifies its use, but does not catas-                           pretraining (e.g., when CTr is 1). Meanwhile,
trophically affect the pretraining capability itself;                        when the model possesses a weakly relevant ca-
meanwhile, with a weakly relevant capability (low                            pability (c), this “revival” is slightly slower (3K
sampling prior during pretraining), even though the                          iterations). In contrast, the Scr. + FT baseline
performance is initially poor on the pretraining task,                       only reaches perfect accuracy at 4.5K iterations
in relatively few iterations (compared to baseline),                         and when using a larger learning rate, i.e., ηM .
the accuracy becomes perfect.
                                                                                                    Tracr Program                                         CTr = 0                  CTr = 1              CTr = 0                  CTr = 1             0.5
                                                                                                                           ------------------------
                                                                              Attending Token


Attention map visualizations further corrobo-                                                   t
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3

rate the wrappers hypothesis. As we noted be-                                                   b
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                a
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                b
fore, the results discussed above remain consistent                                             b
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                    t t t t b t a t bb t                              t t t t b t a t bb t   t t t t b t a t bb t   t t t t b t a t bb t    t t t t b t a t bb t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0


across other experimental setups for both Tracr and                         (a) η
                                                                                                Token Attended
                                                                                              (b) η                                                                            S                                             M

PCFG models. However, by construction, Tracr
yields particularly interpretable attention maps, al- Figure 10: Visualizing attention maps of fine-
lowing us to directly visualize the effects of fine- tuned Tracr models. Leftmost panel shows the
tuning. We thus analyze the attention maps of a Tracr compiled model’s attention map on the
Tracr model on the Counter task described in Sec. 4. counter task. Upon fine-tuning under different
Results are shown in Fig. 10. The original Tracr spurious correlations, we see the model con-
compiled model serves as a baseline and clearly tinues to pay attention to the pretraining target
demonstrates that all tokens only attend the pre- OPT = a. Only when a large enough learning
training target token, OPT = a. Upon fine-tuning to rate and zero spurious correlation is used, there
count OFT = b, we find the model clearly continues is a change in the attention pattern.
to pay attention to OPT if a small learning rate is
used. A larger learning rate is, however, able to alter the model computation, but only if the pretraining
capability is not weakly relevant to the fine-tuning task, i.e., when CTr = 0; otherwise, we again find
the model continues to pay attention to the pretraining target.

                                                                        8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (a) Probing Analysis                                                              (b) ReFT Dynamics
                                    LR: M                               LR: S                                        LR: S                              LR: M

Probe Accuracy
                 0.95
                                                                                                       0.9


                                                                                                Loss
                 0.90
                                                                                                       0.8
                 0.85
                        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10            100   101     102       103     100      101     102   103
                                           Probe Layer Index                                                                 Training Iteration
Figure 11: Validation on TinyStories. Models are trained to produce stories with several features
(e.g., foreshadowing) and fine-tuned via different protocols to not produce stories with a “forbidden”
feature (specifically, twists) (see App. F for details). Left: We probe the existence of this feature at
intermediate Transformer blocks. Probe accuracy on models pre-trained with or without twist data
(Present/Not in Pretraining, respectively) act as upper and lower bounds on the expected accuracy,
and are plotted for ease of comparison. Regardless of the fine-tuning protocol (Filtering, Filtering
+ Randomisation, Filtering + Mix & Match), for the lower LR, no protocol removes a meaningful
amount of information and a similar but less strong trend holds for the higher LR. Right: We plot the
loss during reverse fine-tuning (reFT ) to again produce stories with the forbidden feature. Fine-tuned
models’ loss goes down very quickly (30–300 iterations) compared to baselines (which never reach
the same loss; also see Tab. 1). Both these results indicate the capability of identifying the forbidden
feature, a necessary capability for story modelling, continues to persist after fine-tuning.

 5.2                    VALIDATING OUR H YPOTHESES ON T INY S TORIES
To give additional strength to our results, we per- Deletion Type Twist Proportion at Iteration
form an analysis using more realistic language models                       0      30    300     3000
trained on the TinyStories-Instruct dataset (Eldan &
Li, 2023) (see App. B.3 for an example). These mod-                F (ηM ) 44% 81% 81% 82%
els are able to follow specific instructions to write         F + RR (ηM ) 12% 56% 69% 75%
                                                              F + MM (ηM ) 31% 88% 50% 75%
coherent English stories over multiple paragraphs. We
perform experiments analogous to the reFT and prob-                 F (ηS ) 69% 88% 75% 94%
ing experiments in the previous sections, but now ex-          F + RR (ηS ) 12% 44% 81% 81%
plicitly focus on whether fine-tuning can delete ca-           F + MM (ηS ) 50% 81% 62% 81%
pabilities present in pre-trained models. Models are             Not in PT 12% 31% 44% 81%
pre-trained to generate stories with specific story fea-
tures (such as containing a twist, foreshadowing, Table 1: TinyStories reFT Analysis. We re-
or bad ending) and fine-tuned to not generate stories port the percent of generations with a twist
with a specific feature (twist) (see App. F for details during reverse fine-tuning for the twist ca-
on the protocols). We probe these models to detect the pability. F, R, and MM stand for our three
deleted feature from the intermediate model outputs in fine-tuning protocols: Filtering, Randomi-
Fig. 11, where the dynamics of loss during reFT on sation and Mix & Match (see App. F for
learning to generate stories with the deleted feature are details). Regardless of learning rate and pro-
also shown. We also report the percentage of stories tocol, models relearn to generate stories with
with the deleted feature generated by models during twist more sample-efficiently than the con-
reFT in Table 1, where the generated stories are pro- trol model pre-trained on data w/o twists and
cessed by a fine-tuned GPT-3.5 classifier to predict fine-tuned to generate them (Not in PT).
if the story contains the deleted feature (see App. F for details). Overall, we find that “deleted”
capabilities can be easily and sample-efficiently recovered (compared to the baseline), i.e., stories
with that feature can be generated again, regardless of the fine-tuning protocol used. These results
support our hypotheses that fine-tuning only minimally alters pre-trained model capabilities. We also
highlight a few recent papers that propose similar protocols as reFT and experiments as ours with
further realistic settings (Qi et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Zhang & Wu, 2024; Zhao et al., 2023b).

 6                  C ONCLUSION
In this work, we show that fine-tuning generally alters pre-trained model via small, localized changes
that only minimally transform their capabilities. We perform our analysis both with existing mecha-
nistic interpretability tools as well as our proposed reFT method. Our results pave the way for future
work both understanding how fine-tuning works in more realistic settings with larger models, as
well as emphasize the need for developing methods beyond fine-tuning that alter pre-trained model
capabilities more substantially, particularly deleting unsafe capabilities.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ESL thanks Eric Bigelow, Nikhil Vyas, and Usman Anwar for relevant discussions early in the
project. SJ was partially supported by BERI. ESL was partially supported via NSF under award
CNS-2008151. RK was supported by the Foundation AI CDT at UCL.

AUTHORS ’ C ONTRIBUTIONS

ESL conceived the project direction and developed a set of hypotheses on the limitations of fine-
tuning, with inputs from RK. SJ and ESL co-designed a draft of the PCFG and Tracr setups, and
came up with pruning and reverse fine-tuning analysis which led to validation and further refining of
the hypotheses. SJ led the experimental execution and made the tasks considered in the paper precise
in collaboration with ESL. RK proposed and ran the TinyStories experiments with inputs from ESL,
SJ, EG and TR. Literature review and writing of the main paper was led by ESL. SJ led writing of the
appendix. ESL, SJ, RK, and HT collaborated on design of all figures and plots. DSK acted as the
primary senior advisor on the paper, with inputs from RPD, HT, EG, and TR as well.

R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the
  effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13255, 2020.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and
  extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14316, 2023a.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.2, knowledge manipulation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14402, 2023b.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 1, context-free grammar. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.13673, 2023c.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
Bing Bai, Jian Liang, Guanhua Zhang, Hao Li, Kun Bai, and Fei Wang. Why attentions may not be
  interpretable? In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
  Data Mining, pp. 25–34, 2021.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational
  Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, 2022.
Yoshua Bengio, Tristan Deleu, Nasim Rahaman, Rosemary Ke, Sébastien Lachapelle, Olexa Bilaniuk,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Christopher Pal. A meta-transfer objective for learning to disentangle causal
  mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10912, 2019.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Adam Pearce, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin
  Wattenberg. An interpretability illusion for bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07143, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learning
  in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.
Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on information
  theory, 2(3):113–124, 1956.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt,
  Chris Cundy, Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, Joel Veness, et al. Neural networks and the chomsky
  hierarchy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02098, 2022.
Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Ying Zhang, Zefeng Li, Haoyu Wang, Tianwei
  Zhang, and Yang Liu. Jailbreaker: Automated jailbreak across multiple large language model
  chatbots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08715, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak coherent
  english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Federica Gerace, Luca Saglietti, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Andrew Saxe, and Lenka Zdeborová.
  Probing transfer learning with a model of synthetic correlated datasets. Machine Learning: Science
  and Technology, 3(1):015030, 2022.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Ro Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers
 build predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14680,
 2022.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14767, 2023.
Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Tr˛ebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Maribeth
 Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of dialogue
 agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, Nahyeon Ryu, and Marc Dymet-
  man. Aligning language models with preferences through f-divergence minimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.08215, 2023.
Almog Gueta, Elad Venezian, Colin Raffel, Noam Slonim, Yoav Katz, and Leshem Choshen. Knowl-
  edge is a region in weight space for fine-tuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04863,
  2023.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
  Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  nlp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10186,
  2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liwei Jiang, Jena D Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jenny Liang, Jesse Dodge,
  Keisuke Sakaguchi, Maxwell Forbes, Jon Borchardt, Saadia Gabriel, et al. Can machines learn
  morality? the delphi experiment. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2110, 2021.
Jeevesh Juneja, Rachit Bansal, Kyunghyun Cho, João Sedoc, and Naomi Saphra. Linear connectivity
  reveals generalization strategies. arXiv preprint. arXiv:2205.12411, 2022.
Andrej Karpathy. MinGPT, 2020. Github link. https://github.com/karpathy/minGPT/
  tree/master.
Suhas Kotha, Jacob Mitchell Springer, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding catastrophic forgetting
  in language models via implicit inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10105, 2023.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-tuning can
  distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. arXiv preprint. arXiv:2202.10054,
  2022.
Vivian Lai and Chenhao Tan. On human predictions with explanations and predictions of machine
  learning models: A case study on deception detection. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness,
  accountability, and transparency, pp. 29–38, 2019.
Andrew K Lampinen and Surya Ganguli. An analytic theory of generalization dynamics and transfer
  learning in deep linear networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10374, 2018.
Rémi Le Priol, Reza Babanezhad, Yoshua Bengio, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. An analysis of the
  adaptation speed of causal models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 775–783. PMLR, 2021.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K. Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfis-
  ter, and Martin Wattenberg.           Emergent World Representations: Exploring a Se-
  quence Model Trained on a Synthetic Task, 2023.                    Comment:   ICLR 2023
  oral     (notable-top-5%):        https://openreview.net/forum?id=DeG07_TcZvT    ; code:
  https://github.com/likenneth/othello_world.
Vladislav Lialin, Vijeta Deshpande, and Anna Rumshisky. Scaling down to scale up: A guide to
  parameter-efficient fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15647, 2023.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
David Lindner, János Kramár, Matthew Rahtz, Thomas McGrath, and Vladimir Mikulik. Tracr:
  Compiled transformers as a laboratory for interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05062, 2023.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10749, 2022a.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Exposing attention
  glitches with flip-flop language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00946, 2023a.
Haokun Liu, Derek Tam, Mohammed Muqeeth, Jay Mohta, Tenghao Huang, Mohit Bansal, and
  Colin A Raffel. Few-shot parameter-efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-context
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1950–1965, 2022b.
Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Zhengzi Xu, Yuekang Li, Yaowen Zheng, Ying Zhang, Lida Zhao, Tianwei
  Zhang, and Yang Liu. Jailbreaking chatgpt via prompt engineering: An empirical study. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.13860, 2023b.
Charles Lovering, Rohan Jha, Tal Linzen, and Ellie Pavlick. Predicting inductive biases of pre-
  trained models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=mNtmhaDkAr.
Ekdeep Singh Lubana and Robert P. Dick. A gradient flow framework for analyzing network pruning.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rumv7QmLUue.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Eric J. Bigelow, Robert P. Dick, David Krueger, and Hidenori Tanaka.
  Mechanistic Mode Connectivity, 2022. Comment: 39 pages.
Wesley Maddox, Shuai Tang, Pablo Moreno, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Andreas Damianou. Fast
 adaptation with linearized neural networks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pp. 2737–2745. PMLR, 2021.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based
  view of language model fine-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  23610–23641. PMLR, 2023.
Michael S Matena and Colin A Raffel. Merging models with fisher-weighted averaging. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17703–17716, 2022.
Clara Meister, Stefan Lazov, Isabelle Augenstein, and Ryan Cotterell. Is sparse attention more
  interpretable? arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01087, 2021.
Pavlo Molchanov, Stephen Tyree, Tero Karras, Timo Aila, and Jan Kautz. Pruning convolutional
  neural networks for resource efficient inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06440, 2016.
Michael C Mozer and Paul Smolensky. Skeletonization: A technique for trimming the fat from a
 network via relevance assessment. Advances in neural information processing systems, 1, 1988.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.
Maya Okawa, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka.            Composi-
 tional abilities emerge multiplicatively: Exploring diffusion models on a synthetic task.
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZXH8KUgFx3, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Alicia Parrish, Angelica Chen, Nikita Nangia, Vishakh Padmakumar, Jason Phang, Jana Thompson,
  Phu Mon Htut, and Samuel R Bowman. Bbq: A hand-built bias benchmark for question answering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08193, 2021.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Andreas Rücklé, Clifton Poth, Aishwarya Kamath, Ivan Vulić, Sebastian Ruder,
  Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapterhub: A framework for adapting transformers.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP 2020): Systems Demonstrations, pp. 46–54. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2020.
Nikhil Prakash, Tamar Rott Shaham, Tal Haklay, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Fine-tuning
  enhances existing mechanisms: A case study on entity tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14811,
  2024.
Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson.
  Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to! arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.03693, 2023.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Machel Reid, Yutaro Yamada, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Can wikipedia help offline reinforcement
 learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12122, 2022.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
  Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
  bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
  Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
  Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le Scao,
  Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
Sofia Serrano and Noah A Smith. Is attention interpretable? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03731, 2019.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573–9585, 2020.
Xinyue Shen, Zeyuan Chen, Michael Backes, Yun Shen, and Yang Zhang. "do anything now":
  Characterizing and evaluating in-the-wild jailbreak prompts on large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.03825, 2023.
Hui Shi, Sicun Gao, Yuandong Tian, Xinyun Chen, and Jishen Zhao. Learning bounded context-free-
  grammar via lstm and the transformer: Difference and the explanations. In Proceedings of the
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 8267–8276, 2022.
Michael Sipser. Introduction to the theory of computation. ACM Sigact News, 27(1):27–29, 1996.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Hidenori Tanaka, Aran Nayebi, Niru Maheswaranathan, Lane McIntosh, Stephen Baccus, and Surya
  Ganguli. From deep learning to mechanistic understanding in neuroscience: the structure of retinal
  prediction. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. Bert rediscovers the classical nlp pipeline. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.05950, 2019.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance
  of task diversity. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:7852–7862, 2020.
Puja Trivedi, Danai Koutra, and Jayaraman J Thiagarajan. A closer look at model adaptation using
  feature distortion and simplicity bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13500, 2023.
Josef Valvoda, Naomi Saphra, Jonathan Rawski, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. Benchmarking
  compositionality with formal languages. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 6007–6018, 2022.
Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2003.12298, 2020.
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
  self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.09418, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yihan Wang, Si Si, Daliang Li, Michal Lukasik, Felix Yu, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Inderjit S Dhillon, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. Two-stage llm fine-tuning with less specialization and more generalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.00635, 2022.
Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. Jailbroken: How does llm safety training fail?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02483, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
  Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021.
Johannes Welbl, Amelia Glaese, Jonathan Uesato, Sumanth Dathathri, John Mellor, Lisa Anne
  Hendricks, Kirsty Anderson, Pushmeet Kohli, Ben Coppin, and Po-Sen Huang. Challenges in
  detoxifying language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07445, 2021.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04626,
  2019.
Albert Xu, Eshaan Pathak, Eric Wallace, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, and Dan Klein. Detox-
  ifying language models risks marginalizing minority voices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06390,
  2021.
Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Feature learning in infinite-width neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.14522, 2020.
Xianjun Yang, Xiao Wang, Qi Zhang, Linda Petzold, William Yang Wang, Xun Zhao, and Dahua
  Lin. Shadow alignment: The ease of subverting safely-aligned language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02949, 2023.
Elad Ben Zaken, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Goldberg. Bitfit: Simple parameter-efficient fine-tuning
  for transformer-based masked language-models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10199, 2021.
Xiao Zhang and Ji Wu. Dissecting learning and forgetting in language model finetuning. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=tmsqb6WpLz.
Haoyu Zhao, Abhishek Panigrahi, Rong Ge, and Sanjeev Arora. Do transformers parse while
  predicting the masked word? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08117, 2023a.
Jiachen Zhao, Zhun Deng, David Madras, James Zou, and Mengye Ren. Learning and forgetting
   unsafe examples in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12736, 2023b.
Hattie Zhou, Arwen Bradley, Etai Littwin, Noam Razin, Omid Saremi, Josh Susskind, Samy Bengio,
  and Preetum Nakkiran. What algorithms can transformers learn? a study in length generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16028, 2023.
Xuhui Zhou, Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. Challenges in
  automated debiasing for toxic language detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00086, 2021.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial
  attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     O RGANIZATION OF A PPENDIX
In the appendix we present a comprehensive analysis of our claims on Tracr, PCFG and TinyStories-
Instruct using different mechanistic interpretability tools discussed in Section-D of the main paper.
We also present a summary of the notations used in this work in Tab. 2. Overall, the appendix is
organized as follows:

       • Sec. B presents details of the Tracr, PCFG and Tiny Stories datasets utilized in this work.
       • Sec. C presents the training and model details for each of the datasets considered.
       • Sec. D lists the protocols used for different mechanistic interpretability tools like attention
         maps, probing, pruning and reverse fine-tuning.
       • Sec. E provides a few more results in practically relevant contexts, such as in a synthetic
         jailbreaking setup.
               – Sec. E.1 studies the effect of using different fractions of pre-training and fine-tuning
                 data points for fine-tuning.
               – Sec. E.2 presents the jailbreaking analysis using the PCFG setup.
               – Sec. E.3 shows reverse fine-tuning a fine-tuned model is sample efficient compared to
                 baselines for both PCFG and Tracr models.
               – Sec. E.4 presents reverse fine-tuning analysis of a fine-tuning protocol that actively
                 tries to remove a capability from PCFG / Tracr models.
       • Sec. F presents detailed discussion of setup details and results on TinyStories.
       • Sec. G presents additional results on Tracr for counter and max element tasks.
       • Sec. H presents additional results on PCFG for the counting and index of occurrence tasks.

                                   Table 2: Notations used in this work.

    Notation     Meaning
       X       Input domain
      XD       Factor of the input domain that captures values of the inputs
      XI       Factor of the input domain that captures task identifiers
      PX       Probability distribution over the input domain
        FT
      PX       The overall distribution defining the downstream fine-tuning task
      DFT      Dataset used for fine-tuning
       FT,E
     PX        Empirical distribution from which the fine-tuning dataset is sampled
       T       Denotes a task to be performed by the model (e.g., count)
       O       Denotes an operand that will be processed by to perform the task T
     {OPT }    Set of operand tokens seen during pretraining
      OPT      A specific token used as an operand during pretraining
      OFT      A specific token used as an operand during fine-tuning
    r(x, O)    Denotes the result of executing a task from Sec. 4 on a string x for some operand O
      CTr      Probability that a randomly sampled string in the training data used for fine-tuning has a
               spurious correlation between the pretraining capability and the downstream task
     CTe       Probability that a randomly sampled string in the test data used for evaluating fine-tuned models
               has a spurious correlation between the pretraining capability and the downstream task
   PT (O)      Sampling prior. Denotes the probability that when a string with task token T is sampled during
               pretraining, the operand to perform the task on is O
 H    M      S
PC , PC   , PC Sampling priors such that the probability of sampling the target token for fine-tuning ( OFT ) is
                       H                M               S
               high (PC   ), medium (PC   ), or small (PC )
ηM , ηS , ηV S Medium / Small / Very-small learning rates used for fine-tuning. ηV S is only used for a specific
               reverse fine-tuning experiment with Tracr compiled models.
    reFT       Denotes reverse fine-tuning
   niters      Number of iterations used during pre-training
     LR        Learning rate


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON DATASETS

We consider three experimental setups: Compiled programs with Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023),
learning models on Probabilistic Context Free Grammars (PCFG) (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023c), and the
TinyStories Instruct dataset.



B.1    T RACR D ETAILS

Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023) generates a transformer model using the RASP library by Weiss et al.
(2021). The specific code snippet used to generate the Tracr models for the counting and the max
element tasks are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively. The models corresponding to these tasks is
implemented with three standard transformer blocks, where each block consists of a self-attention
layer followed by two MLP layers.
We analyze the following two tasks to understand the effects of fine-tuning on a pretrained model’s
capabilities.
• Counter: Compile the capability to count the number of occurrences of a token OPT in a string
  into the model; fine-tune to count occurrences of another token OFT . If r(x, O) denotes the number
  of occurrences of a token O in a string x, the spurious correlation is defined by enforcing a constant
  difference in token occurrences, i.e., r(x, OFT ) − r(x, OPT ) = q. See also Alg. 1 and Fig. 12.
• Max-identifier: Compile the capability to identify the OPT -th largest element in a string; fine-tune
  to identify the OFT -th largest element. If r(x, O) reads out the O-th largest token in the string x, we
  define the spurious correlation as r(x, OFT ) − r(x, OPT ) = q; e.g., if q = 1 and the OPT largest
  token in the string x is a, then the OFT -th largest token will be b (which is equal to a + 1 in Tracr’s
  vocabulary). See also Alg. 2 and Fig. 13.
The fine-tuning data is generated by randomly sampling tokens from a uniform distribution over the
input vocabulary. For the Counter task, the input vocabulary consists of first nine letters from the
English alphabet. For the max element task, the input vocabulary consists of all the letters in the
English alphabet. We sample with replacement for the Counter task and without replacement for
the max element task (to avoid having multiple max elements). Examples for the task are shown in
Figs. 12, 13.
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for compiling the Counter capability via Tracr: Rasp code used to
generate the model for the Counter capability and task via Tracr
def countA():
   # binzarize the tokens into 0’s and 1’s
   bin = (rasp.tokens==‘a’)
   # Select the indices of tokens with value of 1
   bin_idx = rasp.Select(bin, rasp.indices, rasp.Comparison.EQ)
   # Count the number of selected indices
   count_a = rasp.SelectorWidth(bin_idx)
   # Generate an identity map
   idx_select = rasp.Select(rasp.indices, rasp.indices,
    rasp.Comparison.EQ)
   # Output the count
   sum = rasp.Aggregate(idx_select, count_a)

    Task: Count b
    Sample: $, c, a, d, a, b, c, b, a, d, f, b, g, c, e, b, b, a, h, j, i, b, d, e, f, ,i, h, f, e, g, a, b, g, f, h,
    j, c, b, e, d, d, h, j, i, b, a, b, #,
    Answer: 10

Figure 12: Exemplar for Counter Task: A sample used for fine-tuning Tracr compiled models on
counting ‘b’.



                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for compiling the Max identifier capability via Tracr: Rasp code
used to generate the model for the Max Identifier capability and task via Tracr.
def maxi dentifier():
   # Identify the tokens larger than a given token
   var_small = rasp.Select(rasp.tokens, rasp.tokens,
    rasp.Comparison.LT)
   # Calculate the sum of the identified tokens for every input token
   sum_small = rasp.SelectorWidth(var_small)
   # Identify the fifth largest token
   bin_target = (sum_small==4)
   # Find the index of the identified token in the original input
   select_idx = rasp.Select(bin_target, rasp.indices,
    rasp.Comparison.EQ)
   # Output the identified index
   return rasp.Aggregate(select_idx, rasp.tokens)



    Task: Find fifth largest element
    Sample: $, b, d, a, f, h, m, x, p, q, n, #, #, #, #
    Answer: ‘h’


Figure 13: Exemplar for Max-Element Task: A sample used for fine-tuning Tracr compiled models
on the Max identifier task.


B.2   PCFG

We follow Allen-Zhu & Li (2023c) and use the production rules shown in Fig. 14. We sample a string
of tokens from the grammar and then randomly subsample a string of 250 tokens from the generated
original sequence (this helps remove bias towards tokens likely to be at the beginning). The sampling
probabilities to sample a valid rule given the parent node is fixed to be 0.5. We formulate the training
data as follows: Start of sequence token (SOS) + Task family token (e.g., Counting) (T) + Operand
one (counting what) (O) + Operand two (number of positions) (O′ ) + Start of text token (SOT ) + Data
generated from DGP (Txt) + End of text token (EOT) + Answer request token (ART) + Answer token
(Ans) + End of sequence token (EOS). This can be summarized as follows.
            Sample input: SOS + T + O + O′ + SOT + Txt + EOT + ART + Ans + EOS.                      (1)

We consider the following tasks for pre-training:

       • Counting (C): Counting number of O (say a) for the last O′ positions (forty). This example
         will be written as Ca40.
       • Counting composition of elements (CC): Counting number of O (say aa) for the last O′
         positions (forty). This example will be written as CCa40.



           s → r, q; s → q, p; p → m, n, o; p → n, o, m; q → n, m, o;
               q → m, n; r → o, m; r→ m, o, n; m → l, j; m → j, l, k;
                 n → k, j, l; n → l, j, k; o →l, k, j; o → k, j; j → h, i;
               j → i, h; k → h, g, i; k → g, h, i; l → i, h, g; l → h, i, g;
      g → d, f, e; g → f, e, d; h → e, d, f; h → d, e, f; i → e, f, d; i → f, d, e;
         d → c, a; d → a, b, c; e → c, b; e → c, a, b; f → c, b, a; f → b, a;

Figure 14: PCFG setup: Grammar rules considered to generate the PCFG dataset. The highlighted
token represents the parent token. These rules have been adapted from Allen-Zhu & Li (2023c).


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Task Family Token T:: ‘(’
    Operand Token O:: ‘a’
    Sample: $, (, a, 40, <, c, a, b, a, c, a, b, a, a, a, c, b, c, b, b, b, a, b, c, a, c, b, c, a, a, c, a, c, a,
    a, c, c, a, b, a, c, b, b, a, a, a, c, b, c, b, b, c, a, a, c, b, c, b, c, b, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, c, b, b, a, c, c,
    b, a, a, a, b, a, c, b, b, a, a, a, c, b, c, b, b, c, a, a, c, b, c, b, c, b, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, c, b, b, a, c, c,
    b, a, a, a, b, a, c, b, b, a, a, a, c, b, c, b, b, c, a, a, c, b, c, b, c, b, a, a, a, b, b, a, b, b, a, b, a, b, b,
    c, b, a, c, c, c, b, a, c, a, c, b, a, c, c, b, c, b, b, a, a, a, c, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, c, b, b, a,
    a, a, c, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, b, c, b, a, c, b, b, a, a, c, b, b, a, a, a, c, a, b, c, a, c, b, c, a, b, c, b, a, a,
    b, a, b, c, a, c, a, c, b, b, c, b, b, a, a, c, b, c, b, a, b, <, =, 15, 10, #, #, #, #, #, #, #, #,
    #, #, #, #, #, #, #, #, #, #, #, $
    Answer: 15


Figure 15: PCFG Exemplar. A representative sample from the PCFG dataset (Allen-Zhu & Li,
2023c)



                                                                                                                           th
       • Index of occurrence (I): Index from the EOT token when O (say a) occurred for the O′
         time (sixth). This example will be written as Ia10.


       • Index of occurrence of composition element (IC): Index from the EOT token when O (say
                                th
         aa) occurred for the O′ time (sixth). This example will be written as ICa10.


       • Token value at an index (T): The token value at index O′ (forty) before the end token. O is
         NULL here. This example will be written as TNULL5.

For the “Counting”, “Counting composition of elements”, and “Token value at index” tasks, we set the
value of O′ token as 40. For “Index of occurrence” and “Index of occurrence of composition element”
task, we set the value of O′ token as 6. All five tasks above are considered during pre-training, but for
fine-tuning we consider only a single task with a given operand. Specifically, we analyze fine-tuning
the pre-trained models on the “Counting” and “Index of occurrence” tasks only.
We analyze the following two tasks to understand the effects of fine-tuning on a pretrained model’s
capabilities.
• Counter: We intentionally reuse this task to demonstrate the effects of compilation of the capability
  via Tracr versus learning the capability via PCFGs. Instead of being compiled, the model is trained
  to count the number of tokens from a set of tokens {OPT }. The model is then fine-tuned to
  exclusively count a OFT ∈ {OPT } token. By making the sampling probability of OFT tokens high
  during pretraining, we can make the model preemptively performant on the downstream task; this
  allows us to model the notion of capability relevance.
• Indexer: Amongst other tasks, the model is pretrained to output the index (location in a string)
  of a token from the set {OPT } occurs for the kth time; fine-tuning is performed to output the index
  of kth occurrence of another token OFT instead. We arbitrarily set k to 6 for our experiments, but
  emphasize that any integer less than context size can be used. If r(x, O) denotes the index of kth
  occurrence of a token O in a string x, the spurious correlation is enforced via constant offset q in
  operand token indices, i.e., r(x, OFT ) − r(x, OPT ) = q.
While the pre-training dataset is generated by simply sampling from PCFG (see Fig. 15 for an
example), for generating the fine-tuning dataset we provide explicit control over the value of CTr by
artificially adding the target tokens OFT from the fine-tuning task. It is important to ensure that the
distribution shift between the fine-tuning distributions with different values of CTr is minimized and
the data is fairly spread across multiple classes to enable reusability of feature via pretraining. As
shown in Fig. 16, the class distribution of the datasets with CTr = 1 and CTr = 0 for the counting
and the index of occurrence tasks satisfies these requirements.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          CTr = 0.0                    CTr = 1.0                    CTr = 0.0                    CTr = 1.0
            25K
Number of
 Samples



            20K
            15K
            10K
            5K



            25K
Number of


            20K
 Samples


            15K
            10K
            5K

                  0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40   0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40   0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40   0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

                                                                   Class Label
                         (a) Count/Index of Occurrence a                              (b) Count/Index of Occurrence b

Figure 16: Distribution of the class labels for Counting (first row) and Index of occurrence tasks
(second row). (a) shows the distribution for the operand token a and (b) shows the same for the
operand token b. The data is similarly distributed across different classes and the distribution shift for
the two operands and the different values of CTr is small.


       Summary: Eddie, an elderly engine who likes to sleep, is blown off the train tracks by a big
       wind, but a little bird and its friends help him get back on the tracks and become his best
       friends. Eddie learns that friends can make you feel young again.
       Features: Dialogue, Twist.
       Sentence: Eddie was happy again.
       Words: sleep, engine, elderly.
       Story: Once upon a time, there was an elderly engine named Eddie. Eddie was old and tired.
       He liked to sleep a lot. One day, Eddie was sleeping on the train tracks when he heard a little
       bird. "Hello, Eddie!" said the bird. "Why are you sleeping here?" "I am old and tired," Eddie
       told the bird. "I like to sleep." Just then, something unexpected happened. A big wind came
       and blew Eddie off the tracks. Eddie was scared but the little bird was brave. "Don’t worry,
       Eddie!" said the bird. "I will help you." The bird flew fast and found strong friends to help
       Eddie. They pushed Eddie back on the tracks. Eddie was happy again. From that day on,
       Eddie and the bird were best friends. And Eddie learned that even when you are old and tired,
       friends can make you feel young again.


Figure 17: TinyStories Exemplar. An example from the TinyStories Instruct dataset (Eldan & Li,
2023).


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3      T INY S TORIES I NSTRUCT

For the TinyStories results, we use the TinyStories Instruct variant of the dataset (Eldan & Li, 2023)1 .
An example from this dataset is given in Fig. 17. For the fine-tuning datasets, we take the original
dataset and alter it in several ways. Details are discussed in App. F.

C       D ETAILS ON T RAINING AND E VALUATION
C.1      T RACR

Compiled Model Details: The compiled model obtained for the counting and max identifier tasks
consists of three blocks, wherein each block contains a single head attention layer followed by two
layer MLP. No normalization layers are used by models developed using Tracr.
Training details: The compiled model is fine-tuned using SGD with momentum for 10K iterations
with a batch size of 96. Tracr yields models with a rather sparse parameterization, which often yields
unstable training dynamics (e.g., gradient spikes), especially with adaptive optimizers. To address
this, we perform the following two interventions. First, we add a small amount of initial gaussian
noise wnoise ∈ N (0, 0.001) to the weights of the compiled model to densify them slightly. Note that
the scale of this noise is not high, i.e., it avoids any performance loss but is sufficient enough to reduce
gradient spikes resulting from extreme sparsity of model parameters. Second, we choose to use on
SGD with momentum as the optimizer, using the following four choices of learning rates: Large
LR (10−1 ), Medium LR (10−2 ), Small LR (10−3 ), and Very Small LR (10−4 ). The characterization
of “Large” or “Small” is based on a general heuristic of what learning rate regimes are commonly
used with SGD in modern neural network training. Linear warmup is used for 2K iterations followed
by a cosine schedule with a minimum learning rate of the order 10−2 smaller than its max value.
Evaluation of the fine-tuned model is done on both test set with and without the spurious correlation
(ie. CTe = 0 and CTe = 1).

C.2      PCFG

Model details: We use the minGPT model by Karpathy (2020) for all experiments on the synthetically
generated PCFG dataset, similar to Allen-Zhu & Li (2023c). The model has close to 3 million
parameters and consists of 6 blocks each made up of multihead self attention with 6 heads and two
layers of MLP layers with an embedding dimension of 192.
Pre-training details: Pretraining is performed from scratch with a learning rate of 10−3 using
the standard AdamW optimizer. Cosine learning rate is used along with linear warmup, where the
warmup is used in the first 20% of the training. The model is trained using the standard next token
prediction task used for training language models. We consider the set of five tasks mentioned
in the previous section during the pre-training phase, but focus on only one of these tasks during
fine-tuning. We use the task family token and an operand token to define the notion of a task. The
task family token is sampled from a uniform distribution, while the operand token (O) is sampled
from a multinomial distribution. The sampling probability for different operands is varied in the
experimental setup to understand the effect of capability relevance in fine-tuning. More specifically,
we analyze the following distributions for sampling the operand tokens (a, b, c):

          • PT (a) = 0.999, PT (b) = 0.001, PT (c) = 0.0;
          • PT (a) = 0.99, PT (b) = 0.01, PT (c) = 0.0;
          • PT (a) = 0.9, PT (b) = 0.1, PT (c) = 0.0;
          • PT (a) = 0.7, PT (b) = 0.2, PT (c) = 0.1; and
          • PT (a) = 0.5, PT (b) = 0.3, PT (c) = 0.2.

For each of the configurations of sampling distributions of operands, we pre-train the model for 10K,
50K, 100K and 200K iterations. The model is trained in an online fashion to model the standard
language model training pipeline, i.e., data is sampled on the fly from the data generating process
during training time.
    1
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStoriesInstruct


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fine-tuning details: While pre-training is done in the next token prediction fashion, fine-tuning is
done in a supervised way where the model is required to just perform the desired fine-tuning task.
We use the final iteration model obtained from pre-training as the initialization for fine-tuning. While
pre-training is done on multiple pairs of task and operand tokens, the model is fine-tuned on a single
pair of task and operand tokens. To simulate a similar setup for fine-tuning as in Tracr, we analyze
the effect of fine-tuning the model using three different sets of learning rate: Large LR (ηL : 10−4 ),
Medium LR (ηM : 10−5 ) and Small LR (ηS : 10−6 ). Fine-tuning is done for 10K iterations using
AdamW optimizer with a batch size of 96 samples. Similar to pre-training phase, we use cosine
learning rate with an initial warmup of 20% of the fine-tuning iterations. The minimum value of the
learning rate is set to be 100× lower than the maximum learning rate. Similar to Tracr evaluation is
done on both the test sets with and without the spurious correlation (CTe = 0 and CTe = 1).


D    M ECHANISTIC I NTERPRETABILITY T OOLS S ETUP

In this section, we describe the different tools of interpretability considered in our work.
Attention Maps: We present the attention maps for different tasks considered in the Tracr setup.
Each map shows the tokens which are attending other tokens on the y axis and the token which
are being attended to on the x-axis. If a token is attended by many other tokens, then, in a crude
sense, this can imply that the presence of the token is impacting the underlying task performed by
the model. In the Counter task, if significant attention is given to a’s / b’s is an indicator of the
respective capability of the model. For the max identifier task, in the attention map in Block-0, the
model implements the sorting function, where each token is attended by the tokens which are greater
than that. The vocabulary order followed is a > b > c > d.... In the attention map of Block-2, the
model implements the read function, where it outputs the token at the desired position in the sorted
sequence.
Pruning: We consider single step pruning where we prune the weights/neurons with largest dot
product between their gradient and weights, where the gradients are calculated by minimizing the loss
for the capability we want to revive. More formally, let the weights of the model with N parameters
be given by wi where i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}, Let the corresponding gradient be given by grad(wi )
then the top-K weights with largest value of grad(wi )wi are pruned off. This follows the pruning
protocols proposed in prior work for reducing or preserving loss via pruning (Molchanov et al., 2016;
Lubana & Dick, 2021; Mozer & Smolensky, 1988). We use weight pruning for the Tracr setup and
neuron pruning for PCFG, where a neuron is defined as a row in the weight matrix. We present a
detailed description of the pruning protocol considered in Algorithm-3.
Algorithm 3: Pruning Pseudocode. A fine-tuned model fθ is parameterized by θ and θi denotes
its ith neuron or weight (we prune neurons in PCFG experiments and weights in Tracr). Pre-
training task family token is given by OPT and is prepended to a string X sampled from the data
generating process, yielding the input OPT ◦ X. The true value corresponding to pre-training task
family token OPT is given by y. Let the cross-entropy loss be given by CE. Let TopK (W ) denote
the indices of the top K values in the vector W .
def prune():
   # Forward prop the model on pre-training task
   out = fθ ( OPT ◦ X)
   # Calculate the loss
   L = CE(out, y)
   # Calculate the gradients
   grad = ∇θ L
   # Calculate the dot product between model weights and gradients
   dotproduct = θ.grad
   # Select the indices of top K values
   indices = TopK (dotproduct)
   # Prune off the neurons/weights present in top K indices
   θ[indices] = 0
   return θ

Probing: Probing is used to understand if a particular capability is present in the model. In this, we
train a linear layer (probe) on top of every block (residual layer’s output) of the mini-gpt model and


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


analyze if the probe is able to perform on a task requiring the use of the desired capability. The probe
is a linear layer with the output dimensions same as the vocabulary size of the model. The probe is
trained using the data randomly sampled from the PCFG data generating process for 4K iterations
using AdamW optimizer with maximum learning rate of 10−3 which is decayed by a factor of 10 at
2K, 3K and 3.5K iterations. Training of the probe is done separately on the residual output of each of
the six blocks present in the minGPT model. The stream corresponding to the answer token (Ans) is
used as the input to the probe.

Reverse Fine-tuning: Same set of hyperparameters as used in the fine-tuning of the pre-trained
Tracr model are used in reFT , except for the learning rate, which we force to be smaller than
the corresponding fine-tuning learning rate. Note that this use of an even smaller learning rate is
intentional: if the original pretraining capability can be revived even with this setup, it is stronger
evidence that the pretraining capability was never forgotten or removed.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
E.1        F INE - TUNING IN PRESENCE OF SOME PRE - TRAINING DATA

In this section, we demonstrate our claims also hold for an often used fine-tuning setup wherein,
beyond the fine-tuning data, the model also gets to see some portion of the pretraining data again.
Specifically, we perform three degrees of mixing of the pretraining and fine-tuning data: (i) 50%
PT + 50% FT, (i) 10% PT + 90% FT, and (i) 0.1% PT + 99.9% FT. We show behavior results on
how the performance of the model improves as a function of fine-tuning iterations for different
spurious correlations for a low pretraining sampling prior in Figs. 18, 19 and high sampling prior in
Figs. 20, 21. Furthermore, we probe these models’ intermediate outputs to infer if features relevant to
the pretraining capability continue to persist. Results can be seen in Figs. 22, 23.
                                     CTr = 0           CTr = 0.5            CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1.0            ηM            ηS
                           CTe = 0              CTe = 1              CTe = 0                CTe = 1               CTe = 0                 CTe = 1
                 100
                  65
                  30
      Acc. OFT


                 100
                  65
                  30

                       0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K     0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K

                             (a) 50% PT + 50% FT                      (b) 10% PT + 90% FT                        (c) 0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                  (high mixing)                          (medium mixing)                                (low mixing)


Figure 18: Effect of different sampling probabilities of pre-training target token OPT on fine-
tuning task’s performance. We observe similar gains for different values of sampling probabilities
of OPT during fine-tuning.

                                     CTr = 0           CTr = 0.5            CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1.0            ηM            ηS
                           CTe = 0              CTe = 1              CTe = 0                CTe = 1               CTe = 0                 CTe = 1
                 100
                  65
                  30
      Acc. OPT


                 100
                  65
                  30

                       0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K      0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K

                             (a) 50% PT + 50% FT                      (b) 10% PT + 90% FT                        (c) 0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                  (high mixing)                          (medium mixing)                                (low mixing)


Figure 19: Effect of different sampling probabilities of pre-training target token OPT on pre-
training task’s performance. We observe a higher loss in performance if low sampling probability
is used for sampling the pre-training target token OPT during fine-tuning.
                                     CTr = 0           CTr = 0.5            CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1.0            ηM            ηS
                           CTe = 0              CTe = 1              CTe = 0                CTe = 1               CTe = 0                 CTe = 1
                 100
                  65
                  30
      Acc. OFT


                 100
                  65
                  30

                       0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K     0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K

                             (a) 50% PT + 50% FT                      (b) 10% PT + 90% FT                        (c) 0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                  (high mixing)                          (medium mixing)                                (low mixing)


Figure 20: Effect of different sampling probabilities of pre-training target token OPT on fine-
tuning task’s performance. Pre-training is done using high sampling prior for fine-tuning task
family token. We observe similar gains for different values of sampling probabilities of OPT during
fine-tunning.


                                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           CTr = 0           CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8           CTr = 1.0            ηM             ηS
                                 CTe = 0               CTe = 1              CTe = 0                 CTe = 1              CTe = 0                  CTe = 1
                       100
                        65
                        30
            Acc. OFT


                       100
                        65
                        30

                             0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K   0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K      0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K    0 2.5K 5K 7.5K 10K

                                   (a) 50% PT + 50% FT                       (b) 10% PT + 90% FT                        (c) 0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                        (high mixing)                           (medium mixing)                                (low mixing)


Figure 21: Effect of different sampling probabilities of pre-training target token OPT on pre-
tuning task’s performance. Pre-training is done using high sampling prior for fine-tuning task
family token. We observe similar gains for different values of sampling probabilities of OPT during
fine-tunning.


                                        50% PT + 50% FT                        10% PT + 90% FT                            0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                                           CTr = 0                        CTr = 1                       CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
           100
Acc. OPT


            65
            30


           100
Acc. OFT


            65
            30

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6            B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

           (a) Pre-trained Model                                            (b) ηM                                                        (c) ηS


                                           Figure 22: Probing analysis corresponding to Fig-18 and 19


                                        50% PT + 50% FT                        10% PT + 90% FT                            0.1% PT + 99.9% FT
                                                           CTr = 0                        CTr = 1                       CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
           100
Acc. OPT


            65
            30


           100
Acc. OFT


            65
            30

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6            B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

           (a) Pre-trained Model                                            (b) ηM                                                        (c) ηS


                                           Figure 23: Probing analysis corresponding to Fig-20 and 21


                                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2               JAILBREAKING A NALYSIS

We emulate jailbreaking (Wei et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023) in our PCFG setup by defining several
task family tokens describing the same task. Specifically, for the “Counter" task, we use three task
family tokens TN J , TJ1 , TJ2 to refer to the task in a string. Here subscript N J indicates the task
family token will not allow jailbreaking, while J1 /J2 indicate the task family token can be used to
jailbreak the model, as explained next. For pretraining, the token TN J may be paired with operand
tokens a, b, c to learn to count them from inputs sampled from the PCFG. However, tokens Tj1 , Tj2
are used only for counting a. During fine-tuning, the model is fine-tuned to count the token b using
the task family token TN J . For evaluation, we compute the model’s accuracy on its ability to count
the token a, using either the task family token TN J or TJ1 , TJ2 . As shown in Fig. 24, the model is
unable to infer the count of a if the task family token TN J is used; however, if task family tokens
TJ1 , TJ2 are used, the model performs perfectly if the prior for sampling the fine-tuning target b
during pretraining was sufficiently high. We argue that this is expected because under a high sampling
prior breaks the symmetry between task family tokens (indeed, TJ1 is only seen with operand token a,
but TN J is seen for all operand tokens. This indicates the pretraining capability continues to persist
in the model, enabling jailbreaking. To further investigate this result, we also probe the fine-tuned
models. Results are shown in Fig. 25. As expected, we see task family tokens TJ1 , TJ2 allow for
linear readout of the count of a; however, we see that even for inputs with task family token TN J , the
model does encode the count of a in the outputs around the middle layers!
                                                                       H
                                                                        T              M
                                                                                        T               LT
                            TNJ                                 TJ1 /TJ2                                TNJ                                       TJ1 /TJ2
           100
Acc. OPT


           65
           30

                 0   2.5K   5K    7.5K 10K         0     2.5K     5K       7.5K 10K          0   2.5K    5K     7.5K 10K               0   2.5K     5K       7.5K 10K
                                             (a)ηM                                                                             (b)ηS


Figure 24: Jailbreaking analysis using PCFG. We report performance on the pretraining task
(counting OPT ) as a function of fine-tuning iterations, where the fine-tuning task (counting OFT ) is
performed using the task family token TNJ . We find that the model is able to learn the fine-tuning
task and seemingly performs poorly on the pretraining task when task family token TNJ is used in
the input. However, in presence of a sufficiently relevant capability (high pretraining prior for OFT ),
using task family tokens TJ1 or TJ2 in the input shows the model can still perform the pretraining task
perfectly—i.e., we can jailbreak the model.
                                                                       H
                                                                        T               M
                                                                                         T                    LT
                                                     TJ1 /TJ2                          TNJ                          TJ1 /TJ2                             TNJ
            100
Acc. OPT


             65
             30


            100
Acc. OFT


             65
             30

                  B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6       B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6             B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6            B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

             (a) Pre-trained Model                                     (b) ηM                                                          (c) ηS


Figure 25: Probing analysis for the setup used to understand jail-breaking. Similar results on
using the fine-tuning token or the jailbreaking token for training the probe indicate that the pre-training
capabilities are not removed on fine-tuning.


                                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3         S AMPLE EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS FOR R EVERSE F INE - TUNING

To emphasize the fact that the pretraining capability is “revived” in the model relatively sample-
efficiently, we repeat Fig. 9, where models trained on PCFG are reverse fine-tuned, and repeat the
experiment with the Scr. + FT baseline for Tracr compiled models. As can be seen in Figs. 26, 27,
compared to the baseline, the model learns to perform the pretraining task in substantially fewer
iterations than the baseline. We note that for the Tracr models in these results, even an extremely
small learning rate is sufficient to revive the pretraining capability! We also note that we do not sweep
over the CTr hyperparameter in the Tracr models because they are compiled, i.e., we cannot control
the correlation with the pretraining capabilities in a meaningful way.
                        CTr = 0                    CTr = 1                   Scr. + FT               ηM           ηS
           100
            65
            30
Acc. OPT


           100
            65
            30

                 102                103        104         102         103        104          102     103       104
                                                       Iters (Log Scale)
                                   (a)    H
                                           T                  (b) M
                                                                   T                                 (c) LT
Figure 26: Reverse Fine-Tuning on PCFGs: We set CTe to be 0 to test if the model performs well
regardless of a spurious correlation. We observe that when a strongly relevant capability is present
(a, b), the model very quickly (0.1–1K iterations) starts to perform well on the task via reFT , even
if behavior relevant to the capability ceased during pretraining (e.g., when CTr is 1). Meanwhile,
when the model possessesses a weakly relevant capability (c), this “revival” is slightly slower (3K
iterations). In contrast, the Scr. + FT baseline only reaches perfect accuracy at 4.5K iterations and
when using a larger learning rate ηM .


                                                           reFT                Scr. + FT
                            100
                 Acc. OPT


                             65
                             30

                                  103                104    103                  104     103               104
                                                           Iters (Log Scale)
                                          (a) ηM                  (b) ηS                         (c) ηVS

Figure 27: Reverse Fine-Tuning on Tracr: We set CTe to be 0 to test if the model performs well
regardless of a spurious correlation. We observe that the fine-tuned model upon reFT very quickly
starts starts to perform well on the pretraining task. Moreover, the protocol works even if an extremely
small learing rate is used. In contrast, the Scr. + FT baseline only reaches a large learning rate ηM is
used, and does so less sample efficiently. We note that the results for ηM learning rate look worse
than the ηS learning rate around 103 iterations because ηM is too big of a learning rate, forcing the
model to essentially go through a “retraining” phase.


                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4     R EVERSE F INE - TUNING A MORE SAFETY- ORIENTED FINE - TUNING PROTOCOL

The fine-tuning protocols used in the bulk of the paper focus on learning a new capability, e.g.,
counting a new operand, while promoting reusability of capabilities learned during pretraining. Part
of our motivation is to see if a pretrained model is actively forced to remove a capability, does that
work? To analyze this, we define a fine-tuning protocol called randFT wherein the model is trained
to actively produce an incorrect output for inputs that require use of the pretraining capability. For
example, if the model possessesses the capability to produce the count the number of occurrences of
token OPT = a in a string, we fine-tune it to produce the count of tokens OFT = b in that string. We
analyze these fine-tuned models analyzed via reverse fine-tuning (reFT ), i.e., by further training
them to produce the correct outputs (number of occurrences of token OPT ). We provide results for
three baselines as well: (i) Scr., wherein the model is trained from scratch to learn to count the token
a; (ii) Scr. + FT, wherein the model is initialized with parameters trained via trained from scratch to
count a separate token ( OFT ) and then the model is fine-tuned to count the token OPT ; and (iii) reFT ,
which follows reverse fine-tuning models that were fine-tuned with the protocols used in the bulk of
the paper, i.e., fine-tuned to learn a new capability that is related to the pretraining one.
Results are shown in Fig. 28. We specifically zoom in on the the scenario where reFT takes the
longest time, i.e., when the sampling prior of the downstream target OFT is low in pretraining data;
results for other sampling priors are shown in Fig. 29 We see that reverse fine-tuning a randFT model
is similarly sample-efficient as the standard reFT pipeline used in the bulk of the paper, while being
more sample-efficient than the Scr. and Scr. + FT baselines.
In addition, we perform a probing analysis of the randFT models in Fig. 30. We again find that we
can predict the information relevant for the pretraining task, i.e., the count of OPT .
            reFT                          reFT − randFT                   Scr.                  Scr. + FT                 ηM          ηS
                                             CTr = 0                                                  CTr = 1
                 100
      Acc. OPT


                  65
                  30

                       102          103      104     102         103     104     102      103       104    102         103      104
                                                   (a)                                                    (b)
                                                                  Iters (Log Scale)

Figure 28: Reverse fine-tuning a model fine-tuned to remove its pretraining capability. See text
in Sec. E.4 for details.
                                     CTr = 0                CTr = 1                  Scr. + FT              ηM                 ηS
                             100
                              65
                              30
                  Acc. OPT


                             100

                              65

                              30
                                   102      103            104     102         103        104      102           103         104
                                                                  Iters (Log Scale)
                                           (a) H
                                                T                        (b) M
                                                                              T                                 (c) LT

Figure 29: Reverse fine-tuning performance on using randFT fine-tuning protocol to forget the
pre-training capability. We follow the setup of Fig. 9 and plot results for several sampling priors
of the target token for fine-tuning, i.e., OFT , but we use randFT for fine-tuning the models before
reFT . The baseline results Scr. + FT are copied from the Fig. 28, i.e., baseline is not trained in an
“adversarial” way, but the randFT results are. While this makes the baseline unfairly stronger, we
find reFT the randFT models are still more sample efficient.


                                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               H
                                                                T             M
                                                                               T           LT
                                              CTr = 0                     CTr = 1                CTr = 0                     CTr = 1
           100
Acc. OPT


            65
            30


           100
Acc. OFT


            65
            30

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

           (a) Pre-trained Model                               (b) ηM                                             (c) ηS


Figure 30: Probing analysis of randFT fine-tuning protocol. We plot probe accuracy versus the
index of the block in the Transformer model. CTe is set to 0. The pretrained model (left) acts as a
baseline for the trend of performance through the model’s blocks. In most scenarios, we find we can
infer the count of OPT with a similar trend as the pretrained model (left). A drop in performance is
observed only when learning rate ηM is used with a weakly relevant capability (low sampling prior).
This indicates pretraining capabilities continues to persist upon fine-tuning.


                                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F       D ETAILS AND R ESULTS ON T INYSTORIES E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we describe our experiments on the TinyStories dataset in more detail. These
experiments are designed to validate our hypotheses in a more realistic language modelling setting.
Overall, the results support our hypothesis that fine-tuning does not lead to deletion of capabilities as
they can be revived in a sample-efficient way and uncovered through probing.

F.1      M ODEL T RAINING

Dataset. We use the TinyStories (Eldan & Li, 2023) dataset to train our models. This data consists
of children’s stories written by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. Each story is several paragraphs long, and comes
with several attributes labelled: a set of three words that are included in the story; a sentence that is
included in the story; a GPT-3.5-written summary of the story; and a list of 0-3 “story features”, such
as Twist, Dialogue or Bad Ending, which the story abides by.
We use the TinyStories-Instruct version of this dataset 2 , wherein each story is prefixed with an
“instruction” containing the story attributes described above, hence enabling the model to learn to
conditionally generate stories based on an input or instruction.

Pre-training. We pretrain 91 million parameter autoregressive language models with a similar
architecture to LLaMa 2 (Touvron et al., 2023), with a custom tokenizer with vocabulary of size 8192
trained on the dataset.3 They have hidden dimension 768, 12 layers, and 12 attention heads per layer.
These models are trained with the standard language modelling cross-entropy loss, with batch size
128, sequence length 1024, no dropout, for 30,000 gradient steps, with a learning rate schedule with
a linear warmup from 0 and cosine decay to 0, with maximum learning rate 0.001. These models
achieve a loss of 0̃.8 at the end of training, and can generate coherent multi-paragraph stories given a
specific instruction in the form it saw during training.

Fine-tuning. We are interested in analysing whether fine-tuning these models can alter underlying
capabilities. The specific capability we investigate is that of generating stories containing Twists
(which is one of the story features), and are analysing whether various fine-tuning protocols can
remove this capability from the pre-trained model. We investigate a variety of fine-tuning protocols
modelled after plausible realistic scenarios where one may want to fine-tune a model to not generate
text of a certain type (e.g., highly toxic text), regardless of the input instruction. These include:
Filtering fine-tunes the model on a dataset where all instances of stories with Twists are filtered out;
Filtering + Mix & Match filters, and then replaces all instances of another, unrelated feature (in this
case, Foreshadowing) in the instruction with the Twist feature; and Filtering + Randomisation
filters, and then adds the “Twist” instruction to the prompt for stories that do not contain Twists,
thus training the model to not model stories with Twists even if instructed. This last protocol acts as
a kind of adversarial training (in that there are stories with the Twist instruction but no Twists), and
introduces a spurious correlation between the Twist instruction and the foreshadowing capability, as
in the Tracr and PCFG results.
We take the pre-trained model described above, and fine-tune it with these various protocols. We
then perform reFT on a dataset of stories which all have Twists in, to measure the extent to which
each fine-tuning protocol deleted the capability of Twist generation. To ensure a good control,
we compare the reFT models to a model pre-trained on data with no Twist stories, which is then
fine-tuned on Twist stories. The sample efficiency and final performance of this model serves as a
comparison for the reFT ed models.

F.2      E VALUATION M ETRICS

We evaluate whether the fine-tuning protocols have removed the capability to model and generate
stories with Twists in multiple ways. Firstly, we look at the loss on stories with Twists. If
fine-tuning deletes the Twist capability, we expect the loss on this dataset to increase.
    2
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStoriesInstruct
    3
        Our code is based on this repository: https://github.com/karpathy/llama2.c


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GPT Evaluations. To evaluate the generative capabilities of these models, we generate stories
from them given prompt instructions with the Twist story feature. We then evaluate whether these
stories contain Twists. To do this evaluation, we use the OpenAI GPT fine-tuning API 4 to fine-tune
a GPT-3.5 model to classify whether a given story has a Twist or not. To do this, we use the
TinyStories dataset and accompanying labels. This fine-tuned model achieves 92% accuracy on a
held-out test set after fine-tuning. We generate stories with multiple different prompts from both
the fine-tuned and reverse fine-tuned models throughout fine-tuning, and measure the proportion of
stories which are classified as having a Twist, which we call the generation score.

Probing. As well as using reFT to measure whether the fine-tuning protocols have deleted
the capability to generate Twists, we also use probing to evaluate whether fine-tuning removes
information from internal representations. We train linear probes on the internal activations of the
transformer models to predict which story features (e.g. Twist, Bad Ending, Dialogue) are present
in the story. These probes take an average of the activations at the final 10 token positions of the story.
Given that this is a multi-label classification problem we employ a separate binary classification
probe to classify the presence of each story feature. We use the accuracy of these probes at different
layers before and after fine-tuning, and on the control pre-trained model which was trained on data
with no Twists, to measure whether fine-tuning has removed information from the models’ internal
activations.

F.3     R ESULTS

Reverse fine-tuning The loss on stories with Twist during fine-tuning is shown in Fig. 31. This
shows that the fine-tuning protocols are raising the loss, and hence behaviourally deleting the
capability of fine-tuning. The generation scores are shown in Fig. 32. This again reinforces that
most fine-tuning protocols are removing the capability behaviourally, as the generation scores (while
noisy) drop to close to 0.
Fig. 33 shows the loss during reFT for all the fine-tuned models, as well as the control model
pre-trained without stories with Twists, and Fig. 34 shows the generation scores. Both of these
results show that the fine-tuned models learn the new capability in a much more sample-efficient way,
and in fact converge to a lower loss on this dataset than the control pre-trained model.

Probing In addition to the reFT results, we perform probing experiments. The probing accuracy
for the Twist feature across layers for the fine-tuned models and the two control pre-trained models is
shown in Fig. 11, which we reproduce here in Fig. 35 for completeness. These results show that a
small amount of information about story classification has been removed from the activations of the
fine-tuned models compared to the model pre-trained with Twist stories, but the reduction is very
minor, as shown in comparison to the information present in the model pre-trained without Twist
stories.
Fig. 36, Fig. 37, and Fig. 38 show similar plots for several other story features. Some of these are
easier or harder for probes to classify, but the important result is that the difference in probe accuracy
between the fine-tuned models and both pre-trained control models is negligible for all of these
features, showing that the results in Fig. 35 are due to the Twist feature, i.e., the feature that we
trained the model to delete.


   4
       https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/fine-tuning


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Filtering + Randomisation             Filtering + Mix & Match          Filtering
                                          LR: S                                         LR: M
                   0.85
Loss


                   0.80

                         100       101       102          103       100          101       102      103
                                                      Training Iteration
Figure 31: Larger learning rates lead to more pronounced loss of modelling capability. The plots
show loss on data with the Twist feature present while fine-tuning to delete the capability to model
text with the Twist feature, for different learning rates and fine-tuning protocols.



                          Filtering + Randomisation             Filtering + Mix & Match          Filtering
                                          LR: S                                         LR: M
Generation Score


                   0.5

                   0.0
                      100         101       102          103        100          101      102       103
                                                      Training Iteration
Figure 32: Larger learning rates lead to more pronounced loss of generative capability. The
plots show the generation score for the Twist feature present while fine-tuning to delete the capability
to model text with the Twist feature, for different learning rates and fine-tuning protocols.



                         Filtering + Randomisation                  Filtering            Not in Pretraining
                         Filtering + Mix & Match
                                          LR: S                                        LR: M
                         0.9
              Loss


                         0.8
                           100      101      102         103        100         101      102     103
                                                   Training Iteration
Figure 33: reFT easily recovers deleted capabilities. We plot loss on data with the Twist for reFT
of various models fine-tuned to delete the capability, as well as a control model which was pre-trained
without data with Twists. The fine-tuned models learn the capability more sample-efficiently, and
additionally converge to a lower loss than the control model.


                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Filtering + Randomisation           Filtering          Not in Pretraining
                          Filtering + Mix & Match
                                       LR: S                                      LR: M
Generation Score



                   0.75
                   0.50
                   0.25
                      100       101       102       103       100          101       102        103
                                                Training Iteration
Figure 34: reFT easily recovers deleted generative capabilities. We plot the generation scores for
the Twist feature for reFT of various models fine-tuned to delete the capability, as well as a control
model which was pre-trained without data with Twists. The fine-tuned models learn the capability
much more sample-efficiently, and additinoally converge to a lower loss, than the control model.


                                 Filtering                            Not in Pretraining
                                 Filtering + Mix & Match              Present in Pretraining
                                 Filtering + Randomisation
                                       LR: M                                      LR: S
Probe Accuracy


                   0.95
                   0.90
                   0.85
                          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10       B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10
                                                Probe Layer Index
Figure 35: Probing the presence of capabilities in TinyStories Models. We plot probe accuracy
of classifying whether a story contains a Twist or not wrt. the layer of the Transformer model
(similarly to Fig. 8). Accuracy on models pre-trained with or without Twist data (Present/Not in
Pretraining respectively) act as upper and lower bounds on the expected accuracy of the probes,
and are plotted on both LR figures for ease of comparison, although they do not use a fine-tuning
learning rate. We find that regardless of fine-tuning protocol (Filtering, Filtering + Randomisation,
Filtering + Mix & Match), for the lower LR no fine-tuning protocol removes a meaningful amount of
information from the activations, and a similar but less strong trend holds for the higher LR, implying
that the pre-trained model retains its capability of story identification (a necessary capability for story
modelling) throughout fine-tuning. Identical to Fig. 11


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Filtering                       Not in Pretraining
                              Filtering + Mix & Match         Present in Pretraining
                              Filtering + Randomisation
                                     LR: M                                LR: S
Probe Accuracy


                 0.95
                 0.90
                 0.85
                        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10
                                             Probe Layer Index
Figure 36: Probing the presence of capabilities in TinyStories Models. We plot probe accuracy
of classifying whether a story contains the Foreshadowing feature or not wrt. the layer of the
Transformer model. All other details the same as Fig. 35


                              Filtering                       Not in Pretraining
                              Filtering + Mix & Match         Present in Pretraining
                              Filtering + Randomisation
                                     LR: M                                LR: S
                 1.00
Probe Accuracy


                 0.95
                 0.90
                 0.85
                        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10
                                             Probe Layer Index
Figure 37: Probing the presence of capabilities in TinyStories Models. We plot probe accuracy of
classifying whether a story contains the Moral Value feature or not wrt. the layer of the Transformer
model. All other details the same as Fig. 35


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Filtering                      Not in Pretraining
                               Filtering + Mix & Match        Present in Pretraining
                               Filtering + Randomisation
                                     LR: M                               LR: S
Probe Accuracy


                 0.95
                 0.90
                 0.85
                        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10
                                              Probe Layer Index
Figure 38: Probing the presence of capabilities in TinyStories Models. We plot probe accuracy of
classifying whether a story contains the Bad Ending feature or not wrt. the layer of the Transformer
model. All other details the same as Fig. 35


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G                 A DDITIONAL T RACR R ESULTS

In this section, we present additional results on the counting and max-identifier tasks with Tracr
models. These results provide an extensive analysis and support our claims presented in the main
paper. Firstly, we present the detailed attention maps showing the full input sequence data: Fig. 40
and Fig. 39 show the attention maps corresponding to Fig. 42 and Fig. 43. We now present the
detailed results on Tracr’s Counter tasks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5



                                                                                        Attending Token
                                                                                                                                  tt
                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                btt
                                                                                                                                at
                                                                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                bt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                at
                                                                                                                                btt
                                                                                                                                   tt
                                                                                                                                    tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                     tt
                                                                                                                                      tt
                                                                                                                                       tt
                                                                                                                                att                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                        tt
                                                                                                                                         tt
                                                                                                                                          tt
                                                                                                                                btt
                                                                                                                                           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                           tt
                                                                                                                                            tt
                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                 ttttbtatbbtttatbttttttttttttatttttttttbtttttt                                                                 ttttbtatbbtttatbttttttttttttatttttttttbtttttt                                                                     0.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Token Attended
                                                                                                                                                                               (a) ηM                                                                                                                  (b) ηL
Figure 39: Counter Task: Detailed visualization of the capability revival analysis on Tracr
compiled for the Counter task. Observation: On using ηV S , we are able to revive the compiled
capability of the Tracr model fine-tuned with ηM , whereas using ηL for fine-tuning hampers the
underlying capability of the model and therefore there is no revival seen.
                       Tracr Program                                                                                                                                CTr = 0                                                                      CTr = 1                                                                      CTr = 0                                                                      CTr = 1                                                   0.5
                                                                                                     ------------------------
Attending Token


                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  b
                  -
                  a
                  -
                  b
                  b
                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                  -
                  -
                  a
                  -
                  b
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  a
                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                      - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                                 - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   0.0

                  Token Attended
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) ηS                                                                                                                                                   (b) ηM

Figure 40: Counter Task: Detailed visualization of the self attention layer in Block-1 of the
Tracr fine-tuned model. Observation: (a) shows the map for the compiled Tracr model, where
we observe that a’s are being attended by the second token in the input sequence. (b) On using ηS
for fine-tuning in the absence of spurious correlations (CTe = 0), a’s are still being attended in the
attention map. (c) On using ηM , the model learns the fine-tuning task as b’s are also being attended
now. On fine-tuning in the presence of the spurious correlation (CTe = 1), the model doesn’t learn to
attend b’s, but rather learns the spurious correlation.

G.1                   B EHAVIORAL RESULTS ON FINE - TUNING

Summary of results on the Counter task. As shown in Fig. 42, on using ηM , the model seems
to learn a new capability of counting b’s (the model primarily attends to b in its attention map).
However, on using a small learning rate (ηS ) of 10−3 , in the absence of correlations, the model is not
able to learn to attend to b’s in its attention map. Thus the model is not able to learn the capability of
counting b’s. As shown in Tab. 3, in the presence of spurious correlations however, the model is able
to learn the spurious correlation and achieve high accuracy on the correlated test set. We also present
the visualization of the attention maps after reverse fine-tuning in Fig. 43, where it is observed that
on using ηM for fine-tuning, revival of capability is possible even on using a very small learning rate
(ηvs ) of 10−4 . We present detailed results on reverse fine-tuning in Tab. 4 Whereas, in case the model
is fine-tuned with a large learning rate (ηL ) of 10−1 , revival of capability is not possible. We also
present analysis of single weight pruning and grafting in Fig. 55. On pruning off a single weight
from the Tracr model compiled to count a’s, the model can achieve a boost in accuracy of over 60%
on the task of counting a’s. This observation is evident only when the Tracr model is fine-tuned on
correlated dataset.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              36
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                              CTr = 0                                                                                                                                                   CTr = 1                                                                                                                                                   CTr = 0                                                                                                   CTr = 1
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                            - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                                                                - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                                                                - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                           - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                             0.4
                                      Attending Token


                                                                                   -
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                            -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                                                      -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                                                      -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                 -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   b
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   a
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                   -
                                                                                            - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                                                      - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                                                      - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                                 - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -



                                                                                                                                                                                                              (a) ηS                                                                                                                                         Token Attended                                                                                                                      (b) ηM

      Figure 41: Counter Task: Validation of Tracr observations on Counter task using three different
      input samples. The rows represents different input samples. Observation: Using ηS for fine-tuning
      the Tracr model compiled on Counter task is unable to learn to attend b’s (a). But the model learns the
      spurious correlation. On the other hand, on using ηM the model is able to learn the fine-tuning task
      by attending to b’s. But in the presence of the spurious correlation CTr = 1 the model still doesn’t
      learn to attend b’s.

      Summary of results on the max-identifer task. We present a visualization of the attention maps for
      the max identifier task in Fig. 44, where we observe that Tracr model implements the sorting and
      the reading functions in the attention maps in blocks 0 and 2 respectively. On fine-tuning the model
      using different learning rates, the sorting capability implemented in Block-0, gets distorted, thereby
      resulting in poor fine-tuning performance (as evident in Tab. 3). However using ηV S (10−4 ), changes
      the reading function, without disturbing the sorting function. Thus the model is able to perform well
      on the downstream task (as evident in Tab. 3).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Attending Token


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tt

                       Tracr Program                                                                                                             CTr = 0                                                                      CTr = 1                                                                      CTr = 0                                                                      CTr = 1                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   btt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                   ------------------------


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   bt                                                                                                                 0.4
Attending Token


                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tt
                  -
                  -
                  b
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                at
                  a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                btt
                  -
                  b
                  b
                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                                 tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tt
                  -
                  a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tt
                  -
                  b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tt
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3                                                             att                                                                                                                0.2
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tt
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tt
                  -
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tt
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                             btt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t                                                                                                      0.1
                  a
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tt
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tt
                  -
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                  -
                  -
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                  -
                  -
                  b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1                                                                                ttttbtatbbtttatbttttttttttttatttttttttbtttttt   ttttbtatbbtttatbttttttttttttatttttttttbtttttt
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Token Attended
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) ηM                                               (b) ηL
                      - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                              - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -


                  Token Attended
                                                                                                                                                                                         (a) ηS                                                                                                                                                   (b) ηM

                                                                           Figure 43: Capability Revival Analy-
            Figure 42: New capabilities are not learned on using sis: Using ηV S (a) is able to recover the
            ηS for fine-tuning. (a) The counting a’s capability im- old capability on reverse fine-tuning the
            plemented by the originally compiled Tracr model is to model fine-tuned with ηM . But ηS is not
            attend to a’s. On using ηS (10−3 ) for fine-tuning, the com- able to recover the original capability,
            piled model is not able to learn the capability of counting when the compiled model is fine-tuned
            b’s (b). Increasing the learning rate makes the model learn with ηl . This is because using a large
            to attend b’s (c), but the pretraining capability of attending value of learning rate during=fine-tuning
            to a’s still exists.                                           hampers the pre-training capabilities.

       G.2                                        COUNTER RESULTS

     A detailed analysis of the attention maps of block-1 and 2 for different learning rates is shown in
     Fig. 45. We further validate our results for three different input datapoints in Fig. 41 and Fig. 49. A
     detailed analysis of the activation map in Block-1 for different values of CTr is shown in Fig. 48.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   0.0                                0.1                        0.2                           0.3                            0.4                                 0.5



                                  Tracr Program                                             Block-0                                                 ηVS
                            Block-0            Block-2                             ηM                       ηS                     Block-0                        Block-2
                  k
Attending Token   e
                  h
                  w
                  m
                  g
                  u
                  a
                   t
                  d
                  #
                  #
                       k e h wm g u a t d # #    k e h wm g u a t d # #   k e h wm g u a t d # #   k e h wm g u a t d # #     k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                                                       Token Attended
                                                (a)                                           (b)                                                      (c)


Figure 44: Learning of the fine-tuning capability is affected by type of compiled capability
present in the model. (a) The Tracr program implements the sorting function in Block-0 and read
function in Block-2. Using ηM and ηS can destroy the sorting capability present in Block-1 (b).
But using ηV S , preserves the sorting capability (c). Thus on using ηV S , the model learns to read a
different stream of output, while preserving the sorting capability.

Table 3: Results on counting and max element task Tracr setups. The evaluation is done on test
sets with and without the spurious correlation. The Tracr compiled models are fine-tuned for different
learning rates and different value of CTr .

                                                         Counting Element                     Max Identifier
                                  η     CTr         CTe = 1           CTe = 0           CTe = 1           CTe = 0
                                                Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT
                                     0            0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0         20.3           34.5           0.0              99.3
                                    0.2           0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0          0.5           92.0           0.0              97.1
                                    0.5           0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0          0.6           97.0           0.1              97.6
                               10−1 0.6           0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0          0.3           98.5           0.0              96.7
                                    0.8           0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0          0.1           99.4           0.0              98.6
                                    0.9           0.0          100.0         0.0          100.0          0.7           98.2           0.1              92.5
                                     1            0.0          100.0         35.8           0.7          0.3           99.6          16.8              37.8
                                     0            1.1           96.3         0.0           98.8         29.7            0.2          16.3              52.6
                                    0.2           0.0          100.0         0.0           99.2         28.4           18.6          19.0              46.0
                                    0.5           0.6           99.4         0.0           95.9          4.8           87.9           3.3              92.6
                               10−2 0.6           0.1           99.9         0.0           98.8          3.9           83.2           2.6              82.5
                                    0.8           0.3           99.6         0.1           97.0          4.5           88.8           6.6              72.9
                                    0.9           1.4           98.5         7.1           39.3         16.0           45.7          26.9              11.1
                                     1            0.3           98.3         4.2            0.2         11.1           78.5          23.8              14.4
                                     0            54.6          1.2          25.7          27.2          6.4           20.2           4.5              28.5
                                    0.2           50.2          15.0         26.5          24.3          7.4           27.4           5.4              28.0
                                    0.5           7.1           90.9         19.8           2.3         11.3           24.0           7.6              20.8
                               10−3 0.6           4.1           94.2         11.8           2.2         11.8           26.7           8.4              20.1
                                    0.8           1.3           98.3         6.7            0.7         11.5           34.3           8.5              19.9
                                    0.9           1.8           97.8         9.2            0.7         14.6           32.2          11.4              15.8
                                     1            4.0           94.3         10.3           2.2         16.0           33.2          12.8              14.0
                                     0            32.6          0.0          10.6          28.7          0.5           82.6           0.5              91.1
                                    0.2           59.2          0.1          31.9          24.4          0.1           84.8           0.6              91.3
                                    0.5           28.5          65.1         37.8           5.6          0.0           89.3           0.6              91.8
                               10−4 0.6           24.4          70.3         35.6           4.8          0.0           89.6           0.6              90.8
                                    0.8           14.1          84.2         29.7           2.1          0.0           89.7           0.6              89.9
                                    0.9           1.3           98.3         6.7            0.7          0.0           93.2           0.2              97.1
                                     1            1.6           98.3         10.6           0.2          0.0           90.2           0.7              88.6



We present an evidence further, showing that capability of the Tracr compiled model to count a’s is
still present in the model in Fig. 46, 47, where Fig. 46 presents a closer look of the Fig. 47. As can be
seen in Fig. 46, on using ηS and ηM , Block-1 activation map of the Tracr fine-tuned model shows
neurons corresponding to token a being activated in a different output channel.
Finally, we present evidence of the wrapper being learned by the model on fine-tuning using spuriously
correlated dataset. We show that this wrapper can be localized in a very few neurons of the model.


                                                                                            38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Results on counting task Tracr for reverse fine-tuning with different learning rates.
Fine-tuning was done using ηM . The evaluation is done on test sets with and without the spurious
correlation. The Tracr compiled models are fine-tuned for different learning rates and different value
of CTr .

                                                  Counting Element
             η   CTr       CTe = 1           CTe = 0           CTe = 1           CTe = 0
                       Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT Acc. OPT Acc. OFT
                 0       96.5    100.0     2.1      0.0     94.0     100.0     0.1      0.0
                0.2      98.5    100.0     0.1      0.0     94.9     100.0     0.1      0.0
                0.5      39.4    100.0     43.6     0.0     44.9     100.0     5.6      0.0
           10−1 0.6      72.9    100.0     26.7     0.0     69.4     100.0     0.2      0.0
                0.8      49.3    100.0     6.5      0.0     37.1     100.0    16.6      0.0
                0.9      31.3    100.0     64.0     0.0     34.1     100.0     1.7      0.0
                 1       69.2    100.0     3.7      0.0     65.4     100.0     6.3      0.0
                 0       63.3     99.9     36.6     0.1     65.5      98.6     0.0      0.0
                0.2      19.5    100.0     48.8     0.0     29.6     100.0    17.5      0.0
                0.5      14.3    100.0     54.4     0.0     28.9      99.9    18.7      0.0
           10−2 0.6      86.2     99.9     13.8     0.1     78.3      98.6     0.0      0.0
                0.8      65.6    100.0     1.7      0.0     43.7      99.5    10.8      0.0
                0.9      33.3    100.0     27.9     0.0     36.5     100.0    12.6      0.0
                 1       99.0     99.6     0.9      0.3     95.2      96.8     0.1      0.1
                 0       19.8     99.9     34.9     0.0     23.7      98.6    10.2      0.0
                0.2      3.9      17.1     33.8    78.0     24.4      42.9    14.7      3.0
                0.5      2.0      87.6     33.2     9.5     18.9      85.7    11.9      0.9
           10−3 0.6      7.1      99.8     35.4     0.1     22.3      97.3    15.4      0.1
                0.8      11.6     97.2     45.8     0.3     27.3      95.5    16.5      0.5
                0.9      24.2     75.2     20.3    23.6     33.5      68.8    13.1      1.5
                 1       68.5     99.9     26.7     0.1     65.3      98.6     5.8      0.0
                 0       45.2     99.9     0.1      0.1     16.9      98.5     4.9      0.0
                0.2      30.1     9.4      22.7    45.1     18.1      26.2    17.9     19.5
                0.5      30.1     3.2      22.7    41.3     15.7      26.1    17.9     16.2
           10−4 0.6      54.1     0.0      45.9    35.9      0.0      27.8    25.7     11.9
                0.8      26.8     83.0     64.5    10.9      3.0      76.8    49.2      1.3
                0.9      27.9     85.0     61.5     8.4      2.1      80.9    44.2      1.1
                 1       45.2     99.6     31.9     0.3     42.2      96.8    12.6      0.0


As shown in Fig. 55, we present this evidence for different values of CTr in Fig. 56. Similar to the
analysis presented for PCFG where we prune multiple neurons, we analyze the effect of pruning
of mutliple weights and neurons in Fig. 57 and Fig. 58 respectively. These results verify that the
wrapper learned by the Tracr compiled model on fine-tuning using spuriously correlated dataset can
indeed be localized to a few weights of the Tracr model. To ensure that the gains achieved on pruning
are indeed because of removal of the wrapper, we present the histograms showing the distribution of
the predicted classes in Fig. 59, where it can be observed that after pruning the model still predicts
multiple classes.

G.3    M AX IDENTIFIER RESULTS

In this section, we provide additional evidence and a detailed analysis of the performance of the Tracr
compiled model on the max identifier task. We show that the model implements the sorting pattern in
the activation map of its first block in Fig. 53 and Fig-54. We present validation of our observations
on considering the spurious correlation as the difference between the fifth and seventh maximmum
element being three in Fig. 51. We validate our results for three different input data-points in Fig. 50.
A detailed visualization of the attention maps in Block-0 and Block-2 for different learning rates is
shown in Fig. 52.


                                                    39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                             Tracr Program                                                                                                                    Tracr Program
                    --
                                                      Block-1                                            Block-2                                                                                                        Block-1            Block-2
                     -
                  b--
                  a-
                  b
                  b-
                     -
                  a-
                  b--
                     --
                      --
                       --
                        --
                         --
                  a--
                          --
                           --
                            --
                             -
                  b--
                             --
                              --
                               -
                                   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -         - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -

                                                                                                           CTr = 0                                                                             ηL                                                                       CTr = 1                                                                                0.5
                    --
                     -
                  b--
                  a-
                  b
                  b-
                     -
                  a-
                  b--
                     --
                      --
                       --
                        --
                         --
                  a--
                          --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                           --
                            --
                             -
                  b--
                             --
                              --
                               -
                                   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -         - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -

                                                                                                                                                                                               ηM
                    --
Attending Token


                     -
                  b--
                  a-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                  b
                  b-
                     -
                  a-
                  b--
                     --
                      --
                       --
                        --
                         --
                  a--
                          --
                           --
                            --
                             -
                  b--                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                             --
                              --
                               -
                                   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -         - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -

                                                                                                                                                                                                ηS
                    --
                     -
                  b--
                  a-
                  b
                  b-
                     -
                  a-
                  b--                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                     --
                      --
                       --
                        --
                         --
                  a--
                          --
                           --
                            --
                             -
                  b--
                             --
                              --
                               -
                                   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -         - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               ηVS
                    --
                     -
                  b--
                  a-
                  b
                  b-
                     -
                  a-
                  b--
                     --
                      --
                       --
                        --
                         --
                  a--
                          --
                           --
                            --
                             -
                  b--
                             --
                              --
                               -
                                   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -         - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -   - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -


                                                                                                                (a)                           Token Being Attended To                                                                                                                            (b)

Figure 45: Counter Task: Visualization of the attention maps of the first and second blocks of
the Tracr fine-tuned models. (a) shows the analysis when the spurious correlation is not present in
the fine-tuning datatset, whereas in case of (b) the spurious correlation is present in the fine-tuning
dataset. The first row shows the maps for the Tracr compiled model and other rows shows the analysis
for different learning rates. Observation: (a) Using ηS or ηV S the model is not able to learn to
attend b’s and thus the fine-tuning task performance is poor. Whereas using ηM the model is able to
learn to attend to b’s, however the capability to count a’s is likely still present since the model still
attends to a’s. Further increasing the learning rate leads to distortion of the compiled capabilities,
and thus model learns the fine-tuning task by learning a different capability. (b) In the presence of
spurious correlation, even for large learning rate the compiled capability is still present, since the
model attends to a’s.


                                                                                                                                                                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  0.0                                      0.1                                 0.2                              0.3                                  0.4                                 0.5


                                                Tracr                                    ηL                                    ηM                                    ηS                                 ηvs
                                  -
                                  -
                    Input Token   -
                                  -
                                  -
                                  b
                                  -
                                  a
                                  -
                                  b
                                  b
                                  -
                                  -
                                  -
                                  a
                                  -
                                  b
                                  -
                                  -
                                  -
                                                                             80   85         90   95     100         80   85    90       95   100         80    85   90        95    100   80      85    90         95   100
                                      80   85        90   95         100


                                  -
                                  -
                                  -
                    Input Token


                                  -
                                  -
                                  b
                                  -
                                  a
                                  -
                                  b
                                  b
                                  -
                                  -
                                  -
                                  a
                                  -
                                  b
                                  -
                                  -
                                  -
                                                                             80   85         90   95     100         80   85    90       95   100         80    85   90        95    100   80      85    90         95   100
                                      80   85        90   95         100



                                                                                                        Output Channel Number

Figure 46: Counter Task: Visualization of the activated output of the first MLP layer in first and
second blocks. The visualization is shown only for channel numbers 80-100. Observation: Using
ηM preserves the Tracr compiled capability, while also learning the fine-tuning task. This shows that
the model changes behaviourally but mechanistically the compiled capabilities are still present in it.


              0.0                                              0.1                                       0.2                                        0.3                                    0.4                                 0.5


                                                                     Block-1                                         Tracr Program                                              Block-2
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                a
                -
                b
                b
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -

                    0                 25        50         75               100        125        150           175                  0         25              50         75         100         125          150        175
                                                                                                                               ηL
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                a
                -
                b
                b
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -

                    0                 25        50         75               100        125        150           175                  0         25              50         75         100         125          150        175


                -
                                                                                                                               ηM
Input Token


                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                a
                -
                b
                b
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -

                    0                 25        50         75               100        125        150           175                  0         25              50         75         100         125          150        175


                -
                -
                                                                                                                               ηS
                -
                -
                b
                -
                a
                -
                b
                b
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -

                    0                 25        50         75               100        125        150           175
                                                                                                                               ηVS   0         25              50         75         100         125          150        175


                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                a
                -
                b
                b
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                a
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                b
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -
                -

                    0                 25        50         75               100        125        150           175                  0         25              50         75         100         125          150        175

                                                                           (a)                          Output Channel Number                                                       (b)

Figure 47: Counter Task: Visualization of the activated output of the first MLP layer in first
and second blocks. This is the complete visualization of the activation map presented in Fig. 46.


                                                                                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  0.0                                                                                            0.1                                                                                          0.2                                                                                              0.3                                                                                         0.4                                                                                        0.5


                  -
                                               CTr = 0.0                                                                                    CTr = 0.5                                                                                        CTr = 0.8                                                                                        CTr = 0.9                                                                                   CTr = 1.0
                  -
                  -
                  -
Attending Token


                  b
                  -
                  a
                  -
                  b
                  b
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  a
                  -
                  b
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  a
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  b
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                  -
                      - - - - b - a - bb - - - a - b - - - - - - - - - - - - a - - - - - - - - - b - - - - - -     - - - - b - a - bb - - - a - b - - - - - - - - - - - - a - - - - - - - - - b - - - - - -         - - - - b - a - bb - - - a - b - - - - - - - - - - - - a - - - - - - - - - b - - - - - -         - - - - b - a - bb - - - a - b - - - - - - - - - - - - a - - - - - - - - - b - - - - - -    - - - - b - a - bb - - - a - b - - - - - - - - - - - - a - - - - - - - - - b - - - - - -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Token Attended
                                                             (a)                                                                                          (b)                                                                       (c)                                                                                                                     (d)                                                                                         (e)


Figure 48: Counter Task: Effect of the presence of the spuriously correlated data-points in
different fractions (CTr ) in the fine-tuning dataset. The Tracr compiled model with the capability
to count a’s is fine-tuned to count b’s on different values of CTr . ηM is used for fine-tuning.
Observation: On increasing the value of CTr , the model gives lower attention to b’s and in case of
CTr = 1, almost no attention is given by the model to b’s.


                                                                ηSreFT                                                                                                      reFT
                                                                                                                                                                           ηVS                                                                                                             reFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ηM                                                                                                             ηSreFT
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         b
                         -
                         a
                         -
                         b
                         b
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         a
                         -
                         b
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         a
                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         b
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                                - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                 - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                     - - - -b-a-bb- - -a-b- - - - - - - - - - - -a- - - - - - - - -b- - - - - -                                              0.4
Attending Token


                         -
                         a
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         b
                         a
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                                -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                       -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                           -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                           -a- - - - - - -ba- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         b
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         a
                         a
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                         -
                                - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                       - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                           - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                           - - - - -b- - -aa- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -



                                                                                                                  (a) ηM                                                                                            Token Attended                                                                                                                                           (b) ηL

Figure 49: Counter Task: Validation of Tracr observations on Counter task on reverse fine-
tuning on three different input samples. The rows represents different input samples. Observation:
Capability revival is possible on using ηM for fine-tuning but not on using ηL .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    CTr = 0                               CTr = 1                                   CTr = 0                               CTr = 1
                       k
                       e
                       h
                       w
                       m
                       g
                       u
                       a
                        t
                       d
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                            k e hwmg u a t d###############       k e hwmg u a t d###############           k e hwmg u a t d###############       k e hwmg u a t d###############              0.4
Attending Token


                        l
                        i
                        t
                        r
                       b
                       s
                       u
                       g                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                       p
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                            l i t r b s u g p################     l i t r b s u g p################         l i t r b s u g p################     l i t r b s u g p################
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                       v
                       c
                        t
                       g
                        l
                       y
                        r
                       h
                       e
                       u
                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                       #
                            v c t g l y r h e u###############    v c t g l y r h e u###############        v c t g l y r h e u###############    v c t g l y r h e u###############


                                                         (a) ηVS                               Token Attended                                (b) ηM

Figure 50: Max Identifier Task: Validation of Tracr observations on max identifier task on three
different input samples. The rows represents different input samples. Observation: Using ηV S
preserves the original Tracr capabilities and therefore performs well on the fine-tuning task, whereas
using ηM distorts the compiled capabilities resulting in poor performance on the fine-tuning task.


                   0.0                                   0.1                             0.2                                 0.3                              0.4                                0.5



                                    Tracr Program                                                      Block-0                                                      ηVS
                              Block-0            Block-2                                   ηM                             ηS                      Block-0                        Block-2
                  k
Attending Token


                  e
                  h
                  w
                  m
                  g
                  u
                  a
                   t
                  d
                  #
                  #
                       k e h wm g u a t d # #        k e h wm g u a t d # #      k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #       k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                                                               Token Attended
                                                   (a)                                                (b)                                                             (c)


Figure 51: Max Identifier Task: Validation of Tracr observations on max identifier task with the
spurious correlation defined as the difference between the indices of fifth and seventh maximum
elements being three. The rows represents different input samples. Observation: Using ηV S
preserves the original Tracr capabilities and therefore performs well on the fine-tuning task, whereas
using ηM distorts the compiled capabilities resulting in poor performance on the fine-tuning task.


                                                                                                       43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  0.0                       0.1                       0.2                      0.3                      0.4                     0.5


                               Block-0 Tracr Program Block-2                                  Block-0 Tracr Program Block-2
                    k
                    e
                    h
                    w
                    m
                    g
                    u
                    a
                     t
                    d
                    #
                    #
                         k e h wm g u a t d # #          k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                  CTr = 0                         ηL                         CTr = 1
                    k
                    e
                    h
                    w
                    m
                    g
                    u
                    a
                     t
                    d
                    #
                    #
                         k e h wm g u a t d # #          k e h wm g u a t d # #   ηM    k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #

                    k
                    e
Attending Token


                    h
                    w
                    m
                    g
                    u
                    a
                     t
                    d
                    #
                    #
                         k e h wm g u a t d # #          k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                                                  ηS
                    k
                    e
                    h
                    w
                    m
                    g
                    u
                    a
                     t
                    d
                    #
                    #
                         k e h wm g u a t d # #          k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                                                  ηVS
                    k
                    e
                    h
                    w
                    m
                    g
                    u
                    a
                     t
                    d
                    #
                    #
                         k e h wm g u a t d # #          k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #         k e h wm g u a t d # #
                                                   (a)                  Token Attended                           (b)


Figure 52: Max Identifier Task: Visualization of the attention maps of the zeroth and second
blocks of the Tracr fine-tuned models on the max identifier task. (a) shows the analysis when
the spurious correlation is not present in the fine-tuning datatset, whereas in case of (b) the spurious
correlation is present in the fine-tuning dataset. The first row shows the maps for the Tracr compiled
model and other rows shows the analysis for different learning rates. Observation: Using ηL , ηM
or ηS for fine-tuning distorts the capability of the programmed Tracr model in the Block-0 and as a
result the Block-2 attention map is not able to attend to the desired output token. Whereas using ηV S
is able to preserve the capability and as a result the fine-tuned model is able to attend to the correct
token in the attention map in Block-2.


                                                                              44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            0.0                                   0.1                              0.2                               0.3                                      0.4                                0.5


                                       Tracr                                       ηL                                ηM                                      ηS                                     ηVS
                        k
                        e
                        h
 Input Token

                        w
                        m
                        g
                        u
                        a
                         t
                        d
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                             50   55        60   65        70       50        55   60    65   70         50     55    60       65   70        50   55        60     65        70     50        55    60     65   70

                        k
                        e
                        h
 Input Token


                        w
                        m
                        g
                        u
                        a
                         t
                        d
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                        #
                             50   55        60   65        70       50        55   60    65   70         50     55    60       65   70        50   55        60     65        70     50        55    60     65   70


                                                                                              Output Channel Number

Figure 53: Max Identifier Task: Visualization of the activated output of the first MLP layer in
first and second blocks for the max identifier task. The visualization is shown only for channel
numbers 50-70. Observation: Using ηV S for fine-tuning, which enables the model to learn the
fine-tuning task, preserves the Tracr compiled model’s compiled capability of sorting tokens in
Block-1. Whereas other learning rates are not able to preserve this capability.


                  0.0                                       0.1                                0.2                                   0.3                                       0.4                                0.5


                                                                  Block-1                                     Tracr Program                                       Block-2
                   k
                   e
                   h
                   w
                   m
                   g
                   u
                   a
                    t
                   d
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #


                        0              20             40                  60            80           100                   0             20             40               60               80              100
                                                                                                                     ηL
                   k
                   e
                   h
                   w
                   m
                   g
                   u
                   a
                    t
                   d
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #


                        0              20             40                  60            80           100                   0             20             40               60               80              100

                                                                                                                     ηM
Attending Token


                   k
                   e
                   h
                   w
                   m
                   g
                   u
                   a
                    t
                   d
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #


                        0              20             40                  60            80           100                   0             20             40               60               80              100


                   k
                                                                                                                     ηS
                   e
                   h
                   w
                   m
                   g
                   u
                   a
                    t
                   d
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #


                        0              20             40                  60            80           100                   0             20             40               60               80              100
                                                                                                                     ηVS
                   k
                   e
                   h
                   w
                   m
                   g
                   u
                   a
                    t
                   d
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #
                   #


                        0              20             40                  60            80           100                   0             20             40               60               80              100

                                                                        (a)                    Output Channel Number                                                (b)


Figure 54: Max Identifier Task: Visualization of the activated output of the first MLP layer in
first and second blocks. This is the complete visualization of the activation map presented in Fig. 53.


                                                                                                                45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      ηL               ηM                ηS

                          100
                                     CTe = 0                       CTe = 0
               Acc. OFT
                           65

                           30


                          100
               Acc. OPT


                           65

                           30


                                Base W1 W2 W3 W4           Base W1 W2 W3 W4
                                   (a) CTr = 0                     (b) CTr = 1
Figure 55: Counter Task: Pruning evaluation on Tracr model fine-tuned to count b’s. Observa-
tion: Higher value of CTr leads to the learning of the wrapper on top of the Tracr compiled capability.
This wrapper is learned on using ηM and ηS and can be localized in a few weights of the model.


                                      ηL               ηM                ηS

                          100
                                     CTe = 0                       CTe = 0
               Acc. OFT


                           65

                           30


                          100
               Acc. OPT


                           65

                           30


                                Base W1 W2 W3 W4           Base W1 W2 W3 W4
                                  (a) CTr = 0.5                   (b) CTr = 0.8
Figure 56: Counter Task: Pruning evaluation on Tracr model fine-tuned to count b’s. Observa-
tion: Observations are consistent with Fig-7.


                                                  46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                               lr1e-1                     lr1e-2                     lr1e-3
                                               CTe = 0                                 CTe = 0.5                                             CTe = 0.8                                           CTe = 1
                      100
Acc. OPT

                          75
                          50
                          25



                      100
Acc. OFT


                          75
                          50
                          25

                                   0       5       10     15       20          0       5         10         15        20           0       5         10        15    20          0           5        10        15   20
                                                                                                 Number of Pruned Weights
                                                   (a)                                           (b)                      (c)                                                                         (d)


Figure 57: Counter Task, weight pruning: Pruning weights of the Tracr model fine-tuned to
count b’s using different learning rates. Observation: In the presence of spurious correlation the
model learns a wrapper when learning rates ηM and ηS are used. This wrapper can be localized in a
few weights of the model.



                                                                                               lr1e-1                     lr1e-2                     lr1e-3
                                               CTe = 0                                 CTe = 0.5                                             CTe = 0.8                                           CTe = 1
                      100
Acc. OPT


                          75
                          50
                          25



                      100
Acc. OFT


                          75
                          50
                          25

                                   0       5       10     15       20          0       5         10         15        20           0       5         10        15    20          0           5        10        15   20
                                                                                                 Number of Pruned Neurons
                                                   (a)                                           (b)                      (c)                                                                         (d)


Figure 58: Counter Task, neuron pruning: Pruning neurons of the Tracr model fine-tuned to
count b’s using different learning rates. Observation: In the presence of spurious correlation the
model learns a wrapper in case of ηM and ηS . This wrapper can be localized in a few weights of the
model.



                                                                                                  ηL                  ηM                   ηS
                                   CTr = 0                              No-Prune                ηM          B1WV97-0 Pruned                                   No-Prune           ηS          B1WK148-1 Pruned
                                                                                                 600
                 60
                                                                                                 500                                       300
                 50                                      150                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                                           250
Acc.OPT


                 40                                                                              400
                                                                                                                                           200
                 30                                      100                                     300                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                           150
                 20                                                                              200
                                                         50                                                                                100                                   100
                 10
                                                                                                 100                                        50
                 0
                                                          0                                       0                                         0                                        0
                      0        1       2       3    4          0    2      4       6       8            0        2    4      6         8         0        2      4       6   8           0        2         4    6   8

                                   CTr = 1
Acc. (Count a)


                 60
                                                                                                 300                                       300
                 50                                      150                                                                                                                     300
                 40
                                                                                                 200                                       200                                   200
                 30                                      100
                 20
                                                         50                                      100                                       100                                   100
                 10
                 0
                                                          0                                       0                                         0                                        0
                      0        1       2       3    4          0    2      4       6       8            0        2    4      6         8         0        2      4       6   8           0        2         4    6   8
                           Pruned Weight                                                        (b)                              Predicted Class Label                           (c)
                                 (a)


Figure 59: Counter Task: Effect of pruning a single weight on the distribution of predicted class
labels. Observation: Even after pruning, the model predicts different classes indicating that the gain
in accuracy on pruning is indeed because the model has removed the wrapper.



                                                                                                                     47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    A DDITIONAL PCFG RESULTS
In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the PCFG results on the counter task. More
specifically, we analyze the effect of the presence of weakly and strongly relevant capability in
the model across three different parameters: training iterations (niters ), fraction of fine-tuning data
samples with spurious correlation (CTr ) and the probability of sampling operand token (O) to be a
during pre-training (PT ). PT essentially determines whether the capability present in the pre-trained
model is strongly relevant or weakly relevant for the fine-tuning task. Additionally we also analyze
the effect of using the spuriously correlated (CTe = 1) and uncorrelated test set (CTe = 0) for
evaluation of the fine-tuned model. We present the summary of the results in Tables 5, 6 for the
counting task and Tables 7,6 for the index of occurrence tasks. Then we discuss the effect of learning
rate on fine-tuning pre-trained models with weakly and strongly relevant capabilities in Fig. 60, 61.
We observe that the observations are consistent for the considered counting and index of occurrence
tasks. Next we analyze the effect of the presence of weakly and strongly relevant capability in the
pre-trained model for different fractions of spuriously correlated data-points (CTr ) and different
pre-training iterations (niters ) in Fig. 62, 64, 66 for the counting element task and Fig. 63, 65, 67 for
the index of occurrence task. We observe that the observations are fairly consistent across both the
tasks and different values of niters . Next we present the effect of the spuriously correlated data and
presence of weakly and strongly correlated capabilities on the learning of the wrapper in Fig. 68, 69
on using uncorrelated test set for evaluation on counting and index of occurrence tasks respectively.
Similar analysis on using test set with spuriously correlated samples is present in Fig. 70 and 71.
We present the capability revival analysis on the Counter task for niters = 200K and niters = 50K
pre-trained models for weakly and strongly relevant capability fine-tuned models in Fig. 76 and
Fig. 77 respectively. A similar analysis for different number of pre-training iterations is present in
Fig. 78.
          Table 5: Results on the PCFG counting task with 200K iterations of pre-training.

                                          Acc OPT                                    Acc OFT
       η   PT (a) CTr                CTe = 0           CTe = 1                  CTe = 0           CTe = 1
                        Acc PT                                     Acc PT
                                 1K       10K       1K      10K             1K       10K       1K      10K
                  0               9.7      9.5      14.5      0             99.4      100      74.9    87.5
                 0.5              7.2      9.7      1.3       0             75.9     99.9      95.9     100
           0.999         100                                        27.1
                 0.8              5.6     10.8      0.2       0              60      99.8      98.1     100
                  1              17.2     15.2      0.2       0               0       1.6      98.9     100
                  0              99.9     92.6      13.6    67.2            99.8      100      100     92.8
                 0.5             100      90.7      15.6    73.5            99.8     99.4      99.9     100
      10−4 0.9           100                                        99.9
                 0.8             99.9     43.4      11.4    33.2            99.4     99.2      100      100
                  1              99.8     15.9      16.5     2.4            99.6      9.4      6.1      100
                  0              98.9     14.7      76.6    44.1            99.9      100      87.6    99.2
                 0.5             95.1     23.6      71.2    33.4            99.7      100      99.8    99.9
            0.5          99.9                                       99.9
                 0.8             92.8     12.2      79.8     2.2            99.9     99.9      98.7    99.9
                  1              49.5       19      60.6      0             25.8      16       99.8     100
                  0              48.9     10.2      51.9     4.6            39.8     99.8      13.9    79.7
                 0.5             19.7     11.6      12.3     1.2            18.4     98.1      81.4    99.7
           0.999         100                                        27.1
                 0.8             12.1      6.6      7.7      0.2             6.1     85.7      98.4    99.7
                  1               0.4     17.5       0        0               0        0       99.9     100
                  0              100      85.3      94.8    56.9            99.8     99.9      83.3    87.3
         −5 0.9 0.5      100
                                 99.9     67.2      94.9    55.4
                                                                    99.9
                                                                            99.9     99.9      99.3    99.8
      10
                 0.8             100      34.6      94.8    21.7            99.8     99.4      99.7     100
                  1              98.5     13.5      88.6     0.8            58.3      3.6      99.8     100
                  0              100      97.5      97.5    65.7            100       100      95.6    95.4
                 0.5             99.9     94.1      98.1     69             100       100      99.3     100
            0.5          100                                        99.9
                 0.8             99.9     87.4      93.8    67.7            99.8      100      100      100
                  1              99.6     41.2      91.8    53.3            90.1     19.6      99.8     100
                  0              100        29      96.6    25.7            28.5     51.8      15.1    29.2
                 0.5             98.7     21.8      88.9    10.6            23.3     23.7      20.3    87.5
           0.999         100                                        27.1
                 0.8              83      15.1      69.7     6.8            18.4      8.9      26.5    99.7
                  1              71.7      2.3       56       0             15.7       0       29.5    99.9
                  0              100       100      95.4    91.8            99.8     99.5      84.1    84.6
         −6 0.9 0.5      100
                                 100      99.9       96     94.4
                                                                    99.9
                                                                            99.6     99.5      95.9    99.6
      10
                 0.8             99.8     99.4      95.9    92.6            99.6     99.3      94.8    99.6
                  1              99.8     51.6      95.1    63.9            99.5     30.5      94.2    99.7
                  0              100      99.9      97.7    98.1            99.8     99.8      95.4    95.6
                 0.5             100      99.9      97.9    93.7            100      99.9      98.5    99.6
            0.5          99.9                                       99.9
                 0.8             100       100      98.8    93.1            100      99.9      98.3    99.9
                  1              100      97.6      98.6    85.1            99.8     73.9      98.3     100



                                                         48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Table 6: Results on the PCFG counting task with 50K iterations of pre-training.

                                          Acc OPT                                     Acc. OFT
      η   PT (a) CTr                 CTe = 0            CTe = 1                   CTe = 0           CTe = 1
                       Acc. PT                                      Acc. PT
                                 1K       10K       1K       10K              1K       10K       1K      10K
                0                10.8       9.1       2       0.1             98.9      100      86.3    93.6
               0.5               11.7       8.9      2.1      0.1             90.2     99.9      97.9    99.8
          0.999         99.9                                         5.17
               0.8                5.5       11        0        0              64.9      100      98.9    99.9
                1                20.2      15.9       0        0                0       1.9      99.9     100
                0                 9.1      10.3      0.7      0.1             99.6      100      84.2    94.4
       −4 0.9 0.5       99.9
                                 11.4      10.6      1.5       0
                                                                     15.8
                                                                              93.2     99.9      97.9     100
     10
               0.8                4.2       9.2      0.1       0              63.1      100      97.8     100
                1                18.4      16.4       0        0               0.5       5       100     99.9
                0                87.7      10.1     62.6       0              99.9      100      89.3    93.5
               0.5               90.1       9.4     67.4       0              99.5      100      99.9     100
          0.5           99.8                                         99.7
               0.8               59.5      10.1     29.3      0.1             99.2     99.9      100     99.9
                1                18.7      15.2      5.1       0              17.4     14.2      100      100
                0                  3        9.3     16.6      0.6             32.6     99.8      12.4    88.7
               0.5               30.9      11.4      4.1      0.6             12.7     99.1       93     99.7
         0.999          99.9                                         5.17
               0.8                6.3      10.8       1       0.1              1.4     93.9       99     99.8
                1                 2.1      20.7      0.2       0                0        0       99.8    99.9
                0                 28       10.9     34.7      0.1             39.6     99.8      23.4    88.6
               0.5               33.2       8.9      4.2       0              22.7     99.6      92.8     100
     10−5 0.9           99.9                                         15.8
               0.8               13.1       9.3      2.9       0               9.4     95.1      98.9     100
                1                 1.9      19.8      0.3       0                0       0.1      99.7     100
                0                99.6      73.7     88.1      46              99.9     99.9      86.4    89.2
               0.5               99.6      79.3     82.7     57.1             99.8     99.9      99.1    99.9
          0.5           99.8                                         99.7
               0.8               99.6      60.8      80      33.6             99.5     99.9      99.3     100
                1                81.7      12.9     68.6      0.5             46.4     16.1      98.8     100
                0                94.1      18.6     81.9     18.8               9      49.1      0.4     24.4
               0.5               38.8      37.2      20       5.6               6      23.8      50.7    93.7
         0.999          99.9                                         5.17
               0.8               14.4       8.8      4.2      0.2              0.9      7.8      74.8    99.9
                1                 8.9       5.8      2.3      0.2              1.3       0       79.2    99.8
                0                99.7       21      94.3     20.6             24.4     56.8      14.6    28.4
               0.5               46.9      38.6     19.7      3.6             11.8     28.6      39.4      92
     10−6 0.9           99.9                                         15.8
               0.8               30.4      10.4      8.7      1.6              3.6     12.3      62.8    98.9
                1                 27        6.3      6.7      0.4              1.3       0       70.4    99.5
                0                99.8      99.6     94.4     82.7             99.9     99.8       81     84.6
               0.5               100       99.5     91.4     80.1             99.7     99.9      95.9    99.6
          0.5           99.8                                         99.7
               0.8               99.7       97      90.1     74.6             99.7     99.3      96.2    99.3
                1                99.8      55.7     91.2      61              99.4      30       96.3    99.4


                                                          49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Table 7: Results on the PCFG index of occurrence task with 200K< iterations of pre-training.

                                         Acc. OPT                                    Acc OFT
      η   PT (a) CTr                 CTe = 0          CTe = 1                   CTe = 0            CTe = 1
                       Acc. PT                                    Acc. PT
                                 1K       10K      1K      10K              1K       10K        1K      10K
                0                 5.8      0.0    23.9      0.0             71.8      99.7      46.1     99.5
               0.5                9.0      0.0    23.0      0.0             66.6      99.6      81.0    100.0
          0.999         99.0                                        9.3
               0.8               14.9      0.0     0.8      0.0             36.8      99.1      99.5    100.0
                1                33.6      9.5     0.0      0.0              3.7       5.8     100.0    100.0
                0                96.2      0.0    88.6      0.1             98.5      99.9      98.6     99.7
       −4 0.9 0.5       99.2
                                 96.8      0.0    83.5      0.0
                                                                   97.1
                                                                            97.3      99.5     100.0    100.0
     10
               0.8               96.8      0.0    84.8      0.0             97.4      99.2     100.0    100.0
                1                72.6      1.3    79.1      0.0             37.3      24.0     100.0    100.0
                0                95.7      4.5    96.5      3.6             99.5      99.7      99.8     99.8
               0.5               95.2      5.6    78.2      3.5             99.1      99.8     100.0    100.0
          0.5           98.0                                       98.9
               0.8               96.0     17.7    90.2      5.6             98.8      99.4     100.0    100.0
                1                91.3     15.8    79.8     14.5             48.0      28.8     100.0    100.0
                0                94.6      2.6    86.2     18.6             17.0      85.4      16.0     68.5
               0.5               98.4      3.4    97.6      7.7             14.3      79.8      27.2     97.8
         0.999          99.0                                        9.3
               0.8               94.1      5.1    94.0      0.2             10.7      66.6      37.6     99.7
                1                77.6     27.7    70.8      0.0              4.9       3.7      56.6    100.0
                0                99.2     88.5    99.0     79.3             97.3      99.1      98.9     99.1
               0.5               99.2     91.9    99.2     77.9             97.3      98.3     100.0    100.0
     10−5 0.9           99.2                                       97.1
               0.8               98.8     95.6    98.9     84.3             96.9      98.7      99.9    100.0
                1                98.0     65.4    98.0     72.7             81.3      31.8      99.9    100.0
                0                97.3     95.8    100.0    89.1             99.1      99.9      99.9     99.4
               0.5               97.6     95.9    98.8     75.4             99.2      99.3     100.0    100.0
          0.5           98.0                                       98.9
               0.8               97.4     95.1    97.8     80.3             99.6      99.1     100.0    100.0
                1                97.4     87.7    98.0     81.0             97.2      51.8     100.0    100.0
                0                99.0     80.4    99.4     73.0             14.6      23.3      19.5     15.5
               0.5               98.9     94.2    99.5     94.3             13.7      20.2      22.0     40.5
         0.999          99.0                                        9.3
               0.8               99.2     67.8    98.7     61.2             13.2       9.2      25.1     71.8
                1                99.4     61.6    98.8     11.3             12.9       4.5      19.3     95.6
                0                98.8     99.6    99.5     99.6             97.3      97.0      98.0     98.4
               0.5               99.0     98.8    99.8     99.2             96.6      96.6      98.8     99.9
     10−6 0.9           99.2                                       97.1
               0.8               98.7     99.2    99.7     99.0             97.1      96.7      99.3    100.0
                1                98.7     98.0    99.4     95.8             97.8      70.7      99.3    100.0
                0                97.8     97.9    99.8     99.6             99.2      98.9      99.2     99.7
               0.5               98.7     98.0    99.8     98.2             98.9      99.0      99.8    100.0
          0.5           98.0                                       98.9
               0.8               97.4     97.9    99.6     98.2             99.5      98.9     100.0    100.0
                1                98.1     96.7    99.9     96.4             98.9      94.5      99.9    100.0


                                                        50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 8: Results on the PCFG index of occurrence task with 50K iterations of pre-training.

                                          Acc OPT                                      Acc OFT
      η   PT (a) CTr                 CTe = 0            CTe = 1                   CTe = 0           CTe = 1
                       Acc. PT                                      Acc. PT
                                 1K       10K       1K       10K              1K       10K       1K      10K
                0                 0.5       0.0     11.7      0.1             77.1      99.6     66.1     99.4
               0.5                3.2       0.0      2.0      0.0             60.0      98.5     92.5    100.0
          0.999         94.2                                          3.2
               0.8                6.7       0.1      1.0      0.0             26.7      96.8     98.7    100.0
                1                23.1      10.9      0.0      0.0              3.8       5.1     99.6    100.0
                0                43.2       0.0     34.6      0.8             86.1      99.6     75.1     97.5
       −4 0.9 0.5       94.2
                                 48.2       0.0     56.2      0.1
                                                                     69.9
                                                                              81.0      98.9     97.5     99.9
     10
               0.8               53.5       0.0     53.1      0.0             74.0      97.0     98.8    100.0
                1                12.8      11.0     32.8      0.0              4.4       3.4     99.8    100.0
                0                72.1       2.3     59.6      2.6             95.2      98.6     90.2     99.6
               0.5               65.4       2.3     70.4      0.0             91.4      99.3     98.8    100.0
          0.5           88.6                                         91.5
               0.8               56.6       1.5     65.5      0.0             88.7      97.4     99.7    100.0
                1                39.0      12.8     40.2      0.0              6.1       5.3     99.9    100.0
                0                 5.0       0.1      6.4      7.7             18.4      88.9     10.3     86.5
               0.5               74.1       1.4     42.3      0.4             10.1      77.0     55.2     98.8
         0.999          94.2                                          3.2
               0.8               37.4       3.8     13.2      0.7              6.9      45.9     86.9     98.7
                1                48.0      19.1      2.7      0.0              0.5       4.4     95.2    100.0
                0                89.2      18.9     69.6     26.8             74.0      91.1     66.8     82.8
               0.5               91.9      25.0     75.9     38.9             70.8      86.9     82.0     99.2
     10−5 0.9           94.2                                         69.9
               0.8               92.4      30.4     75.9     32.1             60.8      80.2     87.8     99.8
                1                69.7       8.8     73.9      8.4             13.8       4.4     92.6    100.0
                0                87.6      64.0     77.7     51.4             93.1      95.6     85.5     90.9
               0.5               85.9      57.5     80.0     57.0             90.4      95.5     93.9    100.0
          0.5           88.6                                         91.5
               0.8               84.9      46.8     78.2     50.4             89.2      91.6     96.8    100.0
                1                80.1      33.5     77.6     13.3             38.6       5.5     98.1    100.0
                0                87.5       3.7     73.8     14.2              8.3      23.0     15.8     20.7
               0.5               95.3      49.3     83.3     19.2              5.4      13.7     27.5     76.9
         0.999          94.2                                          3.2
               0.8               94.0      31.0     71.4      7.7              3.9       7.2     38.7     93.7
                1                88.1      43.0     50.6      2.1              0.3       1.1     44.7     97.5
                0                93.6      88.2     73.2     70.7             69.6      75.6     56.9     66.9
               0.5               94.3      92.2     73.1     76.4             70.3      69.7     67.4     88.6
     10−6 0.9           94.2                                         69.9
               0.8               92.7      89.8     75.7     80.3             65.3      63.6     71.8     94.7
                1                95.6      56.2     72.8     72.3             60.2       7.8     71.9     97.9
                0                87.3      87.0     80.0     76.6             90.3      93.8     85.1     88.3
               0.5               87.7      84.5     80.4     80.8             93.4      91.5     90.3     97.6
          0.5           88.6                                         91.5
               0.8               90.6      83.2     83.1     80.5             92.3      87.9     90.1     98.6
                1                89.0      77.3     79.8     70.2             92.4      23.0     91.9     99.7


                                                          51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    ηL              ηM              ηS

                            CTr = 0                       CTr = 0.5         T(a) = 0.999       CTr = 0.8                      CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                            T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                             T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                             T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K   0   2.5K   5K     7.5K     10K        0   2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K   0   2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K


                              (a)                             (b)                                    (c)                           (d)


Figure 60: Counter Task, niters = 200K, CTe = 0: Effect of learning rate (LR) on fine-tuning
pre-trained models with weakly and strongly relevant capabilities and using different values of CTr
for fine-tuning. Observation: In the presence of strongly relevant capability, training with ηS yields
good performance on the fine-tuning dataset. The convergence time to learn the fine-tuning task
increases with an increase in CTr .


                                                                    ηL              ηM              ηS

                            CTr = 0                       CTr = 0.5         T(a) = 0.999       CTr = 0.8                      CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                            T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                             T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                             T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K   0   2.5K   5K     7.5K     10K        0   2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K   0   2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K


                              (a)                             (b)                                    (c)                           (d)


Figure 61: Index of Occurrence Task, niters = 200K, CTe = 0. The settings are consistent with
Fig. 60


                                                                              52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             CTr = 0         CTr = 0.25                  CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1

                            CTe = 0             ηM                 CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                ηS                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                     T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K    10K      0    2.5K     5K      7.5K     10K      0       2.5K      5K     7.5K   10K          0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                                    (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)



Figure 62: Counter Task, niters = 200K: Effect of the presence of strongly or weakly relevant
pretuning capability on fine-tuning performance on using ηM and ηS . Test sets with and without
the spurious correlations are used for evaluation. Observation: The convergence time for learning
the fine-tuning task in the absence of strongly relevant capability is higher as compared to when
the strongly relevant is present in the model. The time further increases if spurious correlations are
present in the fine-tuning set. However, in the presence of spurious correlations, the convergence time
to learn the spurious correlation is small and is possible even on using the learning rate ηS . Using
ηS is unable to yield learning of the fine-tuning task if a weakly relevant capability is present in the
model.


                                                       CTr = 0               CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1

                            CTe = 0             ηM                 CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                ηS                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                     T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K    10K      0    2.5K     5K       7.5K     10K     0       2.5K      5K     7.5K   10K          0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                                    (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)


     Figure 63: Index of Occurrence Task, niters = 200K: The settings are consistent with Fig. 62.


                                                                                      53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              CTr = 0         CTr = 0.25                  CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1

                             CTe = 0             ηM                 CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                ηS                    CTe = 1
            100
             75
             50
             25
              0

                                                                                      T(a) = 0.99
            100
             75
             50
             25
              0

                                                                                       T(a) = 0.9
            100
Acc. OFT


             75
             50
             25


                                                                                       T(a) = 0.5
            100
             75
             50
             25
              0
                  0   2.5K     5K      7.5K    10K      0    2.5K     5K      7.5K     10K      0       2.5K      5K     7.5K   10K          0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K

                               (a)                                    (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)


Figure 64: Counter Task, niters = 50K: Effect of the presence of strongly or weakly relevant
pretuning capability on fine-tuning performance on using ηM and ηS . Test sets with and without the
spurious correlations are used for evaluation. The observations are consistent with Fig. 62.


                                                        CTr = 0               CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8             CTr = 1

                             CTe = 0             ηM                 CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                ηS                    CTe = 1
            100
             75
             50
             25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.99
            100
             75
             50
             25


                                                                                       T(a) = 0.9
            100
Acc. OFT


             75
             50
             25


                                                                                       T(a) = 0.5
            100
             75
             50
             25

                  0   2.5K     5K      7.5K    10K      0    2.5K     5K       7.5K     10K     0       2.5K      5K     7.5K   10K          0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K

                               (a)                                    (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)


           Figure 65: Index of Occurrence Task, niters = 50K: The settings are consistent with Fig. 64.


                                                                                       54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             CTr = 0         CTr = 0.25                  CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                    CTr = 1

                            CTe = 0             ηM                 CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                    ηS                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25
             0

                                                                                     T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25
             0

                                                                                      T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                                      T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25
             0
                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K    10K      0    2.5K     5K       7.5K     10K     0       2.5K      5K     7.5K      10K           0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K


                              (a)                                    (b)                                         (c)                                             (d)


Figure 66: Counter Task, niters = 10K: Effect of the presence of strongly or weakly relevant
pretuning capability on fine-tuning performance on using ηM and ηS . Test sets with and without the
spurious correlations are used for evaluation. The observations are consistent with Fig. 62.


                                                       CTr = 0               CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                 CTr = 1

                            CTe = 0              ηM                CTe = 1           T(a) = 0.999            CTe = 0                    ηS                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                     T(a) = 0.99
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.9
           100
Acc. OFT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                      T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K      5K     7.5K     10K     0    2.5K      5K      7.5K     10K     0       2.5K      5K     7.5K      10K           0       2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K

                               (a)                                   (b)                                         (c)                                             (d)


      Figure 67: Index of Occurrence Task, niters = 10K: The settings are consistent with Fig. 66.


                                                                                      55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99              T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5          niters = 200k       CTr = 0.8                           CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K       7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K      7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                    (c)                                  (d)


Figure 68: Counter Task, ηM , CTe = 0 : Learning of the wrapper in presence of different fraction of
spuriously correlated data, values of PT (a) during pre-training, and training iterations. Observation:
Using a higher fraction of spuriously correlated data in the fine-tuning set (higher value of CTr ) leads
to faster degradation in the pre-training accuracy. Further this degradation is even faster in presence
of weakly relevant capability.


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99              T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5          niters = 200k       CTr = 0.8                           CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K       7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K      7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                    (c)                                  (d)


Figure 69: Index of Occurrence Task, Medium LR, CTe = 0: The settings are consistent with
Fig. 68.


                                                                                56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99              T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5          niters = 200k       CTr = 0.8                           CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K       7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K      7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                    (c)                                  (d)


Figure 70: Counter Task, ηM , CTe = 1 : Learning of the wrapper in presence of different fraction of
spuriously correlated data, values of PT (a) during pre-training, and training iterations. Observation:
Using a higher fraction of spuriously correlated data in the fine-tuning set (higher value of CTr ) leads
to faster degradation in the pre-training accuracy. Further this degradation is even faster in presence
of weakly relevant capability.


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99              T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5          niters = 200k       CTr = 0.8                           CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                                niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K       7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K      7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K      7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                    (c)                                  (d)


Figure 71: Index of Occurrence Task, Medium LR, CTe = 1 : The settings are consistent with
Fig. 70.


                                                                                57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9          T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5         niters = 200k      CTr = 0.8                          CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                               niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K      7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                   (c)                                (d)


Figure 72: Counter Task, ηS , CTe = 0 : Learning of the wrapper in presence of different fraction of
spuriously correlated data, values of PT (a) during pre-training, and training iterations. Observation:
The observations are consistent with Fig. 68


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9          T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5         niters = 200k      CTr = 0.8                          CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                               niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K      7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                   (c)                                (d)


           Figure 73: Index of Occurrence Task, ηS , CTe = 0 : The settings are consistent with Fig. 72


                                                                                58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9          T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5         niters = 200k      CTr = 0.8                          CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K      7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                   (c)                                (d)


Figure 74: Counter Task, ηS , CTe = 1 : Learning of the wrapper in presence of different fraction of
spuriously correlated data, values of PT (a) during pre-training, and training iterations. Observation:
The settings are consistent with Fig. 70


                                             T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9          T(a) = 0.5
                            CTr = 0                          CTr = 0.5         niters = 200k      CTr = 0.8                          CTr = 1.0
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                               niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   2.5K     5K      7.5K   10K    0    2.5K   5K      7.5K    10K      0     2.5K    5K    7.5K   10K     0     2.5K   5K    7.5K   10K

                              (a)                               (b)                                   (c)                                (d)


           Figure 75: Index of Occurrence Task, ηS , CTe = 1 : The settings are consistent with Fig. 74


                                                                               59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     CTr = 0.0              CTr = 0.25         CTr = 0.5           CTr = 0.9         CTr = 1.0

                                                           T(a) = 0.999
                   CTe = 0                       CTe = 1                   CTe = 0                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                           T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                            T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                            T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

             102     103         104    102        103       104    102      103        104    102      103      104

                                   (a) ηM                                                 (b) ηS

Figure 76: Counter Task, niters = 200K: Reverse Fine-tuning on weakly and strongly relevant
capability fine-tuned models. Medium and small learning rates are used for reverse fine-tuning in
the presence of different degrees of spuriously correlated data-points present in the train-set. The
fine-tuned model was fine-tuned using Large LR. Observation: When the model possesses weakly
relevant capability, the convergence time is lower for models fine-tuned on dataset with spurious
correlations. If the model possesses strongly relevant capability, this difference is less. The “revival”
of pre-training capability is observed for all values of CTr . Even though fine-tuning was done using a
large learning rate of 10−4 , capability revival is possible even on using a small learning rate.


                                                            60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     CTr = 0.0              CTr = 0.25             CTr = 0.5              CTr = 0.9         CTr = 1.0

                                                               T(a) = 0.999
                   CTe = 0                        CTe = 1                         CTe = 0                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                               T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

             102     103         104    102         103          104    102         103        104    102      103      104

                                   (a) ηM                                                        (b) ηS

Figure 77: Counter Task, niters = 50K: Reverse Fine-tuning on weakly and strongly relevant
capability fine-tuned models. ηM and ηS are used for capability reverse fine-tuning in the presence of
different fraction of spuriously correlated data-points present in the train-set. The fine-tuned model
was fine-tuned using Large LR. Observation: The observations are consistent with Fig. 76


                                            LT           H
                                                           T            CTr = 0             CTr = 1
                                                               niters = 200k
                   CTe = 0                        CTe = 1                         CTe = 0                    CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

             102     103         104    102         103          104    102         103        104    102      103      104
                                   (a) ηM                   Iters (Log Scale)                    (b) ηS

Figure 78: Counter Task: Reverse fine-tuning analysis for different pre-training iterations.
Observation: Capability Revival is seen for models pre-trained with different number of iterations.


                                                                61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.1          P RUNING A NALYSIS

In this section, we present detailed results on pruning analysis of the PCFG setup on both counting
and index of occurrence tasks. We provide an exhaustive evaluation in Fig. 79, 82, 84, 86 and 88 for
the Counter task and Fig. 80, 83, 85, 87 and 89 for the index of occurrence task.
                                    CTr = 0            CTr = 0.5           CTr = 0.8                 CTr = 1.0
                                                              niters = 200k
                     CTe = 0            CTe = 1            CTe = 0            CTe = 1            CTe = 0             CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                 niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                 niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   25 50 75 100   0   25 50 75 100   0   25 50 75 100   0   25 50 75 100   0   25 50 75 100    0   25 50 75 100
                               (a) ηL                                (b) ηM                                (c) ηS

Figure 79: Counter task, PT (a) = 0.999, Pruning Analysis: Revival of pre-training capability
analysis for different learning rates, pre-training iterations and different values of CTr . Observation:
(a) On using ηL the model learns the wrapper only when fine-tuning on CTe = 1. This wrapper is
learned only on fine-tuning set with the spurious correlations . (b) On using ηM the model learns the
wrapper on fine-tuning with smaller values of CTe as well. However, still this wrapper is learned only
on fine-tuning set with the spurious correlations. (c) On using ηS the model learns the wrapper for all
values of CTe and for all the data samples.


                                                                     62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    CTr = 0                 CTr = 0.5           CTr = 0.8                     CTr = 1.0
                                                                   niters = 200k
                     CTe = 0             CTe = 1              CTe = 0          CTe = 1                   CTe = 0                   CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                    niters = 50k
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25


                                                                    niters = 10k
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   25 50 75 100   0    25 50 75 100   0     25 50 75 100   0    25 50 75 100      0    25 50 75 100     0        25 50 75 100
                               (a) ηL                                    (b) ηM                                       (c) ηS

Figure 80: Index of Occurrence task, PT (a) = 0.999, Pruning Analysis: The settings are
consistent with Fig. 79


                                        CTr = 0              CTr = 0.5             CTr = 0.8                 CTr = 1.0

                         CTe = 0                        CTe = 1                        CTe = 0                             CTe = 1
           100
Acc. OPT


            65
            30

           100
Acc. OFT


            65
            30

                     0   5     10   15              0   5      10   15             0    5      10       15            0        5      10     15
                                           (a) ηM                                                            (b) ηS

Figure 81: Index of Occurrence task, PT (a) = 0.999, Pruning Analysis: The settings are
consistent with Fig. 7


                                                                     63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                CTr = 0            CTr = 0.5          CTr = 0.8                   CTr = 1.0
                                                                          T(a) = 0.999
                     CTe = 0                CTe = 1                CTe = 0             CTe = 1                      CTe = 0                 CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   5   10   15   20   0   5   10   15   20   0   5   10   15   20   0    5   10   15   20   0    5   10     15   20   0   5   10   15   20
                                   (a) ηL                                        (b) ηM                                            (c) ηS


Figure 82: Counter task, niters = 200K, Pruning Analysis: Revival of pre-training capability
analysis for different learning rates, weakly and strongly relevant capability fine-tuned models, and
different values of CTr . Observation: Learning of the wrapper is possible for weakly as well as
strongly relevant capability pre-trained models.


                                                CTr = 0            CTr = 0.5          CTr = 0.8                   CTr = 1.0
                                                                          T(a) = 0.999
                     CTe = 0                CTe = 1                CTe = 0             CTe = 1                      CTe = 0                 CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                            T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   5   10   15   20   0   5   10   15   20   0   5   10   15   20   0    5   10   15   20   0    5   10     15   20   0   5   10   15   20
                                   (a) ηL                                        (b) ηM                                            (c) ηS


Figure 83: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K, Pruning Analysis: The settings are consistent
with Fig. 82


                                                                             64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   CTr = 0             CTr = 0.5                CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1.0
                                                                             T(a) = 0.999
                     CTe = 0                  CTe = 1                  CTe = 0            CTe = 1                          CTe = 0                  CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25


                                                                                 T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                                 T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                                 T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0    25   50    75   100   0   25   50   75   100
                                     (a) ηL                                           (b) ηM                                              (c) ηS


Figure 84: Counter task, niters = 200K Pruning Analysis: Revival of pre-training capability
analysis for different learning rates, weakly and strongly relevant capability fine-tuned models and
different values of CTr . Here larger number of neurons are pruned as compared to Fig. 82.


                                                   CTr = 0             CTr = 0.5          CTr = 0.8                      CTr = 1.0
                                                                              T(a) = 0.999
                     CTe = 0                  CTe = 1                  CTe = 0             CTe = 1                         CTe = 0                  CTe = 1
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                                 T(a) = 0.99
           100
Acc. OPT


            75
            50
            25



                                                                                 T(a) = 0.9
           100
            75
            50
            25



                                                                                 T(a) = 0.5
           100
            75
            50
            25

                 0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0   25   50   75   100   0    25   50    75   100   0   25   50   75   100
                                     (a) ηL                                           (b) ηM                                              (c) ηS


Figure 85: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K, Pruning Analysis: Here larger number of
neurons are pruned. The settings are consistent with Fig. 84


                                                                                      65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          T(a) = 0.999              T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9                 T(a) = 0.5
                                                              niters = 200k
                          CTr = 0.0                 CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                    CTr = 1.0
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25



                                                                niters = 50k
                100
     Acc. OPT


                 75
                 50
                 25


                                                                niters = 10k
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25

                      0   25   50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100   0    25   50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100

                               (a)                       (b)                        (c)                       (d)

Figure 86: Counter task, ηL , CTe = 0, Pruning analysis: Effect of strongly and weakly relevant
capabilities for different number of pre-training iterations and different values of CTr Observation:
Fine-tuning a model with strongly relevant capability leads to learning of an “inhibitor” on its pre-
training capability, i.e., a wrapper that disallows use of the pretraining capability. Revival of the
pre-training capability is partly possible on pruning, if the model has strongly relevant capability
and it was fine-tuned on dataset without spurious correlations.The inhibitor is mainly learned for the
200K iteration pre-trained model.


                          T(a) = 0.999              T(a) = 0.99             T(a) = 0.9                 T(a) = 0.5
                                                              niters = 200k
                          CTr = 0.0                 CTr = 0.5               CTr = 0.8                    CTr = 1.0
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25



                                                                niters = 50k
                100
     Acc. OPT


                 75
                 50
                 25


                                                                niters = 10k
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25

                      0   25   50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100   0    25   50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100

                               (a)                       (b)                        (c)                       (d)

Figure 87: Index of Occurrence task, ηL , CTe = 0, Pruning analysis: The settings are consistent
with Fig. 86


                                                                    66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          T(a) = 0.999                  T(a) = 0.99                   T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                                                                          ηL
                          CTr = 0.0                 CTr = 0.5                      CTr = 0.8                  CTr = 1.0
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25


                                                                          ηM
                100
                 75
     Acc. OPT


                 50
                 25


                                                                          ηS
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25

                      0   25   50    75   100   0   25     50   75   100       0   25    50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100

                               (a)                        (b)                            (c)                       (d)

Figure 88: Counter task, niters = 200K, CTe = 0, Pruning analysis: Effect of the strongly and
weakly relevant capabilities for different number of pre-training iterations and different values of
fraction of spurious correlations present in the fine-tuning dataset. Observation: Learning of the
inhibitor is observed on using ηL .


                          T(a) = 0.999                  T(a) = 0.99                   T(a) = 0.9            T(a) = 0.5
                                                                          ηL
                          CTr = 0.0                 CTr = 0.5                      CTr = 0.8                  CTr = 1.0
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25


                                                                          ηM
                100
                 75
     Acc. OPT


                 50
                 25


                                                                          ηS
                100
                 75
                 50
                 25

                      0   25   50    75   100   0   25     50   75   100       0   25    50    75   100   0   25   50    75   100

                               (a)                        (b)                            (c)                       (d)

Figure 89: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K, CTe = 0 Pruning analysis: the settings are
consistent with Fig. 88


                                                                     67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            T(a) = 0.999             T(a) = 0.99                      T(a) = 0.9              T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                      CTr = 1       ηL                       CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25


                                                                    ηM
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
Acc. OPT


                                                                    Acc. OFT
           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25


                                                                    ηS
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6         B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
                                       (a)                                                                 (b)
                                                             Probed Block

Figure 90: Counter task, niters = 200K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The effect of different
values of learning rate, weakly and strongly relevant capabilities is shown. Observation: Using
ηL hampers the pre-training capability to count a especially when the probed model has a weakly
relevant capability. The performance on the pre-training task of counting a’s continues to be high,
especially with ηS . The accuracy of counting b’s shows that fine-tuning capability is learned on
using ηL . On using ηS , models with weakly relevant capabilities are not able to learn the fine-tuning
capability well.


                            T(a) = 0.999             T(a) = 0.99                      T(a) = 0.9              T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                      CTr = 1       ηL                       CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25


                                                                    ηM
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
Acc. OPT


                                                                    Acc. OFT


           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25


                                                                    ηS
       100                                                                 100
           75                                                                  75
           50                                                                  50
           25                                                                  25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6         B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
                                       (a)                                                                 (b)
                                                             Probed Block

Figure 91: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The settings
are consistent with Fig. 90



                                                               68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            T(a) = 0.999             T(a) = 0.99                   T(a) = 0.9              T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                      CTr = 1           ηL                CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                     ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OPT


                                                                      Acc. OFT
           50
           25


                                                                     ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6         B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
                                       (a)                                                              (b)
                                                             Probed Block

Figure 92: Counter task, niters = 50K, CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The observations are consistent
with Fig. 90

                            T(a) = 0.999             T(a) = 0.99                   T(a) = 0.9              T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                      CTr = 1           ηL                CTr = 0                        CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                     ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OPT


                                                                      Acc. OFT


           50
           25


                                                                     ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6         B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
                                       (a)                                                              (b)
                                                             Probed Block

Figure 93: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 50K, CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The settings are
consistent with Fig. 92


H.2              P ROBING A NALYSIS

In this section, we present detailed results on probing analysis of the PCFG setup on both counting
and index of occurrence tasks. We provide an exhaustive evaluation in Fig. 92, 95, 97 for the Counter
task and Fig. 93, 96, 98 for the index of occurrence task.


                                                               69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          H
                                                           T              M
                                                                           T                  LT
                       CTr = 0                        CTr = 1                             CTr = 0                         CTr = 1
           100
Acc. OPT


            65

            30

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6           B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6            B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
                                      (a) ηM                                                               (b) ηS

Figure 94: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The settings
are consistent with Fig. 8


                                T(a) = 0.999            T(a) = 0.99                    T(a) = 0.9           T(a) = 0.5
                       CTr = 0                       CTr = 0.5          ηL               CTr = 0.8                       CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                        ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OPT


                                                                         Acc. OFT


           50
           25


                                                                        ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6          B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                 B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6        B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

                          (a)                           (b)      Probed Block               (c)                             (d)

Figure 95: Counter task, niters = 200K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis. Observation: With an
increase in CTr , the accuracy on counting a’s also increases for both weakly as well as strongly
relevant capability models.


                                                                   70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              T(a) = 0.999        T(a) = 0.99                    T(a) = 0.9       T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                  CTr = 0.5          ηL               CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                  ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OPT


                                                                   Acc. OFT
           50
           25


                                                                  ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6      B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

                        (a)                       (b)      Probed Block               (c)                     (d)

Figure 96: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 200K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The settings
are consistent with Fig. 95


                              T(a) = 0.999        T(a) = 0.99                    T(a) = 0.9       T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                  CTr = 0.5          ηL               CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                  ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OFT


                                                                   Acc. OFT


           50
           25


                                                                  ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6      B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

                        (a)                       (b)      Probed Block               (c)                     (d)

Figure 97: Counter task, niters = 50K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis. Observation: With an
increase in CTr , the accuracy on counting b’s also decreases for both weakly as well as strongly
relevant capability models.


                                                             71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              T(a) = 0.999        T(a) = 0.99                    T(a) = 0.9       T(a) = 0.5
                      CTr = 0                  CTr = 0.5          ηL               CTr = 0.8                CTr = 1
       100
           75
           50
           25


                                                                  ηM
       100
           75
Acc. OFT


                                                                   Acc. OFT


           50
           25


                                                                  ηS
       100
           75
           50
           25

                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6      B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6                B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6   B0 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6

                        (a)                       (b)      Probed Block               (c)                     (d)

Figure 98: Index of Occurrence task, niters = 50K , CTe = 0, Probing analysis: The settings are
consistent with Fig. 97


                                                             72
