Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P OWER CHARACTERIZATION OF NOISY QUANTUM
KERNELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Quantum kernel methods have been widely recognized as one of promising quan-
         tum machine learning algorithms that have potential to achieve quantum advan-
         tages. In this paper, we theoretically characterize the power of noisy quantum
         kernels and demonstrate that under global depolarization noise, for different in-
         put data the predictions of the optimal hypothesis inferred by the noisy quantum
         kernel approximately concentrate towards some fixed value. In particular, we de-
         pict the convergence rate in terms of the strength of quantum noise, the size of
         training samples, the number of qubits, the number of layers affected by quantum
         noises, as well as the number of measurement shots. Our results show that noises
         may make quantum kernel methods to only have poor prediction capability, even
         when the generalization error is small. Thus, we provide a crucial warning to
         employ noisy quantum kernel methods for quantum computation and the theoreti-
         cal results can also serve as guidelines when developing practical quantum kernel
         algorithms for achieving quantum advantages.


1     I NTRODUCTION

1.1   BACKGROUND

A main objective of machine learning is to design efficient and robust computation methods to make
accurate predictions for unseen data by using experiences, even for large-scale problems (Zhang
et al., 2022; Ergun et al., 2022; Lyle et al., 2022; Mohri et al., 2018; Wright & Ma, 2022). Quantum
machine learning (QML) aims to explore the representational and computational power of quantum
models to offer advantages beyond what is possible using classical models (Dunjko & Briegel, 2018;
Anschuetz, 2022; Kübler et al., 2021; Landman et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2023a;
Jerbi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021b). Among different types of QML modes
(Wittek, 2014; Schuld et al., 2015; Biamonte et al., 2017; Zhang & Ni, 2020; Li & Deng, 2022; Guan
et al., 2021), quantum kernel methods have attracted increasing attention and shown great potential
for developing powerful new applications (Havlı́ček et al., 2019; Schuld & Killoran, 2019).
In machine learning, the prediction error can be decomposed into the sum of the training error
and the generalization error, where the so-called generalization depicts the difference between the
prediction error on new data and the training error. To make accurate predictions on unseen data,
both of the training and generalization errors should be small (Zhang et al., 2017). In classical
machine learning, it is often much easier to achieve small training errors than to guarantee good
generalization. However, in QML the main obstacle is training and it is often challenging to achieve
good trainability. For QML models based on quantum neural networks (QNNs), their landscapes
often suffer from vanishing gradients known as barren plateaus (McClean et al., 2018; Haug et al.,
2021; Ortiz Marrero et al., 2021) and/or the existence of exponentially many local minima (You &
Wu, 2021; Anschuetz & Kiani, 2022), which make the training of QNNs extremely difficult. Under
noiseless scenarios, quantum kernel methods do not suffer from these trainability issues and thus can
naturally achieve smaller training errors as compared to QNNs. This is because for quantum kernel
methods, due to the fundamental representation theorem (Schölkopf et al., 2002; Mohri et al., 2018),
the optimal parameters minimizing the training error can always be found when the landscape of the
cost function is convex (Havlı́ček et al., 2019; Schuld & Killoran, 2019; 2022; Jerbi et al., 2023).
Quantum kernel methods are widely believed to be representative for achieving practical quantum


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


advantages. The prediction advantages over some classical models by employing quantum kernel
methods have been demonstrated in Huang et al. (2021a); Liu et al. (2021).
Although quantum kernel methods have shown great potential for achieving quantum advantages,
most of the existing results focus on ideal quantum settings without noise. Since noise may severely
degrade the performance of quantum kernels, with the current noisy intermediate-scale quantum
(NISQ) devices, a natural and crucial question is: What is the power of noisy quantum kernel meth-
ods? In this paper, we theoretically characterize the power of noisy quantum kernels and prove that
for a given number of training samples, once the number of layers affected by noise exceeds some
threshold, the prediction capability of noisy kernels is very poor. These limitations are quantitatively
demonstrated by an upper bound on the expected distance between the predictions of the worst hy-
pothesis without prediction capability and the optimal hypothesis for noisy quantum kernels. The
results provide insights for understanding power and limitations of quantum kernels in the NISQ era
and guidelines for developing competitive quantum kernel algorithms.

1.2   R ELATED WORK

Limitations of optimization and variational quantum algorithms on noisy quantum devices were
investigated in Stilck França & Garcia-Patron (2021); De Palma et al. (2023). Exponentially tighter
bounds on limitations of quantum error mitigation has been given in Quek et al. (2022). Their
adopted noise model is either local depolarizing noise or some non-unital noise, applied on each
qubit. However, their N -fold layerwise noise channel is stronger than the global depolarizing model
adopted for power characterization in this work. Here, N denotes the number of qubits. This is
because with the same noise rate, the probability of the quantum state remaining unchanged under
our noise is exponentially larger than that in their models. In this work we focus on investigating the
limitations of noisy quantum kernel methods.
It was demonstrated in Thanasilp et al. (2022) that values of quantum kernels over different input
data can be exponentially concentrated towards some fixed value under the Pauli noise. Similar to
the above local depolarizing noise applied to each qubit, the Pauli noise assumption is also stronger
than our global depolarizing model. In addition, their noise-induced concentration bound does not
take into account of the size of training samples. Thus, for a given size of training samples, their
result cannot tell how many noisy layers will cause poor prediction capability for quantum kernel
methods.
The power of noisy quantum kernel methods under global depolarizing noise and sampling error
was investigated in Wang et al. (2021). Their main result is informative only for shallow quantum
circuits. In addition, their main result is based on the key assumption of zero training error. Such an
assumption places a strong constraint and may limit the applicability of their main results in dealing
with noisy kernels. As we will demonstrate in this work, in the presence of noise, the training error
may be large and dominate the prediction error, making noisy quantum kernel methods fail.

1.3   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

In this work, we propose a new figure of merit to depict the power and limitations of quantum kernel
methods, especially the impact of quantum depolarization noise on their prediction capability.
Our main contribution is providing a theoretical characterization of prediction concentration for
different input data of the optimal hypothesis inferred by noisy quantum kernels. The concentration
speed is clearly depicted in terms of the strength of depolarization noise p̃, the size of training
samples, the number of qubits N , the number of layers affected by quantum noises, and the number
of measurement shots. The results are summarized in Fig. 1, where the red regions represent the
situations in which noisy quantum kernel methods fail, namely, the prediction capability is very
poor. Especially, even with exponentially many training samples like q N (q > 1), noisy quantum
kernels fail once the number of layers affected by noise exceeds N log(1−p̃)−2 q.
We remark that our results hold for a wide range of quantum embedding schemes as we assume little
on the form of quantum encoding circuits. Moreover, our upper bounds can be applied to quantum
circuits with a large number of qubits and deep depth, not only limited to the current available
shallow circuits. Thus, our results not only serve as a warning for shallow NISQ circuits, but also
provide guidelines for future quantum computation. In addition, our results complement the research


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Sample
           size
              𝑞𝑁

                                       𝑁log (1−𝑝)
                                               ෤ −2 𝑞



             𝑁𝑏

                      𝑏log (1−𝑝)
                              ෤ −2 𝑁



          log 2 𝑁 𝑎


                          (log 𝑁)          (pol𝑦 𝑁)          (exp 𝑁) Number of noisy layers

Figure 1: Summary of our main results. The red regions indicate the situations where noisy quantum
kernel methods fail in prediction. Here, N and p̃ denote the number of qubits and the strength of lay-
erwise global depolarization noise, respectively. For logarithmically small training samples, noisy
quantum kernel methods always fail. For training samples of polynomial size like N b , noisy quan-
tum kernel methods fail as long as the number of layers affected by noise exceeds b log(1−p̃)−2 N .
For training samples of exponential size like q N for some q > 1, noisy quantum kernel methods fail
when the number of noisy layers exceeds N log(1−p̃)−2 q.


on generalization of QML and indicate that a QML method having good generalization alone does
not necessarily guarantee good prediction since the training error may be large, especially in the
noisy cases. To achieve good prediction, both the training and generalization errors should be small.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first introduce several preliminaries and then
formulate the learning task with noisy quantum kernels. The main results are presented in Section 3.
Numerical verifications are shown in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2     P RELIMINARIES AND F RAMEWORK
2.1   K ERNEL METHODS

Kernel methods are widely used in machine learning (Hofmann et al., 2008; Cho & Saul, 2009;
Evgeniou et al., 2005; Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004). They are based on kernels or kernel
functions, which implicitly define an inner product in a high-dimensional Hilbert space.
Assume that both training and test data are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according
to some fixed but unknown distribution D defined over X × Y. Denote the training sample by
                n
S = {(xi , yi )}i=1 ⊂ X × Y. The kernel function K (·, ·) is defined such that for x, x0 ∈ X ,
                                  K (x, x0 ) = hΦ (x) , Φ (x0 )i,                                 (1)
where Φ (·) denotes a feature mapping that maps x ∈ X to a high-dimensional Hilbert space called
feature space with the inner product h·, ·i. A crucial benefit of kernel methods is that there is no
need to explicitly define or compute the feature mapping Φ. Instead, the performance of kernel-
based learning depends on the kernel function K (·, ·).
In kernel methods, the hypothesis function is typically chosen as
                                      h (x; ω) = hω, Φ (x)i,                                   (2)
where ω is a vector in the feature space. Since the ultimate goal is to make accurate predictions
for unseen data, the prediction error of a hypothesis h (x; ω) with parameter ω is taken to be the
expected loss
                                                                 2
                                R (ω) = E ([h (x; ω) − y] ).                                   (3)
                                                   (x,y)∼D


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As both the labels of unseen data and the distribution D are unknown, the prediction error is un-
available. The training error on the labeled sample S is often taken as a proxy defined as
                                             n
                                 bS (ω) = 1
                                            X                     2
                                 R              [h (xi ; ω) − yi ] .                                (4)
                                          n i=1

Notice that the prediction error can be decomposed as

                                     R (ω) = R
                                             bS (ω) + gen (ω) ,                                     (5)
where gen (ω) is referred to as the generalization error. It is clear that to make accurate prediction,
both of the training and generalization errors should be small.
To this end, we consider the following regularized optimization problem:
                                      n
                                      X                     2
                                min          [h (xi ; ω) − yi ] + λhω, ωi,                          (6)
                                 ω
                                       i=1

where λ>0 is a hyperparameter. This convex minimization problem can be solved analytically, and
the optimal parameter reads
                                        n             h           i
                                                               −1
                                        X
                               ω? =            Φ (xi ) (K + λI)     yj ,                            (7)
                                                                     ij
                                       i,j=1

where the matrix K ∈ Rn×n , whose element Kij = K (xi , xj ) = hΦ (xi ) , Φ (xj )i.

2.2   Q UANTUM KERNEL METHODS

In quantum computation, the carrier of information is qubits. For an N -qubit system, the quantum
                                                                                                N    N
state can be mathematically represented as a positive semi-definite Hermitian matrix ρ ∈ C2 ×2
with Tr (ρ) = 1. Note that ρ is called a pure state if rank (ρ) = 1, which can be represented in terms
of a unit state vector |ϕi as ρ = |ϕihϕ|, where hϕ| = |ϕi† ; otherwise, it is called a mixed state and
can be decomposed as a convex combination of pure states.
For quantum computing, classical data x ∈ X may be first embedded through an encoding quantum
circuit (Havlı́ček et al., 2019; Schuld & Killoran, 2019; Lloyd et al., 2020; Schuld et al., 2021; Goto
et al., 2021; Hubregtsen et al., 2022) denoted by UE (·) as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The encoded
quantum state vector is
                                         |ϕ (x)i = UE (x) |0i⊗N                                      (8)
with the quantum state ρ (x) = |ϕ (x)ihϕ (x) | corresponding to a vector in the feature space with
the inner product hA, Bi = Tr [AB]. The label y of x can be generated through a quantum concept:
                                            h                     i
                                                             †
                             y = c (x) = Tr OUQNN ρ (x) UQNN        ,                          (9)

where O and UQNN represent the measurement operator and a specified quantum neural network,
respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume that kOk2 ≤ 1. Here, k · k2 denotes the spectral
norm, which is equal to the maximal singular value of the corresponding matrix.
In quantum kernel methods, we only need to employ a quantum circuit as illustrated in Fig. 2(b) to
compute the quantum kernel functions as
                                                                             2
                        K (x, x0 ) = Tr [ρ (x) ρ (x0 )] = |hϕ (x) |ϕ (x0 )i|
                          h                                                  i
                                                        ⊗N
                       =Tr P0 UE† (x0 ) UE (x) (|0ih0|)     UE† (x) UE (x0 )                       (10)

                                  ⊗N
with the projector P0 = (|0ih0|) . To demonstrate quantum advantages, the key is to construct a
quantum encoding circuit UE (·) such that patterns which are classically intractable can be recog-
nized in the feature space (Liu et al., 2021).


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a)                                (b)                            𝑃0      (d)                              𝑃0


       𝑈1    𝑈2         𝑈𝐿                                                                            𝒩𝑝



(c)                                                                                                        𝑃0


        𝑈1    𝒩𝑝෤     𝑈2     𝒩𝑝෤         𝑈𝐿      𝒩𝑝෤       𝑈𝐿′†   𝒩𝑝෤           𝑈2′†    𝒩𝑝෤   𝑈1′†   𝒩𝑝෤


Figure 2: Quantum circuits employed in quantum kernel methods. (a) A general L-layer encoding
circuit encodes the classical data x into the quantum state |ϕ (x)i through the quantum feature
mapping UE (·). (b) Quantum circuit utilized to compute quantum kernels in the ideal/noiseless
                                                    ⊗N
case. The measurement operator is P0 = (|0ih0|) . (c) After each layer of the encoding circuit, a
global depolarizing channel with rate p̃ is applied. (d) The equivalent circuit of the noisy quantum
circuit in (c). The total effect of all the quantum noise channels Np̃ can be effectively described by
                                                           2L
a global depolarizing channel Np with p = 1 − (1 − p̃) .


Once the kernel matrix K is obtained through Eq. (10), the remaining optimization is classical. For
                                        n
a given training sample S = {(xi , yi )}i=1 , from Eqs. (2) and (7), the optimal hypothesis reads
                                                 n                               o
                     h (x) , h (x; ω ? ) = min 1, max − 1, Tr [ρ (x) ω ? ]

                         (                    n                                  )
                                                            h             i
                                                                       −1
                                            X
                   = min 1, max − 1,             K (x, xi ) (K + λI)         yj    .              (11)
                                                                                   ij
                                              i,j=1

Here, the kernel function K (x, xi ) is also obtained via Eq. (10).

2.3   N OISY QUANTUM KERNELS

Up to now, we only consider the ideal setting, that is, the quantum circuits used to compute quantum
kernels are unitary. However, in practice, particularly in the NISQ era, quantum circuits are suscep-
tible to various quantum noises. In this work, we focus on the depolarization noise and consider its
destructive impact on the prediction capability of quantum kernel methods. Our techniques may be
generalized to other types of noise.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(c), when computing quantum kernels, as the noise model adopted in Wang
et al. (2021), we assume that a global depolarizing channel with rate p̃ is applied after each layer of
the ideal quantum circuit (illustrated in Fig. 2(b)), which reads
                                                                   1
                                     Np̃ (ρ) = (1 − p̃) ρ + p̃       I.                                    (12)
                                                                   D
At first glance, our global depolarizing model is stronger than the so-called local noise models
considered in Stilck França & Garcia-Patron (2021); De Palma et al. (2023); Thanasilp et al. (2022);
Quek et al. (2022), which are in the form of Np̃0 (ρ) = ⊗N            0           0
                                                               j=1 Nj (ρ) with Nj denoting either the
single-qubit depolarizing noise, single-qubit Pauli noise, or single-qubit non-unital noise. In fact,
our global model is weaker than these so-called local noise models for the problem in this paper. This
is because at the same depolarizing rate p̃, the probability that the quantum state remains unchanged
under our global noise is (1 − p̃), which is exponentially larger than that under the so-called local
noise which is (1 − p̃)N . In addition, when presenting negative results concerning noisy quantum
kernels, it is better to assume a relatively weaker noise model. Once the kernel methods fail under
weaker noises, they fail under stronger ones in general. Note that the noise rate p̃ > 0 in Eq. (12)
can be arbitrarily small. Thus, it can depict the case where the noise influence is very weak, namely,
after the noise the quantum state is left untouched with a very high probability 1 − p̃.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It can be verified that the total effect of all the 2L quantum noise channels Np̃ can be effectively
described by a global depolarizing channel
                                                                           1
                              Np [ρ (x; x0 )] = (1 − p) ρ (x; x0 ) + p       I                      (13)
                                                                           D
                                                                                 2L
applied after the whole ideal unitary channels. Here, p = 1 − (1 − p̃) with L denoting the
depth of the quantum encoding circuit UE (·), D = 2N , and the ideal quantum output state
ρ (x; x0 ) = |ϕ (x; x0 )ihϕ (x; x0 ) |, where |ϕ (x; x0 )i = UE† (x0 ) UE (x) |0i⊗N . The equivalent
circuit is illustrated in Fig. 2(d) and the proof of the equivalence is given in Lemma A.5 in the Ap-
pendix. In fact, we can see that the exponent L in the depolarization rate p actually indicates the
total number of layers affected by the depolarization noise Np̃ when implementing UE (·).
                                                                 e (x, x0 ) reads
Under the quantum depolarization noise, the noisy quantum kernel K

                  e (x, x0 ) = Tr P0 Np [ρ (x; x0 )]                                   1
                                                            = (1 − p) K (x, x0 ) + p

                  K                                                                      .          (14)
                                                                                       D
The corresponding noisy kernel matrix is K  e = (1 − p) K + p K̄, with K̄ = 1 J, where J denotes
                                                                                D
the matrix that has all entries 1. Accordingly, the optimal hypothesis in the presence of noise reads
                                   (                 n                                   )
                                                    X                         −1
                        ?
                     e ) = min 1, max − 1,
     h̃ (x) , h̃ (x; ω                                  Ke (x, xi ) K e + λI         yj    .      (15)
                                                    i,j=1                               ij


Note that in the worst scenario where p = 1, we have the noisy kernel denoted by K̄ with the
property that for all x, x0 ∈ X ,
                                                      1
                                         K̄ (x, x0 ) = .                                      (16)
                                                      D
From Eq. (15), for new data x, the corresponding optimal hypothesis returns the same value as
                                                                   n
                                                             1    X
                                h̄ (x) , h̄ (x; ω̄ ? ) =              yi ,                          (17)
                                                           Dλ + n i=1

which depends only on the training sample, not on the new data. Thus, it is completely uninformative
for new data, and does not have any prediction capability at all.
In addition, when computing quantum kernels via quantum circuits, only a finite number of mea-
surements are implemented in practice. Assume that m measurements are implemented to compute
     e (x, x0 ). Then the estimated noisy quantum kernels can be described as
each K
                                                      m
                                    b (x, x0 ) = 1
                                                      X
                                    K                       Vk (x, x0 ),                            (18)
                                                 m
                                                      k=1

where each Vk (x, x0 ) is a Bernoulli random variable with the expectation being K
                                                                                 e (x, x0 ).

It can be verified that the random matrix Kb + λI is positive definite with probability of at least
       −λ2 m/4n
1 − ne            (see Lemma E.1). With the positive definiteness of Kb + λI, the optimal hypothesis
under the estimated noisy kernels reads
                                (                  n                                    )
                                                  X                          −1
                        ?
                      b ) = min 1, max − 1,
      ĥ (x) , ĥ (x; ω                               Kb (x, xi ) K  b + λI         yj    .     (19)
                                                    i,j=1                               ij



3   M AIN R ESULTS

In this section, we explicitly characterize the prediction capability of quantum kernel methods under
quantum depolarization noise and measurement noise owing to finite shots. To this end, we consider
a new figure of merit E         h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) . It describes the expected difference of the predictions
                      (x,y)∼D


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between the optimal hypothesis under the depolarization noise h̃ (x) and the worst hypothesis h̄ (x),
which essentially has no prediction capability at all.
In most of existing results, the performance of QML is usually evaluated by the upper bound of either
the generalization error or the training error. The implicit assumption is that the learning algorithm
can achieve small training error or generalization error, respectively, which does not always hold
yet especially for NISQ settings. Now we present a result about the negative impact of noise on the
power of quantum kernel methods.
Theorem 3.1. For any 0<δ<1, with probability of at least 1 − δ over the draw of an i.i.d. sample
                 n
S = {(xi , yi )}i=1 of size n, we have
                                                                       √           s
                                                                                      log 4δ

                                            n                1        8 Dn
               E     h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤ f      (1 − p) 1 +         +            +6            ,     (20)
           (x,y)∼D                          λ                D       Dλ + n             2n
                      √
                   z+8 z                                                                       2L
where f (z) = 1−z λ with λ being the hyperparameter in Eq. (6), p = 1 − (1 − p̃) is the
depolarization rate with L denoting the depth of UE (·) in Eq. (8), and D = 2N is the dimension of
the N -qubit state space.

Theorem 3.1 holds for quantum circuits with arbitrary depth and width. Moreover, since we do not
place strong constraints on the form of quantum encoding circuits UE , our result holds for a wide
class of encoding strategies. From Theorem 3.1, if the upper bound in Eq. (20) is small, then noisy
quantum kernel methods fail in prediction for new data. Note that for the upper bound in Eq. (20),
the first term f (·) converges to 0 if and only if its argument converges to 0, and the second term
approaches to 0 as the increase of D and n (as long as n is not in the order of D = 2N ).
To better characterize the limitations of noisy quantum kernel methods, we quantify the circuit
depth L and the size of training samples n in terms of the number of qubits N . As illustrated by
the vertical axis in Fig. 1, we consider three typical orders of the training size n. The red regions
in Fig. 1 describe the ranges of the circuit depth L such that the upper bound approaches to 0 as N
increases, making noisy quantum kernel methods fail. For example, noisy quantum kernel methods
always fail for logarithmically small training samples, and even for training samples of exponential
(polynomial) size q N with q > 1 (N b with b > 1), noisy quantum kernel methods fail as long as the
number of noisy layers exceeds N log(1−p̃)−2 q (b log(1−p̃)−2 N ). In the yellow regions, our upper
bound in Eq. (20) is uninformative, and needs to be further investigated. The demarcation lines of
red and yellow regions are clearly depicted in Fig. 1.
To address practical and meaningful tasks, the scale of quantum circuits should be relatively large
to generate a sufficient amount of expressibility. Thus, it is reasonable to utilize quantum circuits
of polynomial depth. In this case, however, as illustrated in Fig. 1, even with exponentially large
training samples, quantum kernel methods under noise may not predict well for unseen data. There-
fore, our result provides a caveat for employing quantum kernel methods to demonstrate quantum
advantages in the NISQ era.
The proof of Theorem 3.1 is mainly based on the following lemma.
Lemma 3.2. Under the same setting as in Theorem 3.1, we have
                                                                                  √          s
                                                                                                 log 4δ
                                         r                                       8 Dn
   E      h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤ λkMK,
                               e K̄ k2 + 8              e K̄ k2 kMK,
                                                 1 + λkMK,        e K̄ k2 +             +6              ,
(x,y)∼D                                                                          Dλ + n           2n
                                                                                                   (21)
                                    −1                −1
where kMK,
        e K̄ k2 =         K
                          e + λI         − K̄ + λI             .
                                                           2

To prove Theorem 3.1, we can further bound kMK,
                                             e K̄ k2 as

                                             n               1

                                             λ2 (1 − p) 1 + D
                               kMK,
                                 e K̄ k2 ≤                     1 .                                 (22)
                                           1 − nλ (1 − p) 1 + D
                                                                                   e K̄ k2 bounds
The detailed proof is given in Appendix C. We point out that it can be verified λkMK,
1
  P n
n   i=1 h̃ (xi ) − h̄ (xi ) , which is the empirical difference between h̃ and h̄.



                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Theorem 3.1, we do not assume any prior information on the unknown distribution D. In practice,
to guarantee accurate predictions, learners prefer balanced training samples (Lindström et al., 2011;
Wang et al., 2023b), where the amount of data belonging to different categories is the same.
Definition 3.3. (Balanced labels) In binary or multi-class classification tasks, assume that data are
drawn from X × Y with respect to a discrete or continuous distribution D. The labels ys gener-
ated from D are called balanced and normalized, if the labels for different categories are evenly
distributed, and E y = 0.
                (x,y)∼D

With this additional prior information on the distribution D, we can tighten the upper bound in
Theorem 3.1 by reducing the second term as stated in the following corollary.
Corollary 3.4. In addition to the setting stated in Theorem 3.1, assume that the labels ys generated
from D are balanced. For any 0<δ<1, with probability of at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                 q                s
                                                            8 2D log 4
                                                                                    log 8δ

                                      n                1                   δ
         E    h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤ f       (1 − p) 1 +          +                +6           .    (23)
     (x,y)∼D                          λ                D          Dλ + n              2n

The corresponding statements concerning the red and yellow regions and their boundaries in Fig. 1
still hold for the upper bound (23). Moreover, in this case, the worst hypothesis h̄ behaves like a
random-guess classifier and the hypothesis inferred by the noisy quantum kernel h̃ tends to perform
no better than random guess in cases represented by the red regions.
We now consider the impact of the statistical measurement noise on the prediction capability of
quantum kernel methods.
Theorem 3.5. In addition to the setting stated in Theorem 3.1, assume that we perform m mea-
surements to compute the value of each kernel. For any 0<δ<1, with probability of at least
              2
1 − δ − ne−λ m/4n , we have,
                                                                          √
                                                        s                         s
                                                               4n2
                                                                                      log 8δ

                                n                1     n   log  δ      8 Dn
     E    ĥ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤ f  (1 − p) 1 +          +               +          +6           ,
  (x,y)∼D                       λ                D     λ     2m         Dλ + n         2n

                   √                                                                              (24)
             z+8 z
where f (z) = 1−z λ .

From Theorem 3.5, it is clear that once the number of measurement shots, m = Ω n2+  with  >0,
the upper bound Eq. (24) can be reduced to Eq. (20), which corresponds to the ideal case where
an infinite number of measurement shots is implicitly assumed. This implies that when evaluating
quantum kernels, the number of mesurement shots should be set at least n2+  to alleviate the negative
impact of the measurement statistical noise on the prediction error.

4    N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate the theoretical limitation of noisy quantum kernel methods via classifica-
tion tasks. Following the results in Huang et al. (2021a) and Havlı́ček et al. (2019), which describe
the power of quantum data and quantum kernel methods, respectively, we conduct experiments on
the fashion-MNIST dataset (Xiao et al., 2017), which is more challenging for classification than on
the MNIST data. For binary classification, we identify images as shirts or dresses.
As in Huang et al. (2021a), we first transform each original 28 × 28 grayscale image into a 10-
dimensional vector using principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 2002). Then we use the IQP-type
embedding circuit composed of single-qubit and 2-qubit unitary gates (Havlı́ček et al., 2019) to
embed the 10-dimensional vector into the Hilbert space of N = 10 qubits. Specifically, the encoded
quantum state vector reads
                |ϕ (x)i = UE (x) |0i⊗N = UZ (x) H ⊗N UZ (x) H ⊗N |0i⊗N ,                          (25)
where H ⊗N denotes the Hadamard gate acting on all qubits in parallel, and
                                                                        
                                      N
                                      X            N X
                                                   X   N
                      UZ (x) = exp       xi Z i +         xi xj Z i Z j  ,                      (26)
                                           i=1         i=1 j=1



                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with xi denoting the i-th element of the vector x and Zi denotes the Pauli-Z operator acting on
the i-th qubit. Havlı́ček et al. (2019) stated that the embedding circuit UE (x) provides a quantum
advantage as it is hard to simulate the circuit classically.
For binary classification, we employ the sign of the optimal hypothesis h̃ to predict labels of test
samples, and take the frequency of misclassification over the training sample (test sample) as the
proxy for the training error (prediction error). In the numerical experiments, we utilize both training
and test samples of size n = 500, which is exponentially large with N = 10 (n = q N with q =
1.86). We set the strength of depolarization noise p̃ = 0.1, and the regularization hyperparameter
λ = 0.5.

(a)                                                    (b)


                                        Maximum
                                        Mean
                                        Minimum



                            𝐿                                                     𝐿

Figure 3: Prediction capability of quantum kernel methods under depolarization noise of different
numbers of layers. Here, training sample size: n = 500, test sample size: n = 500, depolarization
noise rate: p̃ = 0.1, hyperparameter: λ = 0.5, and number of noisy layers: L. (a) Concentration
of the noisy optimal hypothesis h̃ towards the worst hypothesis h̄ as L increases. The red dashed
baseline denotes the value of h̄, and the shaded areas denote the relative frequency of each hypothesis
value over the 500 test samples, with the parma dotted, blue line, and dark orange dash represent
the maximum, mean, and minimum values of h̃, respectively. (b) The training error (red square) and
test error (blue circle) versus L. There is a phase transition for the training error at L = 24.

From Fig. 3(a), as the number of noisy layers increases, the values of h̃ on the test samples do
converge to an uninformative value returned by the worst hypothesis h̄. The convergency behavior
coincides with the demarcation line as illustrated in Fig. 1, namely, when L > log(1−p̃)−2 500 ≈ 30,
E h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) ≈ 0. When L = 40, all the values of h̃ is positive, and all test samples will
be labeled in the same class as that returned by h̄, which is completely uninformative. Fig. 3(b)
depicts the practical performances of the training error and test error as L increases. For the training
error, there is a phase transition at L = 24, which is owing to the accumulated noise in the circuit.
The training error converges to the error of h̄, and the test error tends to be independent of the test
samples, and the prediction is no better than the random guess.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we investigate the power and limitations of quantum kernel methods under quantum
global depolarization noise. We theoretically depict the concentration speed of predictions of the
optimal hypothesis inferred by noisy quantum kernels. Our techniques can be generalized to in-
vestigate the impact of other typical quantum noises. Our results hold for a wide class of quantum
encoding strategies, and are applicable not only on shallow NISQ circuits, but also on future large-
scale quantum devices. Therefore, our results on the one hand make a clear warning against utilizing
quantum kernel methods to demonstrate quantum advantages in the NISQ era, and on the other hand
provide crucial guidelines in developing practical machine learning approaches for future quantum
computation.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eric R Anschuetz and Bobak T Kiani. Quantum variational algorithms are swamped with traps.
  Nature Communications, 13(1):7760, 2022.
Eric Ricardo Anschuetz. Critical points in quantum generative models. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jacob Biamonte, Peter Wittek, Nicola Pancotti, Patrick Rebentrost, Nathan Wiebe, and Seth Lloyd.
  Quantum machine learning. Nature, 549(7671):195–202, 2017.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuur-
  mans, J. Lafferty, C. Williams, and A. Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 22. Curran Associates, Inc., 2009.
Giacomo De Palma, Milad Marvian, Cambyse Rouzé, and Daniel Stilck França. Limitations of vari-
  ational quantum algorithms: A quantum optimal transport approach. PRX Quantum, 4:010309,
  Jan 2023.
Vedran Dunjko and Hans J Briegel. Machine learning & artificial intelligence in the quantum do-
  main: a review of recent progress. Reports on Progress in Physics, 81(7):074001, 2018.
Jon C. Ergun, Zhili Feng, Sandeep Silwal, David Woodruff, and Samson Zhou. Learning-augmented
  k-means clustering. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Theodoros Evgeniou, Charles A. Micchelli, and Massimiliano Pontil. Learning multiple tasks with
  kernel methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(21):615–637, 2005.
Takahiro Goto, Quoc Hoan Tran, and Kohei Nakajima. Universal approximation property of quan-
  tum machine learning models in quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Physical Review Letters, 127:
  090506, Aug 2021.
Wen Guan, Gabriel Perdue, Arthur Pesah, Maria Schuld, Koji Terashi, Sofia Vallecorsa, and Jean-
 Roch Vlimant. Quantum machine learning in high energy physics. Machine Learning: Science
 and Technology, 2(1):011003, 2021.
Tobias Haug, Kishor Bharti, and M. S. Kim. Capacity and quantum geometry of parametrized
  quantum circuits. PRX Quantum, 2:040309, Oct 2021.
Vojtěch Havlı́ček, Antonio D Córcoles, Kristan Temme, Aram W Harrow, Abhinav Kandala, Jerry M
  Chow, and Jay M Gambetta. Supervised learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature,
  567(7747):209–212, 2019.
Thomas Hofmann, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander J. Smola. Kernel methods in machine learn-
  ing. The Annals of Statistics, 36(3):1171 – 1220, 2008.
Hsin-Yuan Huang, Michael Broughton, Masoud Mohseni, Ryan Babbush, Sergio Boixo, Hartmut
  Neven, and Jarrod R McClean. Power of data in quantum machine learning. Nature Communica-
  tions, 12(1):1–9, 2021a.
Hsin-Yuan Huang, Richard Kueng, and John Preskill. Information-theoretic bounds on quantum
  advantage in machine learning. Physical Review Letters, 126:190505, May 2021b.
Thomas Hubregtsen, David Wierichs, Elies Gil-Fuster, Peter-Jan H. S. Derks, Paul K. Faehrmann,
  and Johannes Jakob Meyer. Training quantum embedding kernels on near-term quantum comput-
  ers. Physical Review A, 106:042431, Oct 2022.
Sofiene Jerbi, Casper Gyurik, Simon Marshall, Hans Briegel, and Vedran Dunjko. Parametrized
  quantum policies for reinforcement learning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S.
  Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, pp. 28362–28375. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Sofiene Jerbi, Lukas J Fiderer, Hendrik Poulsen Nautrup, Jonas M Kübler, Hans J Briegel, and
  Vedran Dunjko. Quantum machine learning beyond kernel methods. Nature Communications, 14
  (1):517, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ian T Jolliffe. Principal component analysis. Springer, 2002.
Jonas M. Kübler, Simon Buchholz, and Bernhard Schölkopf. The inductive bias of quantum kernels.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 12661–12673. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Jonas Landman, Slimane Thabet, Constantin Dalyac, Hela Mhiri, and Elham Kashefi. Classi-
  cally approximating variational quantum machine learning with random fourier features. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Weikang Li and Dong-Ling Deng. Recent advances for quantum classifiers. Science China Physics,
 Mechanics & Astronomy, 65(2):1–23, 2022.
Susanne W. Lindström, Paul Geladi, Oskar Jonsson, and Fredrik Pettersson. The importance of
  balanced data sets for partial least squares discriminant analysis: Classification problems using
  hyperspectral imaging data. Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, 19(4):233–241, Aug 2011.
Yunchao Liu, Srinivasan Arunachalam, and Kristan Temme. A rigorous and robust quantum speed-
  up in supervised machine learning. Nature Physics, 17(9):1013–1017, 2021.
Seth Lloyd, Maria Schuld, Aroosa Ijaz, Josh Izaac, and Nathan Killoran. Quantum embeddings for
  machine learning. arXiv:2001.03622, 2020.
Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Lester Mackey, Michael I. Jordan, Richard Y. Chen, Brendan Farrell, and Joel A. Tropp. Matrix
  concentration inequalities via the method of exchangeable pairs. The Annals of Probability, 42
  (3):906, 2014.
Jarrod R McClean, Sergio Boixo, Vadim N Smelyanskiy, Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven. Bar-
   ren plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes. Nature Communications, 9(1):1–6,
   2018.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, 2018.
Carlos Ortiz Marrero, Mária Kieferová, and Nathan Wiebe. Entanglement-induced barren plateaus.
  PRX Quantum, 2:040316, Oct 2021.
Yihui Quek, Daniel Stilck França, Sumeet Khatri, Johannes Jakob Meyer, and Jens Eisert. Expo-
  nentially tighter bounds on limitations of quantum error mitigation. arXiv:2210.11505, 2022.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Alexander J Smola, Francis Bach, et al. Learning with kernels: support vector
  machines, regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT press, 2002.
Maria Schuld and Nathan Killoran. Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces. Physical
 Review Letters, 122:040504, Feb 2019.
Maria Schuld and Nathan Killoran. Is quantum advantage the right goal for quantum machine
 learning? PRX Quantum, 3:030101, Jul 2022.
Maria Schuld, Ilya Sinayskiy, and Francesco Petruccione. An introduction to quantum machine
 learning. Contemporary Physics, 56(2):172–185, 2015.
Maria Schuld, Ryan Sweke, and Johannes Jakob Meyer. Effect of data encoding on the expressive
 power of variational quantum-machine-learning models. Physical Review A, 103:032430, Mar
 2021.
John Shawe-Taylor and Nello Cristianini. Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis. Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press, 2004.
Daniel Stilck França and Raul Garcia-Patron. Limitations of optimization algorithms on noisy quan-
  tum devices. Nature Physics, 17(11):1221–1227, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Supanut Thanasilp, Samson Wang, Marco Cerezo, and Zoë Holmes. Exponential concentration and
  untrainability in quantum kernel methods. arXiv:2208.11060, 2022.
Xinbiao Wang, Yuxuan Du, Yong Luo, and Dacheng Tao. Towards understanding the power of
  quantum kernels in the NISQ era. Quantum, 5:531, 2021.
Xinbiao Wang, Junyu Liu, Tongliang Liu, Yong Luo, Yuxuan Du, and Dacheng Tao. Symmetric
  pruning in quantum neural networks. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023a.
Xinyi Wang, Michael Saxon, Jiachen Li, Hongyang Zhang, Kun Zhang, and William Yang Wang.
  Causal balancing for domain generalization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023b.
Peter Wittek. Quantum machine learning: what quantum computing means to data mining. Aca-
  demic Press, 2014.
John Wright and Yi Ma. High-dimensional data analysis with low-dimensional models: Principles,
  computation, and applications. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Xuchen You and Xiaodi Wu. Exponentially many local minima in quantum neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2021), pp. 12144–
  12155, 2021.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2017.
Yao Zhang and Qiang Ni. Recent advances in quantum machine learning. Quantum Engineering, 2
  (1):e34, 2020.
Yi Zhang, Arushi Gupta, Nikunj Saunshi, and Sanjeev Arora. On predicting generalization using
  GANs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


A    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
For self-consistency, we firstly present two widely used concentration inequalities for independent
random variables and matrices, respectively.
Lemma A.1. (Hoeffding’s inequality) (Lemma D.1, Mohri et al. (2018)) Let X1 , · · · , Xn be in-
      Pn random variables with Xi taking values in [ai , bi ] for all i ∈ [n]. Then, for any  >0 and
dependent
Sn = i=1 Xi ,
                                                            2     Pn            2
                             P [Sn − ESn ≥  ] ≤ e−2  /             i=1 (bi −ai )    ,
                                                         −2 2 /
                                                                  Pn            2
                           P [Sn − ESn ≤ − ] ≤ e                   i=1 (bi −ai )    .
Lemma A.2. (Matrix Hoeffding) (Corollary 4.2, Mackey et al. (2014)) Let Y (1) , · · · , Y (m) be
independent random Hermitian n × n matrices and A(1) , · · · , A(m) be deterministic Hermitian
n × n matrices. Assume that for each k ∈ [m],
                             h      i         h    i2 h          i2
                                (k)
                          E Y         = 0 and Y (k)   A(k) .
Here, X   Y means that the matrix Y −X is positive semi-definite. Then, for all t ≥ 0,
                            "        m
                                              !     #
                                     X                        2    2
                           P λmax       Y (k)
                                                ≥ t ≤ ne−t /2σ ,                               (27)
                                       k=1
                              "       m
                                                    !       #
                                      X                                  2     2
                            P λmin          Y (k)       ≤ −t ≤ ne−t /2σ ,                      (28)
                                      k=1



                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Pm n  (k)  2           (k)  2 o
where σ 2 = 12      k=1   A      +  E  Y           , λmax (A) and λmin (A) denote the maximal
                                                 2
eigenvalue and the minimal eigenvalue of matrix A, respectively.

We can directly obtain the following equivalent form of Eq. (28):
                          "        m
                                                 !     #
                                   X                              2 2
                        P λmin        Y (k)
                                            + tI ≥ 0 ≥ 1 − ne−t /2σ .                           (29)
                                       k=1

That is, under the same assumptions as in Lemma A.2, for all t ≥ 0, with probability of at least
          2  2                   Pm
1 − ne−t /2σ , the random matrix k=1 Y (k) + tI is positive semi-definite.
Secondly, we present a basic result in machine learning, which provides an upper bound on the
generalization error.
Lemma A.3. (Theorem 3.3, Mohri et al. (2018)) Let G be a family of functions mapping from Z
to [0, 1]. Then, for any 0<δ<1, with probability of at least 1 − δ over the draw of an i.i.d. sample
S = (z1 , . . . , zn ) of size n with elements in Z, the following inequality holds for all g ∈ G:
                                                       "                   #    s
                                       n                      n
                                    1X             2          X                   log 2δ
                       E [g (z)] ≤        g (zi ) + E sup        σi g (zi ) + 3          ,
                       z            n i=1          n σ g∈G i=1                     2n
                               T
where σ = (σ1 , · · · , σn )       with σi s independent uniform random variables taking value in
{−1, +1}.
                           Pn
Here, R̂S (G) = E supg∈G n1 i=1 σi g (zi ) is referred to as the empirical Rademacher complexity

                 σ
of the set G with respect to the sample S.
Thirdly, we present a lemma that relates the empirical Rademacher complexity of a new set of
composite functions of a hypothesis in H and a Lipschitz function to the empirical Rademacher
complexity of the hypothesis set H.
Lemma A.4. (Talagrand’s lemma) (Lemma 5.7, Mohri et al. (2018)) Let Φ1 , · · · , Φn be l-Lipschitz
                                                T
functions from R to R and σ = (σ1 , · · · , σn ) whose elements are independent uniform random
variables taking value in {−1, +1}. Then, for any hypothesis set H of real-valued functions, the
following inequality holds:
                        "     n
                                                  #       "      n
                                                                             #
                    1        X                        l        X
                      E sup     σi (Φi ◦ h) (xi ) ≤ E sup          σi h (xi ) .
                    n σ h∈H i=1                       n σ h∈H i=1

At last, we present the lemma concerning the total effect of all the quantum depolarizing channels
Np̃ .
                                                                                        QL
Lemma A.5. (Lemma 2, Wang et al. (2021)) For an L-layer quantum circuit U = l=1 Ul or
channel E = EL ◦ · · · ◦ E1 , the noise model where a global depolarizing channel Np̃ acts after
each (unitary or completely positive trace preserving) layer is equivalent to a global depolarizing
                                                                                    L
channel Np following the entire quantum circuit or channel, where p = 1 − (1 − p̃) . That is,
                      n           h                 i           o
                  Np̃ UL · · · Np̃ U2 Np̃ U1 ρU1† U2† · · · UL† = Np U ρU † ,


                                   Np̃ ◦ EL {· · · Np̃ ◦ E2 [Np̃ ◦ E1 (ρ)]} = Np ◦ E (ρ) .


B    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.2

Firstly, we introduce the following lemma.
Lemma B.1. Consider an optimal hypothesis function h (x; ω ? ) in the form of Eq. (11) associated
with a specific kernel matrix Kh . For any 0<δ<1, with probability of at least 1 − δ over the draw
                                    n
of an i.i.d. sample S = {(xi , yi )}i=1 of size n, the expected difference of the predictions between


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


h (x; ω ? ) and h̄ (x) is upper bounded as
                                        1             −1       1
      E      h (x; ω ? ) − h̄ (x) ≤       Kh (Kh + λI) Y −          JY
   (x,y)∼D                              n                    Dλ + n    1
                                                                                s
                                                                                  log 4δ
                                              q
                                          8                 −1           −1
                                        +√     Y T (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y + 6          ,
                                           n                                       2n
                                                                                         (30)
                          T
where Y = (y1 , · · · , yn ) , the vector norm k·kp denotes the lp -norm, and d·e represents the roundup
function.
   Pn     Here, the first term in the right-hand side of Eq. (30) bounds the empirical difference
 1                 ?
n    i=1 h (xi ; ω ) − h̄ (xi ) .


Proof. The expected difference can be decomposed into the sum of the empirical difference and the
so-called generalization as
                                          n
                                      1X
     E       h (x; ω ? ) − h̄ (x) =      h (xk ; ω ? ) − h̄ (xk )
  (x,y)∼D                             n
                                          k=1
                                                                                   n
                                                                                1X
                                      +       E        h (x; ω ? ) − h̄ (x) −         h (xk ; ω ? ) − h̄ (xk ) .
                                          (x,y)∼D                               n
                                                                                  k=1
                                                                                                              (31)

Firstly, we bound the empirical difference. According to the optimal hypothesis given in Eq. (11),
for each data xk in S,
                               (                 n                                )
                                                            h              i
                                                                        −1
                                                X
                       ?
              h (xk ; ω ) = min 1, max − 1,         (Kh )ki (Kh + λI)         yj
                                                                                             ij
                                                          i,j=1
                                    (                                                   )
                                                          h               i
                                                                       −1
                          = min 1, max                − 1, Kh (Kh + λI) Y                .
                                                                                   k

                              1
Particularly, if Kh = K̄ = D    J which corresponds to the noisy kernel (16) in the worst scenario,
then the optimal hypothesis h̄ returns the same value for each xk as
                                   n
                            1     X         h            −1 i           1
               h̄ (xk ) =             yi = K̄ K̄ + λI        Y =              JY     .
                          Dλ + n i=1                           k      Dλ + n       k

Thus, the empirical difference can be upper bounded as
            n                            n
          1X           ?               1X h             −1
                                                           i       1
              h (xk ; ω ) − h̄ (xk ) ≤      Kh (Kh + λI) Y −            JY
          n                            n                     k   Dλ + n      k
           k=1                                    k=1
                                             1             −1     1
                                           =   Kh (Kh + λI) Y −        JY                         .          (32)
                                             n                  Dλ + n                        1


Next, we derive the upper bound of the generalization. Denote dω (x) = h (x; ω) − h̄ (x) . Since
dω (x) ∈ [0, 2], to utilize Lemma A.3, let Gγ = d2ω : kωk ≤ γ , for γ = 1, 2, 3, · · · , where


k · k denotes the Frobenius norm unless otherwise stated, and the subscript F has been omitted for
brevity. Then from Lemma A.3, for any δ>0 and γ, with probability of at least 1 − 2γδ 2 over the
                                         n
draw of an i.i.d. sample S = {(xi , yi )}i=1 of size n, the following inequality holds for any ω with
kωk ≤ γ:
                             n
                                                 "         n
                                                                         #    r
                          1X                2             X                       1     4γ 2
         E [dω (x)] −          dω (xk ) ≤ E sup               σk dv (xk ) + 6       log      .   (33)
      (x,y)∼D             n                 n σ kvk≤γ                            2n      δ
                              k=1                                 k=1


                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                       P∞
Thus, with probability of at least 1 − γ=1 2γδ 2 ≥ 1 − δ, the inequality (33) holds for all γ . Then
for any ω ∈ H, with probability of at least 1 − δ, we have
                                              "                         #    s
                          n                               n                                      2
                      1X                 2               X                       1      4dkωke
      E [dω (x)] −            dω (xk ) ≤ E        sup        σk dv (xk ) + 6       log             .
   (x,y)∼D            n                  n σ kvk≤dkωke                          2n          δ
                        k=1                              k=1
                                                                                                 (34)
Note that
                                                                                                   n
                                      n                         o                            1    X
      dv (x) = h (x; v) − h̄ (x) = min 1, max − 1, Tr [ρ (x) v]   −                                   yi ,
                                                                                           Dλ + n i=1
                                                1
                                                  Pn
and the function Γ(·) = min 1, max {−1, ·} − Dλ+n   i=1 yi is 1-Lipschitz. According to
Lemma A.4, we have
            "           n
                                     #    "       n
                                                                     #
                       X                          X
          E      sup      σk dv (xk ) ≤ E   sup     σk Tr [ρ (xk ) v]
            σ   kvk≤dkωke k=1                  σ   kvk≤dkωke k=1
                                                   "                      n
                                                                                             #
                                                                          X
                                             ≤E         sup      kvk            σk ρ (xk )                   (35)
                                               σ   kvk≤dkωke              k=1
                                                            "   n
                                                                                   #
                                                                X
                                             ≤dkωke E                 σk ρ (xk )
                                                        σ
                                                                k=1
                                                   v "                               #
                                                   u
                                                   u X n X
                                                         n
                                             ≤dkωketE      σi σk Tr [ρ (xi ) ρ (xk )]                        (36)
                                                            σ
                                                                i=1 k=1
                                                        p
                                             ≤dkωke         Tr (Kh )                                         (37)
                                                        √
                                             ≤dkωke n,                                                       (38)
where Cauchy-Schwartz inequality and Jensen’s inequality are applied to yield Eq. (35) and Eq. (36),
respectively. To derive Eq. (37), we use the fact that σ1 , · · · , σn are independent uniform random
variables taking value in {−1, +1}.
Combining Eqs. (34) and (38) with the following inequality
   s
                2
                     r                                       r   r
         4dkωke                            4                   4   4
                                               q
                                  2                        2
     log          = log dkωke + log ≤ log dkωke + log ≤ dkωke + log ,
            δ                              δ                   δ   δ
it yields
                                         n                                         r
                                  1X             8                                      1    4
                     E [dω (x)] −    dω (xk ) ≤ √ dkωke + 6                               log .              (39)
                  (x,y)∼D         n               n                                    2n    δ
                                       k=1

This holds for ω = ω ? which is in the form of Eq. (7) and satisfies
                                  q
                                                   −1                −1
                        kω ? k = Y T (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y .                                              (40)

Thus, by plugging Eqs. (32), (39), and (40) into Eq. (31), we prove Lemma B.1.

Secondly, we introduce the L2 -geometric difference kMKh ,K̄ k2 between a specific kernel matrix
Kh and the kernel matrix K̄ as
                                                  −1              −1
                        kMKh ,K̄ k2 = (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI             ,                    (41)
                                                                                       2

and further bounds the right-hand side of Eq. (30).


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.2. Under the same setting as in Lemma B.1, we have

                E      h (x; ω ? ) − h̄ (x)
             (x,y)∼D
                                                                                 √         s
                                  q                                      Dn                    log 4δ
          ≤λkMKh ,K̄ k2 + 8           1 + λkMKh ,K̄ k2 kMKh ,K̄ k2 + 8        +6                      ,       (42)
                                                                       Dλ + n                   2n
                                      Pn
where the empirical difference n1       i=1      h (xi ; ω ? ) − h̄ (xi ) is upper bounded by λkMKh ,K̄ k2 .



Proof. Our goal is to bound the right-hand side of Eq. (30) using the L2 -geometric difference
kMKh ,K̄ k2 between the two kernel matrices. First, we calculate its first term which is the upper
                                    Pn
bound of the empirical difference n1 i=1 h (xi ; ω ? ) − h̄ (xi ) .
It is straightforward to calculate that

     1             −1     1                              1                 −1            −1
       Kh (Kh + λI) Y −        JY                      =    Kh (Kh + λI) Y − K̄ K̄ + λI     Y
     n                  Dλ + n                       1   n                                                1
                                                         λ              −1         −1
                                                       =    (Kh + λI) Y − K̄ + λI     Y                       (43)
                                                         n                                1
                                                          λ               −1          −1
                                                       ≤ √ (Kh + λI) Y − K̄ + λI         Y                    (44)
                                                           n                                2
                                                          λ
                                                       ≤ √ kMKh ,K̄ k2 kY k2                                  (45)
                                                           n
                                                       ≤ λkMKh ,K̄ k2 ,                                       (46)

where Eq. (43) uses K(K + λI)−1                        −1
                                  √ = I − λ(K + λI) , Eq. (44) comes from the fact that for an
n-dimensional vector x, kxk√  1 ≤  nkxk  2 , Eq. (45) employs kAY k2 ≤ kAk2 kY k2 , and Eq. (46)
utilizes the fact that kY k2 ≤ n owing to kOk2 ≤ 1.
To upper bound the second term in the right-hand side of Eq. (30), we decompose it into two terms
and employ the triangle inequality to yield
             q
         8                   −1                −1
        √       Y T (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y
          n
             q
         8                   −1                −1           −1             −1
       ≤√       Y T (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y − Y T K̄ + λI     K̄ K̄ + λI     Y
          n
                q
            8                   −1             −1
        +√         Y T K̄ + λI     K̄ K̄ + λI     Y .                                                         (47)
             n

Since it can be verified that

                                            −1                   −1          D
                                 K̄ + λI         K̄ K̄ + λI           =          2 J,
                                                                          (Dλ + n)

we have
                                   s                                              n  √     √
                                                                 D           D X             Dn
  q           −1             −1
    T
   Y K̄ + λI     K̄ K̄ + λI     Y = YT                                               yi ≤
                                                                   2 JY = Dλ + n          Dλ + n
                                                                                                 ,
                                                           (Dλ + n)              i=1
                            Pn                                                                  (48)
where Eq. (48) utilizes |    i=1 yi | ≤ n.


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, by employing K(K + λI)−1 = I − λ(K + λI)−1 , it can be calculated that
                        −1                    −1                  −1               −1
              (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI                        K̄ K̄ + λI
                           h                                           −1 i
                        −1                      −1
           = (Kh + λI)      Kh (Kh + λI) − K̄ K̄ + λI
                  h                                  −1 i                −1
                               −1
                + (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI                       K̄ K̄ + λI
                                h                                    −1 i
                            −1                   −1
           = − λ(Kh + λI)         (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI
                  h                                  −1 i h                   −1 i
                               −1
                + (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI                        I − λ K̄ + λI
              h                               −1 i         h                              −2 i
                         −1                                             −2
           = (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI                    − λ (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI
                         h                                       −1               −1           i
                              2
           = MKh ,K̄ − λ MK     h ,K̄
                                      +   M  Kh ,K̄   K̄   + λI      +   K̄ + λI     M   Kh ,K̄ ,

                           −1                   −1
where MKh ,K̄ = (Kh + λI) − K̄ + λI                 . Thus, the corresponding quadratic form reads
                      −1                    −1                         −1               −1
        Y T (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y − Y T K̄ + λI                         K̄ K̄ + λI      Y
                              h                                                                       i
                                                                      −1                −1
      = Y T MKh ,K̄ Y − λY T MK     2

                                      h ,K̄ +  M  K  h ,K̄  K̄ + λI       +  K̄ +  λI      M  K h ,K̄   Y
            h                                      i
                                                −1
      = Y T I − λMKh ,K̄ − 2λ K̄ + λI

                                                      MKh ,K̄ Y
          h                                  −1 i
      ≤ I − λMKh ,K̄ − 2λ K̄ + λI                 MKh ,K̄ kY k22                                          (49)
          h                  −1                             i 2
      ≤ n I − 2λ K̄ + λI              + λkMKh ,K̄ k2 kMKh ,K̄ k2                                          (50)
                                    2

      ≤ n 1 + λkMKh ,K̄ k2 kMKh ,K̄ k2 ,                                                                  (51)
where Eq. (49) uses Y T AY ≤ kAk2 kY k22 , Eq. (50) employs the triangle inequality
                                                                               √ and the sub-
multiplicative property of matrix norm as well as the inequality that kY k2 ≤ n, and Eq. (51)
                          −1
utilizes I − 2λ K̄ + λI      2
                                = 1 which can be verified by checking the maximum singular value
                    −1
of I − 2λ K̄ + λI      .
By plugging Eqs. (51) and (48) into Eq. (47), it yields
     q                                                                   √
 8                                                                         Dn
                                                     q
                      −1                −1
√         T
        Y (Kh + λI) Kh (Kh + λI) Y ≤ 8 1 + λkMKh ,K̄ k2 kMKh ,K̄ k2 + 8        .
  n                                                                     Dλ + n
                                                                            (52)
Thus, combining Eqs. (46), (52) with (30), we have the conclusion of Lemma B.2.

The proof of Lemma 3.2 can be completed by letting the hypothesis function h (x; ω ? ) be h̃ (x) and
the associated kernel matrix Kh be K
                                   e in Lemma B.2.


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
Proof. It is straightforward to verify that by plugging Eq. (22) into Eq. (21) and further simplifying
the resultant equation, Theorem 3.1 can be proved. Now we provide the proof of Eq. (22), namely,
                                                 n                1

                                                 λ2 (1 − p) 1 + D
                                kMK,e K̄ k2 ≤                       1 .
                                               1 − nλ (1 − p) 1 + D

The proof leverages the following lemma.
Lemma C.1. (Lemma 6, Wang et al. (2021)) Let k · k be a given matrix norm and suppose A, B ∈
Rn×n are nonsingular and satisfy kA−1 (A − B) k ≤ 1, then
                                                              2
                                                      kA−1 k kA − Bk
                                kA−1 − B −1 k ≤                        .                                 (53)
                                                    1 − kA−1 (A − B) k

                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From Lemma C.1, we have
                                                      −1              −1
                           kMK,
                             e K̄ k2 =     K̄ + λI         − Ke + λI
                                                                           2
                                                         −1 2
                                              K̄ + λI    2
                                                           kK̄ − Kk e 2
                                      ≤                 −1
                                        1 − K̄ + λI           K̄ − Ke
                                                                        2
                                                      −1 2
                                             K̄ + λI     2
                                                           k K̄  − Kk
                                                                   e 2
                                      ≤                 −1                                       (54)
                                        1 − K̄ + λI          2
                                                               kK̄ − Kk
                                                                      e 2
                                          n                1

                                           2 (1 − p) 1 + D
                                      ≤ λ n                  1 ,
                                                                                                 (55)
                                        1 − λ (1 − p) 1 + D
where Eq. (54) uses the sub-multiplicative property of matrix norm, and Eq. (55) employs the facts
                −1
that k K̄ + λI     k2 = λ1 and

                               kK̄ − Kk
                                     e 2 = (1 − p) kK − K̄k2

                                           ≤ (1 − p) kKk2 + kK̄k2

                                                           1
                                           ≤ n (1 − p) 1 +     .                                 (56)
                                                           D
                                                    n
Here, we have utilized kKk2 ≤ Tr(K) ≤ n and kK̄k2 = D .

D    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3.4
Proof. According to the assumption of balanced labels and the Hoeffding’s inequality (Lemma A.1),
for any  >0, we have                              !
                                        n
                                    1X                        2
                               P           yi ≥   ≤ 2e−n  /2 .                               (57)
                                    n i=1
Thus, for any δ1 >0, with probability of at least 1 − δ1 over the draw of S, it holds that
                                                     s
                                           n
                                       1  X             2 log δ21
                                              yi ≤                ,                              (58)
                                       n i=1                n
so that
                                                       √     n        √     r
                                                        D X             Dn         2
          q             −1             −1
           Y T K̄ + λI     K̄ K̄ + λI     Y =                   yi ≤          2 log .            (59)
                                                     Dλ + n i=1      Dλ + n        δ1
This can yield a tighter bound of the second term in the right-hand side of Eq. (47) than the bound
in Eq. (48).
In fact, by replacing Eq. (48) with Eq. (59) in Eq. (20) and employing the sub-additivity of prob-
ability, we derive that for any δ1 , δ2 >0, with probability of at least 1 − δ1 − δ2 over the draw of
S,
                                                                 √
                                                                                      s
                                                                                        log δ42
                                                                        r
                                    n                1          8 D             2
      E     h̃ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤ f       (1 − p) 1 +           +             2 log    +6           . (60)
   (x,y)∼D                          λ               D         Dλ + n            δ1        2n

Finally, letting δ1 = δ2 = 2δ , we prove Corollary 3.4.

E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.5
Before giving the proof of Theorem 3.5, we first provide a necessary lemma to guarantee the exis-
tence of ĥ (x), the optimal hypothesis inferred by the estimated noisy kernel.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   2
Lemma E.1. With probability of at least 1 − ne−λ m/4n , the estimated noisy kernel matrix K
                                                                                          b
satisfies
                                      b + λI   K
                                      K        e   0,                                   (61)
                                          2
where K e is the noisy kernel matrix.

Proof. According to our settings, for any i, j ∈ [n], we have
                                                             m
                                      b (xi , xj ) = 1
                                                             X
                                      K                            Vk (xi , xj ),                        (62)
                                                     m
                                                             k=1

where each Vk (xi , xj ) , Vk;ij is a Bernoulli random variable with expectation K
                                                                                 e (xi , xj ) = K
                                                                                                e ij .
For any i, j ∈ [n] , k ∈ [m], let
                                                      1
                                      Y (k;ij) =                  e ij E (ij) ,
                                                          Vk;ij − K                                      (63)
                                                      m
where E (ij) = |iihj| + |jihi|, and particularly, E (ii) = 2|iihi|. It is clear that the expectation of the
random Hermitian n × n matrix Y (k;ij) is zero and
                                  2      1                   2           2
                         Y (k;ij) = 2 Vk;ij − K        e ij      E (ij)
                                       m
                                         1                     2
                                                                      (ii)     (jj)
                                    =         V k;ij −  Ke ij      E       + E
                                       2m2
                                         1   (ii)           (jj)

                                               E      +  E         ,                                  (64)
                                       2m2
                                                                      2
where Eq. (64) is derived from the inequality of Vk;ij − K      e ij ≤ 1.

According to Lemma A.2, for all t ≥ 0,
                                                    
                           n X   m
                          X                                      2   2
                     P             Y (k;ij) + tI   0 ≥ 1 − ne−t /2σ ,                                  (65)
                                  i,j=1 k=1

with
                  n X  m                                         2
        2  1     X          1   (ii)         (jj)

                                                         (k;ij)
       σ =                          E   +E          +E Y
           2    i,j=1 k=1
                           2m2
                                                                     2
                  n
                      "                               m
                                                                                                 #
              1  X      1                          1 X                      2
                               (ii)    (jj)                                       (ii)    (jj)
            =                E      +E        +         E Vk;ij − K   e ij      E      +E
              2 i,j=1 2m                         2m2
                                                                k=1                                  2
                     n
               1     X
            ≤               E (ii) + E (jj)                                                              (66)
              2m    i,j=1                         2

                 1          2n
            =      k4nIk2 =    .
                2m          m
                                                              2
Here, Eq. (66) is derived from the inequality of Vk;ij − K
                                                         e ij ≤ 1.

Thus, by letting t = λ and noting that
                       n X
                       X m                        n
                                                  X
                                  Y (k;ij) =            K      e ij E (ij) = 2 K
                                                        b ij − K                b −K
                                                                                   e ,                   (67)
                      i,j=1 k=1                i,j=1

we have
                                         λ                2
                                    P K + I   K ≥ 1 − ne−λ m/4n ,
                                       b      e                                                          (68)
                                         2
which completes the proof.


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From Lemma E.1, the positive definiteness of K  b + λI guarantees that ĥ (x) exists and can be
described in the form of Eq. (19). Now we present the proof of Theorem 3.5.

Proof. According to Lemma C.1, we have
                                                       −1                    −1
                           kMK,
                             b K̄ k2 =      K̄ + λI               − Kb + λI
                                                                                          2
                                                           −1 2
                                           K̄ + λI    2
                                                        kK̄ − Kk
                                                               b 2
                                      ≤              −1
                                        1 − K̄ + λI       K̄ − K
                                                               b
                                                                                         2
                                         1
                                          2 kK̄ − Kk2
                                                  b
                                      ≤ λ 1             ,                                                     (69)
                                       1 − λ kK̄ − Kk
                                                    b 2
                                                                                                    −1
where Eq. (69) employs the sub-multiplicative property of matrix norm and k K̄ + λI                      k2 = λ1 .
Moreover,
                         kK̄ − Kk
                               b 2 ≤ kK̄ − Kk
                                            e 2 + kK
                                                   e − Kk
                                                        b 2

                                                    1
                                   ≤ n (1 − p) 1 +      + kK
                                                           e − Kk
                                                               b 2,                                           (70)
                                                   D
where Eq. (70) is derived from Eq. (56).
According to the definition of Kb (x, x0 ) in Eq. (18) and the Hoeffding’s inequality (Lemma A.1),
for any   ≥ 0 and arbitrary x, x0 ∈ X , we have

                           P K  b (x, x0 ) − Ke (x, x0 ) ≥   ≤ 2e−2 2 m .                     (71)

Note that the estimated noisy kernel matrix K
                                            b is a random matrix with its expectation being the
                    e Then for any   ≥ 0,
noisy kernel matrix K.

                   P K e −K  b ≥  ≤P K        e −K  b ≥                                    (72)
                               2
                                                                      
                                             Xn X n              2
                                       = P           K      b ij ≥  2 
                                                      e ij − K
                                                    i=1 j=1
                                                                                              
                                                    n [
                                                      n
                                                                                           2 

                                                    [                                2
                                           ≤ P                     e ij − K
                                                                    K      b ij          ≥ 2
                                                  i=1 j=1
                                                                                          n
                                               n X
                                                 n
                                                                                       2

                                               X                                 2
                                           ≤              P        e ij − K
                                                                   K      b ij       ≥ 2
                                               i=1 j=1
                                                                                      n
                                                              2    2
                                           ≤ 2n2 e−2m  /n ,                                                   (73)
where Eq. (72) employs the relationship between the spectral norm and the Frobenius norm, namely,
kAk2 ≤ kAk, and Eq. (73) is obtained from Eq. (71).
Combining Eqs. (69), (70) and (73), it yields that for any δ1 >0, with probability of at least 1 − δ1 ,
                                    1
                                       h
                                                         1
                                                             q n2        2n2
                                                                             i
                                   λ 2  n  (1 − p)  1 +  D   +    2m log  δ1
                  kMK, b K̄ k2 ≤         h                     q n2             i.                 (74)
                                                                              2
                                 1 − λ n (1 − p) 1 + D + 2m log 2n
                                       1                   1
                                                                            δ1


Thus, from Lemma E.1, Lemma 3.2, and Eq. (74), by employing the sub-additivity of probability,
                                                                                                 2
we have the conclusion that for any δ1 , δ2 >0, with probability of at least 1 − δ1 − δ2 − ne−λ m/4n ,
                                                                                 √
                                                            s                              s
                                                                     2n2
                                                                 log                           log δ42

                                  n                 1      n          δ1       8 Dn
    E     ĥ (x) − h̄ (x) ≤  f     (1  −  p)   1 +      +                   +           + 6           ,
 (x,y)∼D                          λ                 D      λ       2m           Dλ + n           2n


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   √ z
                z+8 λ
where f (z) =     1−z .

Finally, by letting δ1 = δ2 = 2δ , we reach the conclusion of Theorem 3.5.


                                                 21
