Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS T EXT- GUIDED 3D S CENE C OMPOSITION
  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



A bedroom with large windows                             A living room,
revealing sunset outside, Ukiyo-e style                  pencil drawing style


                                                          DSLR photo of
                                                          a washing room


Cars parked at the street, cartoon style

                           Original layout                  Delete object                       Move object


Figure 1: Diverse 3D scenes synthesized by our method. Our method can incorporate objects that
are either automatically generated from text prompts (denoted as , top left, top right), or provided
by a user (denoted as , middle right). Our method generalizes to different scene types and styles
and supports scene manipulation, such as moving or deleting objects (bottom).


                                                 A BSTRACT

             We are witnessing significant breakthroughs in the technology for generating
             3D objects from text. Existing approaches either leverage large text-to-image
             models to optimize a 3D representation or train 3D generators on object-centric
             datasets. Generating entire scenes, however, remains very challenging as a scene
             contains multiple 3D objects, diverse and scattered. In this work, we introduce
             SceneWiz3D – a novel approach to synthesize high-fidelity 3D scenes from text.
             We marry the locality of objects with globality of scenes by introducing a hybrid
             3D representation – explicit for objects and implicit for scenes. Remarkably,
             an object, being represented explicitly, can be either generated from text using
             conventional text-to-3D approaches, or provided by users. To configure the
             layout of the scene and automatically place objects, we apply the Particle Swarm
             Optimization technique during the distillation process. Furthermore, in the text-to-
             scene scenario, it is difficult for certain parts of the scene (e.g., corners, occlusion)
             to receive multi-view supervision, leading to inferior geometry. To mitigate
             the lack of such supervision, we incorporate an RGBD panorama diffusion
             model, resulting in high-quality geometry. Extensive evaluation supports that
             our approach achieves superior quality over previous approaches, enabling the
             generation of detailed and view-consistent 3D scenes.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1   I NTRODUCTION
Remarkable progress in text-to-3D (Poole et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;c; Metzer et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023a; Zhu & Zhuang, 2023) has been achieved in the generation of
diverse and high-quality 3D objects, driven by techniques distilling knowledge from 2D foundation
models (Rombach et al., 2022). In this work, we aim to go beyond the creation of individual 3D
objects and embark on the synthesis of entire 3D scenes. Unlike a single object, a scene encapsulates
a wealth of information, offering the potential for a truly immersive experience, especially vital for
applications such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and filmmaking.
Generating 3D scenes entails dealing with numerous objects that have distinct appearances and
are arranged in various layouts. Current text-to-3D methods often struggle to address these
complexities, primarily due to unsuitable representations. Implicit representations, like Neural
Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020), excel in modeling arbitrary scenes, yet face
challenges in manipulating individual objects in scenes. In contrast, explicit representations, like
meshes, provide explicit geometry and prove to be effective in representing objects, but are costly
to maintain and update complex scenes with numerous objects. Taking advantage of both ends,
we adopt a hybrid 3D representation with both implicit and explicit components. We employ
Deep Marching Tetrahedra (DMTet) (Shen et al., 2021), an explicit 3D representation, for objects
of interest, ensuring excellent multi-view consistency. Given text description, objects of interest
can either be suggested by Large Language Models (LLM) or user-specified. Objects can then be
initialized via off-the-shelf text-to-3D models. To represent the remaining scene elements, we utilize
an implicit radiance field that provides flexibility in representing scenes with varying depth ranges.
Beyond 3D scene representations, obtaining proper 3D layouts, formatted as object configurations
(i.e., positions, rotations, and scaling), remains a non-trivial task. Some concurrent efforts (Po
& Wetzstein, 2023; Cohen-Bar et al., 2023) circumvent the challenge by taking predefined 3D
layouts as inputs, which are less user-friendly compared to 2D layouts and underutilize the
generalizability and creativity of foundation models. In contrast, we incorporate automatic
updates of object configurations in the optimization process. The naive incorporation of update
through back-propagation often falls into local minima, particularly for low-dimensional object
configuration vectors. To circumvent this issue, we propose the use of Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995) based on CLIP similarity. PSO is a particle-based optimization
method inspired by the simulation of the movement and intelligence of swarms. It can effectively
navigate the landscape of configurations through collaboration between different particles, evading
local minima, and striking a good balance between exploration and exploitation.
Another challenge in 3D scene generation lies in obtaining detailed and complex geometry.
Conventional distillation-based text-to-3D object generation approaches rely on 360-degree cameras
placed around objects to provide multi-view information (Poole et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023a).
However, this approach is struggling with scene generation due to (1) camera placement within the
scene, limiting viewing angles, especially for areas near scene boundaries, and (2) occlusions within
scenes, restricting the coverage of viewing regions. Moreover, the longstanding Janus problem
(i.e., the multi-face issue), originally identified in distillation-based 3D object generation (Hong
et al., 2023), persists in scene generation, as shown in Fig. 6. To address these, we incorporate
LDM3D (Stan et al., 2023), a diffusion model finetuned on panoramic images in RGBD space.
During the optimization process, LDM3D provides additional prior information: The RGBD
knowledge yields supervision in depth, while panoramic knowledge mitigates the issues of limited
views with perspective images and disambiguates the global structure of a scene.
We dub our pipeline as SceneWiz3D. We thoroughly evaluate the proposed method in terms
of appearance and geometry by employing the CLIP similarity metric (Radford et al., 2021b), a
depth estimator (Ranftl et al., 2022) and the FID metric (Heusel et al., 2017) on both perspective
and panoramic views. SceneWiz3D achieves state-of-the-art performance in text-to-3D scene
generation compared to all baseline methods. SceneWiz3D effectively synthesizes scenes based
on a wide range of user-provided text prompts, while also accommodating specific user preferences
for 3D assets and seamlessly arranging the selected objects within the scenes.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Text-to-3D object generation. It is intuitive to learn a text-to-3D generative model using 3D data.
Recent research has explored various 3D representations, such as point clouds (Nichol et al., 2022),
signed distance functions (Cheng et al., 2023), triplane representations (Wang et al., 2023b), and
neural representations (Jun & Nichol, 2023), etc. Despite these advancements, current text-to-3D
methods still face limitations in terms of quality and diversity, primarily due to a lack of annotated
data. In contrast, 2D generative models have made significant improvements in visual quality and
diversity, owing to diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022) trained on large-scale annotated 2D image datasets (Schuhmann et al.,
2022). Therefore, it is crucial to bridge the gap between 2D and 3D generative models, and several
strategies have emerged to achieve this. Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Lin et al., 2023a; Wang
et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c; Zhu & Zhuang, 2023; Wang et al., 2023a),
introduced by Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2023), employs pretrained text-to-image diffusion models
as priors for optimizing parametric spaces. Lastly, Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023b) finetunes the
Stable Diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) with 3D data to gain control over camera perspective,
enabling novel-view synthesis and 3D reconstruction (Liu et al., 2023a; Qian et al., 2023).
3D scene generation. Generating 3D scene models presents a unique challenge, as collecting 3D
scene data is inherently difficult compared to 2D images, whether through scanning or manual
creation. Inspired by Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020), NeRF-based
generators (Chan et al., 2022; 2021; Gu et al., 2022; Schwarz et al., 2020; Siarohin et al., 2023;
Skorokhodov et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023) in conjunction with GAN-based framework (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Karras et al., 2020) emerged as dominant approaches to learning 3D scene structure
from 2D image collections. Among these models, GSN (DeVries et al., 2021) was an early attempt
at scene-level synthesis by modeling traversable indoor scenes using local radiance fields, and
InfiniCity (Lin et al., 2023b) proposed a pipeline consisting of 2D and 3D models to make use of
both types of data. Recent advancements, facilitated by diffusion models, have introduced strategies
to lift 2D knowledge into 3D representations, achieving 3D scene synthesis. The lifting from 2D
images to 3D scenes can occur either through jointly predicting depth information (Stan et al., 2023)
or by utilizing off-the-shelf methods for depth estimation (Höllein et al., 2023). Some concurrent
efforts (Po & Wetzstein, 2023; Cohen-Bar et al., 2023) take predefined 3D layouts as inputs to
sidestep the difficulties of compositions in 3D scene generation. All these methods encounter
challenges related to inaccurate scene-level geometry.

3     M ETHOD
Our goal is to create high-fidelity 3D scenes from text. We build our method based on existing text-
to-3D object approaches with score distillation sampling (Sec. 3.1). Different from individual object
which is local and compact, scenes can be global with objects scattered throughout, which poses a
challenge for a unified 3D representation for generation. Thus, we marry the locality of objects with
the globality of scenes by introducing a hybrid 3D representation (Sec. 3.2). , We discuss how to
optimize the hybrid representation in Sec. 3.3. To automatically configure the layout of the scene,
we use Particle Swarm Optimization, presented in Sec. 3.3.1. To mitigate the lack of multi-view
supervision caused by occlusion, we incorporate a pre-trained RGBD panorama diffusion model for
providing additional guidance, illustrated in Sec. 3.3.2.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES
Recent advancements in text-to-3D object synthesis have demonstrated the effectiveness of distilling
knowledge from large text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022).
A text-to-image diffusion model contains a denoising autoencoder ϵϕ , parameterized by ϕ. A noisy
data xt is created by adding sampled noise ϵ ∈ N (0, I) over the original image x. Given xt ,
time step t, and text embedding y, the autoencoder estimates the sampled noise ϵ, denoted as ϵ̂t =
ϵϕ (x, y, t). We will omit the time step t for simplicity. A weighted denoising score matching
objective (Ho et al., 2020; Kingma et al., 2021) is derived as the training objective of the diffusion
model: Ldiff (ϕ, x) = Et,ϵ [w(t)∥ϵ̂ − ϵ∥22 ], where w(t) is a weighting term. In text-to-3D synthesis,
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole et al., 2023) is used to optimize a 3D representation which
is parameterized by θ, using as gradients the denoising score on rendered images x, denoted as

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                           Perspective RGB
                    User speci ed
                                                           OOIs      Hybrid representation
                                                           (DMTet)                           env                                           Dep
                                                                      Scene con g.           (NeRF)
{prompt}             OOI
                    bed     Text                                                                             renderer
                             to                                                                                            Panoramic RGBD
                    chair    3D
                                                                                                      Update
           LLM                                                                                        OOIs and env
                                                                              Update
                                                                              Scene con g.
      Multiple particles
                                           1                                                      {prompt}                                   3   1   2   3


                                                                                                                             Similarity
                                               1
       Global Best
                                                                                                                    CLIP
       Local Best
                                                       3
                                                                                       renderer                               (Score)
       Local/Global                2
                                                                                                                                             3
       update components
                                       2                                                                                                  Update local/
                                                                 Particle Swarm Optimization
                                                   N
       Update direction                            3
                                                                                                                                           global best
           fififi


Figure 2: SceneWiz3D Overview. To model 3D scenes, we adopt a hybrid representation
containing explicit and implicit components: DMTets for objects of interest (OOIs) and NeRF for the
environment. Given a text prompt, we first identify OOIs of the scene, and initialize their DMTets.
We update the OOIs’ configurations with Particle Swarm Optimization based on CLIP similarity, and
update both OOIs and the environment by score distillation with a text-to-image diffusion model, a
panoramic RGBD diffusion model, along with a depth regularizer.


x = g(θ). Formally, the gradient is denoted as:

                                                                                      ∂x
                            ∇θ LSDS (ϕ, x = g(θ)) = Et∼U (0,1),ϵ∼N (0,I) w(t)(ϵ̂ − ϵ)      .                                                             (1)
                                                                                      ∂θ
 Wang et al. (2023c) propose to model the 3D parameter as a random variable instead of a constant
as in SDS and present variational score distillation (VSD):

                                                                                   ∂x
           ∇θ LVSD (ϕ, x = g(θ)) = Et∼U (0,1),ϵ∼N (0,I) w(t)(ϵ̂ − ϵLoRA (x, y, t))      ,     (2)
                                                                                   ∂θ
where ϵLoRA is the low-rank adaptation of the pretrained diffusion model. VSD can help alleviate
the over-saturation, over-smoothing, and low-diversity problems met in SDS.
3.2   H YBRID S CENE R EPRESENTATION
A scene typically consists of many objects arranged in various layouts. Different scenes also have
varying depth ranges. As a result, it is challenging to find a unified representation to model an entire
3D scene effectively. For example, implicit representations like NeRF can result in aliasing and
floating artifacts and fail to model crisp object surface. While explicit representations, like meshes,
are costly to maintain and update when representing a whole scene with multiple objects. To address
this, we propose to employ a hybrid scene representation with both implicit and explicit components
to handle the complexity of a single scene, which is detailed below.
DMTet for objects of interest. We identify objects of interest (OOIs) for target scenes and
model those objects with the explicit representation, DMTet. Specifically, DMTet maintains an
explicit surface via deep marching over the signed distance value predicted on vertexes. Such
explicit representation ensures OOIs maintaining multi-view consistency. As OOIs often occupy
significant regions of the rendered image, maintaining their consistency greatly contributes to the
overall scene fidelity. Moreover, the categories of OOIs can either directly identified by users,
or automatically determined with the help of the Large Language Model (LLM) with queries like
“Please suggest several ordinary objects in a scene. The scene can be described as {prompt}.” With
the recommended categories of OOIs, such as beds, we can use text-to-3D object generative models
to initialize the generation of these objects for the DMTet representation.
To effectively model different objects of interest, we use separate DMTet for each object. Each
DMTet contains two networks Φg and Φc which take hashing-based encoding as input to model the
geometry and color separately. Specifically, the geometry network Φg predicts the signed distance
function (SDF) value for each vertex. We initialize the network by optimizing it to fit the SDF of
the instantiated 3D objects. We use Marching Tetrahedra to extract the triangular mesh from this
representation. Then we can get the rendered occupancy mask, normal map, and depth map by


                                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               CLIP Similarity       PSO         Gradient Descent          PSO        Gradient Descent


Figure 3: Discovering scene configurations. Naive gradient-based optimization suffers from local
minima imposed by low-dimensional and non-convex optimization space, leading to improbable
configurations for both 2D and 3D (objects overlap or are incorrectly placed). Particle Swarm
Optimization, instead, correctly identifies a plausible configuration for both 2D and 3D.

differentiable rasterization. Finally, the color network Φc predicts the color of each point in the
occupancy mask, which forms the RGB observation Ifg .
NeRF for the environment. We model the remaining scene components, termed as environment,
with an implicit representation, NeRF. NeRF offers versatility in handling scenes with complex
layouts and varying depth ranges. It can effectively accommodate both bounded and unbounded
scenes (Zhang et al., 2020; Barron et al., 2022; 2023), and is flexible enough to render complex
lighting effects that is otherwise not trial to implement with explicit representation. We model the
environment as a volumetric radiance field that predicts density and color for any given 3D point.
We follow NeRF’s volumetric rendering equation to integrate density and colors along each ray,
resulting in the rendered image, Ibg , contributed by the environment.
After separately predicting the geometry and color of the foreground OOIs and the background
environment, we use z-buffering to blend the rendered results together to form the final image.

3.3     G ENERATING S CENES

Our method requires only a text prompt to generate a scene. We first determine which 3D object
categories need to be generated by querying an LLM (Touvron et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020),
where a text-to-image diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) can be used to generate images of
suggested objects. After that, an off-the-shelf image-to-3D model (Cheng et al., 2023) generates
3D objects of interest. We note that the proposed process is flexible, accommodating alternative
text-to-3D pipelines and allowing users to incorporate their preferred 3D objects at any stage of the
process, as shown in Fig. 1. After obtaining the 3D objects of interest, we then initialize our hybrid
scene representation. We initialize the geometry of DMTets to match the 3D objects obtained, and
initialize the environment NeRF model by assigning a predefined density distribution designed for
scenes following ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023c). At last, we generate the scene by alternating
between optimizing the scene configuration (i.e., object poses, see Sec. 3.3.1) and optimizing the
scene model (i.e., DMTets for OOIs and NeRF for the environment, see Sec. 3.3.2).

3.3.1    AUTOMATICALLY L EARNING S CENE C ONFIGURATIONS
As we disentangle OOIs from the rest of the scene in our hybrid representation, we need to determine
the configuration for each object, location, scaling, and rotation. However, due to the complex
and diverse layouts of scenes, obtaining reasonable configurations poses a challenge. Previous
works (Huang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023) have attempted to learn scene configurations or
layouts from limited datasets (e.g., indoor scenes), limiting the generalizability. Instead, we propose
leveraging multi-modal foundation models for enhanced generalization.
Scene configuration score. We assess a scene configuration with the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021a)
similarity between rendered images generated by the configuration and the input text prompt. Since


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our rendering pipeline is fully differentiable, a straightforward idea is to update the configuration
with backpropagation. However, as we observed, such an approach is prone to getting trapped in
a local minima, as scene configurations represent a very low-dimensional space for gradient-based
optimization. We illustrate the finding in 2D layouts (Fig. 3, left) and 3D layouts (Fig. 3, right).
In our initial experiments, we also examined the use of SDS loss for optimizing scene configuration.
We encountered similar optimization challenges as described earlier. Furthermore, we observed that
the global minimal point of the SDS score map does not correspond to the optimal configuration.
This discrepancy arises from the fact that SDS is a proxy loss used to estimate the gradient of the KL
divergence objective (Poole et al., 2023), and itself does not effectively distinguish between proper
and improper configurations.
Particle swarm optimization. To overcome this challenge, we employ a non-gradient-based
heuristic searching approach called Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). PSO is a particle-based
optimization algorithm that simulates the social behavior of a swarm of particles. During the
n-th iteration, each particle ai (n) represents a potential scene configuration. Its velocity vi (n)
determines its movement in the search space. We update each particle as:
          vi (n + 1) = k · vi (n) + c1 · r1 · (pbesti − ai (n)) + c2 · r2 · (gbest − ai (n)),     (3)
          ai (n + 1) = ai (n) + vi (n + 1)                                                        (4)
where pbesti is the best position found by the particle, gbest is the best position found by
any particle in the swarm, k, c1 , c2 are hyper-parameters, and r1 , r2 are random numbers used
for exploration. PSO can effectively explore the scene configurations’ search space and converge
towards an optimal solution. We disable gradient descent over scene configurations and perform
PSO updates every 3000 iterations.

3.3.2   O PTIMIZING SCENE MODEL
To optimize the parameters of a scene, we render perspective RGB image and panoramic RGBD
images. Then, we employ VSD guidance with Stable Diffusion on perspective images, and SDS
guidance with LDM3D on panoramic images, denoted as Lpers and Lpano , respectively. Additionally,
we include a depth regularization loss to further improve the quality of geometry.
The overall optimization target is a weighted sum of the above loss terms:
                                 L = λpers Lpers + λpano Lpano + λdep Ldep ,                            (5)
where λpers , λpano , and λdep are weighting coefficients. Below, we discuss details of Lpano , Ldep , and
refer readers to ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023c) for details of applying VSD for Lpers .
Score distillation sampling in RGBD panoramic view (Lpano ). Multi-view supervision plays a
crucial role in accurately reconstruct 3D structure. In the context of text-to-3D scene generation,
viewing angles are constrained as cameras are positioned within scenes, leading to frequent
occlusions that prevent certain regions from receiving comprehensive multi-view supervision.
Consequently, this can result in foggy and distorted generated geometry. To address this deficiency,
we propose to directly leverage supervision from a geometry-aware diffusion model, LDM3D (Stan
et al., 2023). LDM3D is specifically designed to denoise data in RGBD space. By rendering RGBD
images and distilling knowledge from LDM3D in a similar manner as in Score Distillation Sampling
with Stable Diffusion, we can enhance the geometry of the synthesized scene. In addition, a version
of LDM3D is finetuned over panoramic equirectangular images, able to generate realistic panoramas
representing different scene types, providing holistic information about scene structure. To adopt
panoramic views into the SDS pipeline, we need to modify the casting rays during rendering. The ray
direction cast from the pixel (u, v) is computed by converting its spherical coordinates to Cartesian
coordinates. The vertical and horizontal viewing angles can be defined as πv/H, 2πu/W , where
H, W are the image resolution. Note that since we aim to improve the geometry, and OOIs modeled
by DMTet already enjoy a good geometry guarantee, we do not render OOIs in the panorama view.
Depth regularization (Ldep ). We also adopt a depth regularizer Ldep based on a monocular depth
estimator, MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2022), to further improve the geometry property of the environment
NeRF. Specifically, in perspective view, we render RGB image I and disparity image Id by NeRF
rendering. We use the MiDaS to predict a disparity image Iˆd based on I. The MiDaS network is
frozen during optimization. The regularization term Ldep is designed as the least square distance
between Id and Iˆd , formally written as Ldep := min ∥sId + b − Iˆd ∥22 .
                                                   s,b∈R


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Quantitative evaluation. We evaluate the proposed methods against (a) the baseline
methods and (b) different design choices in terms of the appearance alignment between outputs
and prompts, and in terms of geometry using an off-the-shelve depth estimator and FID score.
                        Appearance         Geometry                                        Appearance      Geometry
                                                            Lpers   Lpano   Ldep   PSO         CLIP-AP↑   align↓   FID↓
                          CLIP-AP↑       align↓     FID↓
                                                                     ✓                           59.7     0.23     23.89
DreamFusion                  92.6         0.25     41.18    SDS                      ✓           90.5     0.26     38.93
ProlificDreamer              95.5         0.30     76.22    SDS      ✓               ✓           96.7     0.22     29.41
Text2room                    63.4         0.32     26.25    VSD                      ✓           93.0     0.32     68.53
                                                            VSD      ✓               ✓           96.1     0.24     28.39
LDM3D                        69.3         0.24     11.33    VSD      ✓       ✓                   91.8     0.19     18.92
Ours                      97.6        0.14         10.43    VSD      ✓       ✓       ✓           97.6     0.14     10.43
              (a) Comparison with baselines.                                   (b) Ablation study.

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1       S ETTINGS

Implementation details. The geometry and color networks in NeRF and DMTet are parameterized
as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) with hashing-based positional encoding (Müller et al., 2022). For
score distillation, we use a pretrained Stable Diffusion model1 for perspective views and LDM3D-
pano for panoramic views2 , and adapt the time step sampler from DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023).
Optimization comprises 20,000 iterations with the Adam optimizer, conducted on a single A100
GPU with a batch size of 1. Further implementation details are provided in the Supplementary.
Test set. To compare with other text-to-3D scene synthesis approaches, we generate a set of 10 test
prompts describing various indoor scenes, such as museums and classrooms (see supplementary for
the full list). For each scene, we sample 1000 different camera viewpoints, yielding a total of 1000
images. Different from previous works (Höllein et al., 2023), our method is flexible to generate
versatile scenes. For ease of comparison, we choose indoor scenes only.
Metrics. We assess the quality of text-to-3D scene synthesis from two different perspectives. (1)
appearance: We evaluate the quality of the rendered images by measuring their alignment with the
provided captions, using an average precision of the CLIP similarity between the rendered images
and their co captions. (2) geometry: Assessing the quality of generated geometry is non-trivial.
Following EG3D (Chan et al., 2022), we measure the alignment between the rendered perspective-
view disparity map, denoted as Id , and the disparity map Iˆd predicted by MiDaS (Birkl et al., 2023),
using the corresponding rendered RGB image as input. We quantify the alignment using mean
square error (MSE). As both disparity maps Id , Iˆd are non-metric, we adjust the rendered disparity
map to align with MiDaS’s by solving a least square problem i.e., min ∥sId + b − Iˆd ∥22 , where s, b
                                                                                   s∈R+ ,b∈R
are parameters for alignment. Additionally, we calculate Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel
et al., 2017) to assess the visual quality of the rendered perspective-view disparity map. We utilize
the NYU-dep-v2 (Nathan Silberman & Fergus, 2012) as the ground truth source for calculating the
FID score. We find that the FID score is sufficiently sensitive to artifacts resulting from the presence
of floating densities and opaque edges.
Baselines. We compare our method with DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023) and Prolific-
Dreamer (Wang et al., 2023c), two SDS-based methods originally designed for text-to-3D object
synthesis. ProlificDreamer extends its application to text-to-3D scene synthesis by introducing a
density bias and a different camera sampling strategy. We apply the same setting to DreamFusion.
In addition to these SDS-based methods, we also compare our method with two approaches that
do not rely on SDS for creating 3D scenes. Specifically, in Text2room (Höllein et al., 2023), a
text-conditioned inpainting model combining with monocular depth estimation is used to iteratively
create and refine a textured mesh. Moreover, we compare with LDM3D (Stan et al., 2023) which
we leverage as additional guidance. We follow the steps specified in the original paper to convert
its generated RGBD panorama image into a 3D mesh using TouchDesigner (Derivative, 2023) for
perspective view synthesis.
    1
        https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1
    2
        https://huggingface.co/Intel/ldm3d-pano


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Fusion
 Dream
                                                                      SDS


 Dreamer
  Proli c

                                                                SDS
     LDM3D


                                                                VSD
     Text2Room


                                                                VSD SDS


                                                                VSD SDS
     Ours


                 fi                                                              RGB      D         RGB             D

Figure 4: Qualitative baselines comparisons. Figure 5: Qualitative ablation study. prompt: a
prompt: a bedroom, realistic detailed photo. washing room, realistic detailed photo.

                          AAsingle
                             Shogun   in a spacious
                                   Shogun            Dojo.
                                           in a spacious Dojo               AA single
                                                                               boy visiting  a spacious
                                                                                      boy visiting        aquarium.
                                                                                                   a spacious aquarium
w/o hybrid
w/ hybrid


Figure 6: Janus problem in scene synthesis is expressed as multiple instances of the same object
category (top row), which can be mitigated with hybrid representation (bottom row). Each bounding
box color represents a single identity.

4.2                   M AIN R ESULTS
As reported in Tab. 1(a), our method consistently outperforms existing methods in terms of appear-
ance and geometry quality. We provide a qualitative comparison in Fig. 4 by visualizing synthesized
RGB and disparity images from both perspective and panoramic views. Due to inadequate multi-
view supervision, the disparity maps synthesized by DreamFusion and ProlificDreamer contain
fuzziness, opaqueness, and floating artifacts. Furthermore, DreamFusion’s output lacks fine-grained
details. As LDM3D and Text2room both create 3D environments by projection from 2D, they suffer
from severe distortion issues. In contrast, our proposed method successfully synthesizes scenes with
exceptional details. The disparity maps obtained by our method exhibit greater realism, signifying
a more plausible geometry for the synthesized scene.

4.3                   A BLATION S TUDY

In Tab. 1(b), we systematically perform ablation experiments for our approach.
PSO for discovering scene configurations. In the final two rows of Tab. 1(b), there is a significant
drop in CLIP-AP when substituting PSO with gradient descent. The score decreases from 97.6
to 91.8, demonstrating the essential role of PSO in searching reasonable configurations in the low
dimensional configuration space.
Perspective view guidance. We experiment with synthesizing a scene only with panoramic view
SDS guidance, and observe a decrease in appearance quality (first row of Tab. 1(b) and Fig. 5).
By incorporating perspective view guidance, the appearance can be enhanced. This enhancement
improves the similarity between rendered views and the prompts, and leads to a CLIP-AP score
that exceeds 90. Additionally, we find that SDS tends to synthesize over-simplified scenes. This
simplicity can make it easier to predict the depth and subsequently leads to a marginal performance
advantage for SDS over VSD. Nevertheless, we still opt for VSD as our preferred guidance for the
perspective view due to its ability to capture and incorporate greater levels of detail.


                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A living room, watercolor style   A house in MineCraft world       A spacecraft navigating through      Messi on the football court
                                                                            the tranquil universe


    a bedroom with large windows,                                           An astronaut missing in
    revealing roaring blaze outside   A plain in MineCraft world                                           Curry on the basketball court
                                                                         pink starry sky, cartoon style


             A bath room,              Two MineCraft characters        An astronaut landing at the moon,   A man stands on a rooftop
       with Japanese decoration        exploring a space station                  Sci-fi style              overlooking a city skyline


Figure 7: Diverse scenes generated by SceneWiz3D. Our method successfully generalizes to
different scene types (indoor, outdoor) with varying styles (realistic, cartoon, painting) and OOI
categories (human, object).

Panoramic RGBD guidance. We observe that the introduction of panoramic view guidance reduces
floating artifacts and increases the precision of the geometry, consequently benefiting the appearance
quality. This improvement can be attributed to the denoising capability within the RGBD space,
offering valuable geometry-aware feedback.
Depth regularizer. The depth regularizer serves as a direct supervision mechanism by measuring
the distance between the rendered and MiDaS predicted disparity map. Leveraging the robust
capabilities of MiDaS, we find that this term enhances the quality of geometry, reducing the disparity
map’s alignment and FID score by a large margin (see last row of Tab. 1(b)).

4.4      F URTHER A NALYSIS

Alleviating the multi-faces problem. We find that the multi-faces (Janus) problem, originally
discovered in text-to-3D object scenario, also exists in the scene scenario. As shown in Fig. 6, when
given the prompt: a single boy visiting a spacious aquarium, multiple instances of boys appear
throughout the scene. However, by explicitly modeling objects of interest, such as the boy in this
case, we can mitigate the issue of each perspective view generating new objects. Consequently, the
Janus Problem is alleviated.
Generalizability to different scene types. We observe that our method generalizes well across
various scene types, as shown in Fig. 7.
Limitations. Our method shares common limitations with other SDS-based approaches, including
long optimization time and color saturation. Despite significant improvements, our approach may
still occasionally result in foggy or distorted geometry. Moreover, our current scene configuration
optimization is limited by the capabilities of the CLIP model, which does not excel in fine-grained
manipulation tasks. Finally, our approach is restricted by the capabilities of the LDM3D model,
which currently lacks support for fine-grained context generation and artistic styles. We anticipate
that more advanced RGBD and panoramic diffusion models could further enhance the quality of our
method.

5       C ONCLUSION
We present a novel pipeline, SceneWiz3D, for text-to-3D scene generation, utilizing a hybrid
of implicit and explicit representation which generalizes well across diverse scene types. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of PSO in optimizing scene configurations, and the incorporation of
score distillation from both perspective RGB and panoramic RGBD view notably enhances scene
generation quality. SceneWiz3D achieves state-of-the-art 3D scene generation quality in terms of
both appearance and geometry details.


                                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In CVPR, 2022.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Zip-nerf:
  Anti-aliased grid-based neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06706, 2023.
Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, and Matthias Müller. Midas v3. 1–a model zoo for robust monocular
  relative depth estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14460, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic
  implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In CVPR, 2021.
Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efficient geometry-aware 3d
  generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13873, 2023.
Yen-Chi Cheng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Alexander G Schwing, and Liang-Yan Gui.
  Sdfusion: Multimodal 3d shape completion, reconstruction, and generation. In CVPR, 2023.
Dana Cohen-Bar, Elad Richardson, Gal Metzer, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Set-the-scene:
  Global-local training for generating controllable nerf scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13450,
  2023.
Derivative. Touchdesigner. https://derivative.ca, 2023.
Terrance DeVries, Miguel Angel Bautista, Nitish Srivastava, Graham W Taylor, and Joshua M
  Susskind. Unconstrained scene generation with locally conditioned radiance fields. In ICCV,
  2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. NIPS,
  2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS, 2014.
Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt. Stylenerf: A style-based 3d-aware
   generator for high-resolution image synthesis. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. NeurIPS,
 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NIPS, 2020.
Lukas Höllein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2room:
  Extracting textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models. In ICCV, 2023.
Susung Hong, Donghoon Ahn, and Seungryong Kim. Debiasing scores and prompts of 2d diffusion
  for robust text-to-3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15413, 2023.
Siyuan Huang, Zan Wang, Puhao Li, Baoxiong Jia, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, Wei Liang, and Song-
  Chun Zhu. Diffusion-based generation, optimization, and planning in 3d scenes. In CVPR, 2023.
Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. Shap-e: Generating conditional 3d implicit functions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02463, 2023.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
  Analyzing and improving the image quality of StyleGAN. In CVPR, 2020.
James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In Int. Conf. Neural Net., 1995.
Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. NIPS,
  2021.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In CVPR, 2023a.
Chieh Hubert Lin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Willi Menapace, Menglei Chai, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Ming-
  Hsuan Yang, and Sergey Tulyakov. Infinicity: Infinite-scale city synthesis. In ICCV, 2023b.
Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Haian Jin, Linghao Chen, Zexiang Xu, Hao Su, et al. One-2-3-45:
 Any single image to 3d mesh in 45 seconds without per-shape optimization. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.16928, 2023a.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In ICCV, 2023b.
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. In CVPR, 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics
  primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 41(4):
  1–15, 2022.
Pushmeet Kohli Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem and Rob Fergus. Indoor segmentation and support
  inference from rgbd images. In ECCV, 2012.
Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system
  for generating 3d point clouds from complex prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08751, 2022.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, 2021.
Ryan Po and Gordon Wetzstein. Compositional 3d scene generation using locally conditioned
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12218, 2023.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-
  Ying Lee, Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, et al. Magic123: One image
  to high-quality 3d object generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.17843, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021a.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning.
  PMLR, 2021b.
René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust
  monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. PAMI, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NIPS, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. NIPS, 2022.
Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance fields
  for 3d-aware image synthesis. In NIPS, 2020.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. NIPS, 2021.
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Ivan Skorokhodov, Kyle Olszewski, Jian Ren, Hsin-Ying Lee,
  Menglei Chai, and Sergey Tulyakov. Unsupervised volumetric animation. In CVPR, 2023.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Yinghao Xu, Jian Ren, Hsin-Ying Lee, Peter Wonka, and
  Sergey Tulyakov. 3d generation on imagenet. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
Gabriela Ben Melech Stan, Diana Wofk, Scottie Fox, Alex Redden, Will Saxton, Jean Yu, Estelle
  Aflalo, Shao-Yen Tseng, Fabio Nonato, Matthias Muller, et al. Ldm3d: Latent diffusion model
  for 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10853, 2023.
Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner.
   Diffuscene: Scene graph denoising diffusion probabilistic model for generative indoor scene
   synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14207, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
  Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
  foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In CVPR, 2023a.
Tengfei Wang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Shuyang Gu, Jianmin Bao, Tadas Baltrusaitis, Jingjing Shen,
  Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Qifeng Chen, et al. Rodin: A generative model for sculpting 3d digital
  avatars using diffusion. In CVPR, 2023b.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu.
  Prolificdreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023c.
Yinghao Xu, Menglei Chai, Zifan Shi, Sida Peng, Ivan Skorokhodov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Ceyuan
  Yang, Yujun Shen, Hsin-Ying Lee, Bolei Zhou, et al. Discoscene: Spatially disentangled
  generative radiance fields for controllable 3d-aware scene synthesis. In CVPR, 2023.
Kai Zhang, Gernot Riegler, Noah Snavely, and Vladlen Koltun. Nerf++: Analyzing and improving
  neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07492, 2020.
Joseph Zhu and Peiye Zhuang. Hifa: High-fidelity text-to-3d with advanced diffusion guidance.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18766, 2023.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

This appendix is organized as follows. Appendixes A and B present the implementation details of
our proposed SceneWiz3D and baselines respectively. Appendix D justifies the usage of FID over
disparity map to assess the geometry of synthesized scenes. Appendix C lists all the prompts used for
evaluation. Appendix E demonstrates that SceneWiz3D is capable of synthesizing artistic scenes
with diverse styles. We also show qualitative comparison and a collection of diverse synthesized
scenes on the anonymous website: https://scenewiz3d.github.io.

A        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF S C E N E W I Z 3D

Perspective guidance. We use VSD as our perspective view guidance. We inherit the original
camera sampling strategy and annealed time schedule for score distillation.
Panoramic RGBD guidance. Different from perspective camera that is sampled on a sphere and
looks at the middle of the scene, our panoramic camera is placed at the center of the scene with a
small random offset. The magnitude of this offset is limited to a maximum of ten percent of the
scene radius. Since the panoramic guidance does not consider rendering Object of Interests (OOIs)
in the panoramic view, it lacks awareness of the presence of OOIs. To avoid conflicts between the
panoramic guidance and OOIs, we exclude the panoramic guidance from the initial 5000 iterations.
After the first 5000 iterations, we introduce the panoramic guidance based on the rough scene layout
obtained from the perspective guidance. To ensure a smooth transition, we gradually anneal the
maximum time step from 0.5 at 5000 iterations to 0.3 at 20000 iterations. We render the panoramic
image in 256×512 resolution. Furthermore, we also exclude the panoramic guidance during the last
5000 iterations. We have observed that incorporating it during this stage can slightly compromise
the visual quality of the scene.
Depth regularizer Ldep . We use the official dpt-beit-large-512 version of MiDaS to estimate the
target depth for calculating the depth regularizer term.
Coefficients. λpers , λpano , and λdep are set to 1, 10−1 , 104 for all experiments.

B        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF BASELINES

ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023c). We adopt the implementation from threestudio3 which
achieves a similar visual quality to the results in the original paper. We inherit the camera sampling
scheme and density initialization as proposed in the original paper. We only render 64×64 resolution
images for the first 5000 iterations, and then render in 512×512 images for another 20000 iterations.
DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023). We implement DreamFusion based on the ProlificDreamer’s
implementation specified above. We preserve all the configs, except for the modification of the
guidance term from VSD to SDS.
Text2room (Höllein et al., 2023). We train text2room using our text prompts, following its official
guidance. We generated panoramic images and depth maps using Blender. As the mesh color is
assigned to each vertex, we rendered the panoramic images without additional lighting.
LDM3D (Stan et al., 2023). We follow the official implementation of LDM3D. We first synthesize
a panoramic RGBD image by LDM3D-pano. Then we use TouchDesigner to convert it into a 3D
mesh for rendering novel-view images. Fig. A1 illustrates the process in details. The rendering
pipeline processes the input depth map as a height map to deform a 3D sphere with a radius of 1,
using the input image as the texture map for the sphere. The degree of deformation is controlled by
the ‘displacement scale’ parameter in the Phong shader, which we empirically set to 1 to minimize
distortion in perspective view rendering. We position the camera on a circle with a radius of 0.4
and ensure it always points towards the scene’s center. Rendering RGB and depth images for the
perspective view is straightforward using the renderer TOP. For panoramic views, we configure the
renderer TOP to produce dual paraboloid images and then use a projection TOP to convert them into
equirectangular panorama images.
    3
        https://github.com/threestudio-project/threestudio#prolificdreamer


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure A1: Rendering pipeline of TouchDesigner for LDM3D.


C    P ROMPT L IST U SED FOR E VALUATION
During evaluation, each method generates scenes based on 10 indoor scene prompts. Here we list
the prompts:

       • a bedroom, realistic photo style, 4k
       • a dining room, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a living room, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a museum exhibition hall displaying sculptures
       • a car exhibition center, realistic photo style, 4k
       • a study room, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a table tennis room, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a washing room, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a classroom, realistic detailed photo, 4k
       • a computer laboratory, realistic detailed photo, 4k

D    F R ÉCHET I NCEPTION D ISTANCE OVER D ISPARITY M AP
As we observe severe visual artifacts exist in rendered disparity map of baseline methods (floating,
distortion, blurriness, and discontinuity), we would like to use Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) to
assess the image quality. FID is commonly used to evaluate generators trained on real-world images.
It utilizes a backbone network that is pretrained on general vision tasks to extract features from each
image. By comparing the feature distributions of real dataset images and synthesized fake images,
FID quantifies the divergence between these two distributions. Naturally, a question arises regarding
the robustness of the backbone network, specifically Inception-v3 in our case, to provide meaningful
features that can effectively differentiate between real and fake disparity maps.
To answer this question, we conduct an experiment to verify whether FID exhibits a positive
correlation with changes in disparity image quality. To approximate variations in image quality,
we test different types of degradatations of the real data, proposed in Heusel et al. (2017):
Gaussian noise is used to approximate the floating artifacts, Gaussian blur is used to approximate
blurriness, Swirl is used to approximate global distortion, and Implanted black rectangles is used
to approximate discontinuity and hollows. We use NYU-dep-v2 (Nathan Silberman & Fergus, 2012)


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Gaussian noise                                   Blur


                          Swirl                                        Rect


Figure A2: FID is evaluated for upper left: Gaussian noise, upper right: Gaussian blur, bottom
left: swirled images, bottom right: implanted black rectangles. The disturbance level rises from
zero and increases to the highest level. The FID captures the disturbance level very well by
monotonically increasing.


as the ground truth dataset. This dataset and the images generated from 10 prompts have significant
domain shift globally (e.g different number of objects and different types of scenes). On the other
hand local pattern such as edges and surfaces should be pretty similar in these two datasets. To
this end we should select the metric that is sensitive to local degradation types, such as Gaussian
blur and Gaussian noise, but largely ignore global transformations such as Swirl. We first test the
features from different layers of Inception-v3, including 64, 192, 2048 channels.
As shown in Fig. A3, initial feature maps with 64 channels is not sensitive to Gaussian blur. On the
other hand, global features with 2048 channels exhibit an overly intense response to Swirl. To this
end we opt to utilize features with 192 channels for calculating the FID in all of our experiments,
which adequately captures both local transformation, Gaussian blur and Gaussian noise, but is
almost indifferent for global Swirl transformation.
Finally, we shown in Fig. A2, that FID with 192 channels adequately captures different disturbance
levels. This justifies our choice of 192 features FID as an evaluation metric.

E    A RTISTIC S CENES S YNTHESIS
SceneWiz3D can generalize to artistic scenes with diverse styles. We show a gallery of bedrooms
with varying styles in Fig. A4.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              dim=64                             dim=192                          dim=2048


Figure A3: The FID score is calculated for various feature levels, including 64, 192, and 2048
channels. Among these, the mid-level feature with 192 channels exhibits a favorable balance
between different types of noise.


     Enchanted forest            Multiverse                    Sunset                 Snow


      Roaring blaze            Pencil drawing                 Ukiyo-e              Oli painting


     The Milky Way                 Anime                        Sea                16bit game


       Skyscraper                  Forest                   Oil painting              Forest


         Ukiyo-e                   Anime                   Pablo Picasso         Snowy mountain


Figure A4: Diverse artistic bedroom scenes generated by SceneWiz3D. SceneWiz3D can
successfully generalize to a wide range of scene characteristics, encompassing various artistic styles
and scenic views. With our proposed hybrid representation, we can simultaneously maintain multi-
view consistency for foreground objects and synthesize background with varying structure (from
skyscraper, sunset, the Milky Way, to the smoke spreading from the burning house).


                                                 16
