Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SHARCS: SHAR ED C ONCEPT S PACE FOR
E XPLAINABLE M ULTIMODAL L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Multimodal learning is an essential paradigm for addressing complex real-world
         problems, where individual data modalities are typically insufficient for accurately
         solving a given modelling task. While various deep learning approaches have
         successfully addressed these challenges, their reasoning process is often opaque;
         limiting the capabilities for a principled explainable cross-modal analysis and
         any domain-expert intervention. In this paper, we introduce SHARCS (SHARed
         Concept Space) – a novel concept-based approach for explainable multimodal
         learning. SHARCS learns and maps interpretable concepts from different heteroge-
         neous modalities into a single unified concept-manifold, which leads to an intuitive
         projection of semantically similar cross-modal concepts. We demonstrate that
         such an approach can lead to inherently explainable task predictions while also
         improving downstream predictive performance. Moreover, we show that SHARCS
         can operate and significantly outperform other approaches in practically significant
         scenarios, such as retrieval of missing modalities and cross-modal explanations.
         Our approach is model agnostic and easily applicable to different types (and num-
         ber) of modalities, thus advancing the development of effective, interpretable, and
         trustworthy multimodal approaches.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal learning has emerged as a critical research area due to the need for AI systems that can
effectively handle complex real-world problems where individual modalities are insufficient to solve
a given task. Moreover, in safety-critical domains such as biology and transportation, it is vital to
develop interpretable and interactive multimodal agents that can explain their actions and interact
with human experts effectively (Rudin, 2019; Shen, 2022). This presents a unique challenge for
researchers and a crucial step for deploying effective and trustworthy multimodal agents.
Existing deep learning (DL) systems for multimodal learning attain high performance by blending
information from different data sources (Radford et al., 2021; Lei et al., 2021). However, the opaque
reasoning of DL models (Rudin, 2019) hinders the human ability to draw meaningful connections
between the modalities, which could potentially lead to novel insights and discoveries. To address
this issue, many self-explainable methods were released (Koh et al., 2020; Zarlenga et al., 2021;
Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Chen et al., 2019), offering an effective solution to bridge this
knowledge gap. These methods can extract intuitive and human-readable explanations, and some
even facilitate interaction with human experts, enabling a deeper understanding of the problem.
However, they are often limited to single data modalities. A recent line of research focuses explicitly
on developing or adapting existing methods for multimodal settings (Rodis et al., 2023). While
relevant, they are typically tailored for specific multimodal scenarios (Wang et al., 2015), provide
only local explanations (Park et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018) or generate explanations for just one of the
modalities (Kim et al., 2018b) using an extra modality, thus failing to provide a general solution to
multimodal problems.
In this paper, we introduce SHARCS (SHARed Concept Space), a novel interpretable concept-based
approach (described in Section 2) designed to address general multimodal tasks. Our experiments
(Section 3) demonstrate on four common data modalities (tabular, text, image, and graph data) that
SHARCS (i) outperforms unimodal models and matches the task performance of existing baselines
on challenging multimodal settings, (ii) attains high task accuracy even when a modality is missing,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Local          Shared concept
           Input
                               concepts             space

                                                                            SHARCS
                                                                 Concept               Prediction
                                                                 Distance


         big blue
         metallic
         cylinder


Figure 1: SHARCS (SHARed Concept Space): for each modality i, the concept encoder module gi
produces a local concept embedding ci . SHARCS then maps local concept embeddings into a shared
concept representation si . To generate a semantically meaningful shared space, SHARCS minimises
the distance between shared concepts of similar objects from different modalities. Finally, the label
predictor f takes as input the concatenation of all shared concepts si to solve the task at hand.
(iii) generates intuitive concept-based explanations for task predictions, and (iv) generates simple
concept-based explanations for a data modality using the concepts emerging from other modalities,
allowing human experts to uncover hidden cross-modal connections.
Our contributions can be summarised as follows:

       • We introduce SHARCS – a novel concept-based approach for explainable multimodal
         learning. SHARCS is a model-agnostic approach that learns and maps interpretable concepts
         from different heterogeneous modalities into a unified shared concept space, which leads to
         an intuitive projection of semantically similar cross-modal concepts.
       • We show that SHARCS is able to outperform a variety of unimodal and multimodal baselines
         on four different tasks, especially in scenarios with missing modalities;
       • We demonstrate the interpretable capabilities of SHARCS, providing valuable insights of
         the cross-modal relationship between the different modalities at hand.

2     SHARCS: SHAR ED C ONCEPTS S PACE
2.1   P RELIMINARIES

Multimodal learning systems process data set of i = 1, . . . , n 2 N modalitis, each describing an input
sample m 2 N in potentially heterogeneous feature spaces xim 2 Xi ✓ Rd with dimensionality
d 2 N. In supervised settings, data sets may provide global (or modality-specific) sets of l 2 N task
labels ym 2 Y ✓ Rl (yim 2 Yi ✓ Rl ). In these scenarios, multimodal learning systems are trained
to map inputs from feature spaces X1 , . . . , Xn to the output task spaces Y1 , . . . , Yn .

2.2   A RCHITECTURE

SHARCS combines the information extracted from different data modalities during training. In
particular, it aims at joining high-level human-interpretable concept representations (as defined
by Ghorbani et al. (2019)) in a shared concept space rather than joining standard embeddings, which
are typically uninterpretable (Rudin, 2019). SHARCS first extracts a set of k 2 N concepts from
individual modalities and then combines them as multimodal concept representations in a shared
concept space S ✓ [0, 1]t of size t 2 N. This renders intuitive concept-based explanations and
allows human experts to interact with the learnt concepts to gain insights into the mutual relationships
between data modalities. For instance, in SHARCS, a red ball is represented by a multimodal concept
whose representation in the shared space is invariant w.r.t. the input modality (e.g., image, text, etc.).
Local concepts Figure 1 describes an example of SHARCS applied on two data modalities. The first
part of the model is composed of a set of distinct concept encoder functions g1 , . . . gn , one for each


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


modality i = 1, . . . , n 2 N. The concept encoder function gi : Xi ! Rk maps inputs from the i-th
modality to the set of (local) concepts available for that modality. In practice, we instantiate a concept
encoder using a modality-specific architecture e.g., a set of feed-forward layers for tabular data,
convolutional layers for images, or message passing layers for graphs. Modality-specific architectures
  1 , . . . , n map inputs to latent concept representations i.e., i : Xi ! R . A concept encoder then
                                                                                k

maps latent concept representations into a local concept space using a batch scaling ~ : Rb⇥k ! Rk
(where b 2 N is the batch size) and a sigmoid activation function : R ! [0, 1] i.e., gi =           ~    i.
To make the model focus on relevant concepts, we perform batch rescaling before applying the
sigmoid activation. This ensures that an input sample m activates a concept only if the concept
representation, prior to rescaling, significantly differs from the representations of other samples in the
same batch:
                                   ⇣          ⇣ ⇣                            ⌘⌘⌘ 1
                            cim = 1 + exp            i (xim ) ~     i (xij )                           (1)
                                                           j2Bim

where Bim ✓ N represents the indexes of the batch of samples including the m-th sample, ~ is a
permutation-invariant batch rescaling function (such as batch normalisation), and ci are the local
concepts of the i-th modality.
Shared concepts SHARCS then maps the local concepts ci into a shared concept space. To this end,
SHARCS applies a modality-specific set of concept encoders h1 , . . . , hn mapping local concepts
ci 2 C ✓ [0, 1]k into a set of shared concept embeddings si 2 S ✓ [0, 1]t of size t 2 N i.e.,
hi : Ci ! S. Shared concept encoders resemble the structure of local encoders applying batch
rescaling and a sigmoid activation on top of learnable parametric functions 1 , . . . , n :
                         ⇣          ⇣ ⇣                                      ⌘⌘⌘ 1
                   sim = 1 + exp            i (cim )     ~          i (cij )                  (2)
                                                     i=1,...,n ^ j2Bim

Thanks to this operation, our model blends information from different data modalities into the same
space, enabling the generation of unified concept manifolds.
Task prediction. Finally, the model concatenates the shared concepts si from each modality and uses
them to solve the task at hand. To solve the task, a label predictor function f : S n ! Y maps the
shared concepts to a downstream task space Y ✓ Rl : ŷm = f s1m . . . snm where the symbol |
represents the concatenation operation. We provide more details about SHARCS in Appendix A.

2.3   L EARNING PROCESS

The SHARCS architecture enables the integration of information from potentially diverse data
modalities into a unified vector space. However, concept encoders may learn distinct concepts for
different tasks, resulting in different concepts being mapped to the same region in the shared vector
space. To avoid this, we generate a semantically homogeneous shared space by introducing an
additional term in our model’s loss function L. By doing so, the model is encouraged to establish
connections between concepts learned from different modalities, promoting a semantically coherent
shared space:
                                                            X
                      L(y, ŷ, s) = T (y, ŷ) +                           si sq 2                 (3)
                                                |M |
                                                     (i,q)2M ✓({1,...,n}
                                                                   2    )
where 2 R is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of our semantic regularization, T is a
task-specific loss function (such as cross-entropy), M is a subset of all possible pairs of modalities
 {1,...,n}
     2     , and ||si sq ||2 represents the Euclidean norm between the shared representation of the
same sample in the two different modalities i and q. In our solution, we randomly draw samples to
compute the semantic regularisation loss at every iteration. It is worth noting that a model based
on SHARCS can also accommodate local tasks allowing the definition of modality-specific loss
functions, which can be included in the global optimisation process (cf. Appendix A).
A model based on SHARCS offers three learning mechanisms enabling different forms of training
according to concrete use cases:

  • End-to-end: This method trains all model components together, allowing a joint optimisation of
       global (and local) tasks, local and shared concepts.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  • Sequential: This method first trains the full model without SHARCS-specific components
       (i.e., hi , f , and the SHARCS loss). After this pre-training phase, local models freeze, and
       SHARCS components begin training. This approach enables the independent development
       of local concepts preventing dominant modalities from overshadowing concepts of weaker
       modalities.
  • Local pre-training: This method first trains modality-specific models only. After this local
       pre-training, local models freeze, and all the other components start their training.

In contrast to Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020), we do not use any supervision
on local concepts, allowing the model to learn them directly from data.

2.4   M ULTIMODAL CONCEPT- BASED EXPLANATIONS

Unimodal and multimodal explanations. The key advantage of SHARCS with respect to existing
multimodal models is that it provides intuitive concept-based explanations. Similarly to unimodal
unsupervised concept-based models (Ghorbani et al., 2019), we can use SHARCS to assign semantic
meaning to concept labels by visualizing the “prototypes” of a concept, represented by the examples
with the highest values (concept active) or with the lowest values (concept inactive) for that concept
in the shared space. Thanks to the interpretable architecture, SHARCS does not require an external
algorithm to find these samples as opposed to post-hoc methods such as Ghorbani et al. (2019). More
formally, we can retrieve a prototype v 2 {0, 1}t of a concept v in a modality i by taking the sample
with the SHARCS shared concept representation with the highest (lowest) value across all the si seen
during training.
Moreover, SHARCS can also provide a semantic contextualisation for an input sample m by visual-
ising the input samples whose embeddings are closer in the shared space embeddings to the given
input. More formally, given a reference modality i we can identify the set of closest samples to the
input m in a radius ⇢ 2 R as follows:
                                E = {j 2 Btrain | ||sim      sij ||2 < ⇢}                             (4)
where Btrain ✓ N is the set of indexes of training samples, E ✓ Btrain is the set of the closest
samples in the shared space. This form of visualisation is often used to find relevant clusters of
samples sharing some key characteristics. By showcasing examples from the input concept’s family,
the SHARCS allows users to comprehend why these examples are classified similarly.
Both can be applied to global concepts, as they are the concatenation of the shared concepts. The
only difference it to consider zj = (s1j | . . . |snj ) 2 [0, 1]n⇥t , instead of si .
Cross-modal explanations. SHARCS offers unique forms of explanations which go significantly
beyond simple unimodal interpretability. Indeed, SHARCS enables cross-modal explanations, al-
lowing one modality to be explained using another. Specifically, we can use an input sample in a
specific modality to retrieve the most similar examples from other modalities. To this end, we can
select training samples from the other modalities, which are closer in the shared concept space to the
sample m being explained:
                       E = {j 2 Btrain , q 2 {1, . . . , n} | ||sim   sqj ||2 < ⇢}                    (5)

As before, it is also possible to visualise how a concept v of a modality i is interpreted in the other
modality q, visualising the samples with the highest (or lowest) value of the concept v in modality q
across all sq v. In such a manner, it is possible to translate a key feature from one modality to another.
These functionalities are particularly valuable when a modality’s features are less human-interpretable
than others. Visualizing the relationships between modalities enables cross-modal interpretability by
emphasizing the semantic interconnections between concepts of different modalities.
Inference with missing modalities. Another unique feature of SHARCS is that the shared concept
space enables it to process inputs with missing modalities effectively. Indeed, the original representa-
tion of an input m of a missing modality i can be effectively approximated using the shared concepts
of another reference modality q. To this end, we just need to find the shared concept sij observed
during training from the missing modality, which is closest to a shared concept of the reference
modality m0 = arg minj2Btrain ||sqm sij ||2


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This way we can approximate the missing shared concept representation sim from the missing
modality as follows:
                     ⇣       ⇣ ⇣                                   ⌘⌘⌘ 1
              sim0 = 1 + exp       i (cim0 )    ~         i (cij )       ⇡ sim          (6)
                                                  i=1,...,n ^ j2Bim0



3    E XPERIMENTS

Our central hypothesis is that SHARCS allows for an efficient, accurate and interpretable multimodal
learning. To address these aspects, we design our experiments along two main points: (Multimodal
generalisation performance) Through a series of experiments, we first evaluate SHARCS’ ca-
pabilities for multimodal learning in different practically-relevant scenarios. Then, we compare
SHARCS performance to unimodal and multimodal baselines, some of which are not interpretable;
(Interpretability) We qualitatively showcase SHARCS capabilities for learning semantically plausi-
ble, explainable and consistent (multimodal) concepts.
Tasks and datasets. We evaluate our hypotheses on four multimodal tasks, each leveraging a pair
of multimodal datasets such as tabular, image, graph, and text data. The four multimodal, or global,
tasks are designed such that the models need to leverage both modalities in order to provide correct
predictions. Models that will learn only from one of the modalities will be able to solve a partial (local)
single-modality task but will typically exhibit random performance on the global multimodal task.
(i) "XOR-AND-XOR" task: Combines tabular and graph data, each modeling a local XOR task.
The dataset has 1000 samples for each modality. The tabular modality uses bit-strings (2 used for
solving the ‘xor’ and 4 random), and the graph modality contains four types of graphs (each graph
can be transformed to a binary 2-bit binary encoding). The global task is binary ’and’ problem,
combining the local ’xor’ results. (ii) "MNIST+Superpixels" task: Consists of 60,000 pairs of
MNIST images and superpixel-graphs. Local tasks involve image and graph classification, with
the global task being the sum of the two digits. (iii) "HalfMNIST" task: Combines 60,000 image
and graph samples, where each modality represents one half of the sample. The goal is MNIST
classification. (iv) "CLEVR" task: Adapts the CLEVR benchmark for visual question answering
by generating text captions for 8000 images. The multimodal task is binary, predicting whether the
caption matches the image. Additional dataset details can be found in Appendix B.
Modeling details. As discussed earlier, SHARCS learns modality-specific concepts before combining
them in a shared space. Therefore, since we consider tasks that combine different modalities, we use
different models. Specifically: (i) for tabular data, we use a 2-layer Feed Forward Network; (ii) for
images, a 2 layers CNN (MNIST+Superpixels, HalfMNIST) or a pre-trained ResNet18 (He et al.,
2015) (CLEVR); (iii) for text, a 2-layer Feed Forward Network after computing the text representation
with TF-IDF; and (iv) for graphs, 4 layers of GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016) (XOR-AND-XOR) or 2
layers of Spline CNN (Fey et al., 2018) (MNIST+Superpixels, HalfMNIST). Appendix C provides
further details about model compositions and used hyperparameters. Note that, since in this paper, we
are focusing on evaluating the efficacy of SHARCS in a multimodal setting rather than pursuing state-
of-the-art performance; all approaches use the same (local) backbone architectures. Nevertheless,
as SHARCS is model agnostic, these can be easily extended to more sophisticated (but likely less
efficient) architectures.
Baselines and experiments. We begin by examining SHARCS’ multimodal capabilities. In our initial
experiments, we compare SHARCS with models trained solely on single modalities. These unimodal
models include both basic concept-less models and concept-based variations. In the subsequent
experiments, we assess SHARCS’ performance against several multimodal baseline models. These
baselines consist of: (i) A standard multimodal approach called ’Simple Multimodal,’ which combines
uninterpretable embedded representations from individual local models (ii) A concept-based variant
known as ’Concept Multimodal,’ similar to the previous approach but additionally computes and
uses local concepts without sharing them (iii) A ’Relative Representations’ multimodal approach
(Moschella et al., 2023), which constructs relative mapped representations of each sample in relation
to a given anchor within a shared space. This approach requires a two-stage training process: first for
building representations for each modality and then for mapping them in the shared relative space.
Furthermore, we consider a practical multimodal scenario involving missing modalities. In this setup,
we train multimodal models using both modalities, but during inference, one of the modalities is


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Accuracy (%) of SHARCS compared to non-interpretable (Simple Multimodal and Relative
representation) and interpretable (Concept Multimodal) multimodal baselines. Generally, SHARCS
achieves comparable performance than the other baselines.

           Model        XOR-AND-XOR           MNIST+SuperP.           HalfMNIST        CLEVR
                                 Acc.                  Acc.                 Acc.          Acc.
           Simple              99.3 ± 0.5             86.6 ± 3.0       94.2 ± 0.2     59.5 ± 9.5
           Concept             99.0 ± 0.8             88.2 ± 0.1       93.9 ± 0.0     90.1 ± 1.0
           Relative            99.5 ± 0.3             80.4 ± 0.2       95.6 ± 0.1     48.7 ± 0.5
           SHARCS              98.7 ± 0.5             89.6 ± 0.1       94.0 ± 0.1     90.2 ± 0.2

replaced with an auxiliary one. For example, instead of representing a six as an image and a four as a
graph, we represent both a six and a four as images.
Evaluation metrics. We repeat each experiment several times (three times in the case of CLEVR
and five times for the other three) and report a mean and standard error for each metric we use. Each
model has been evaluated using test classification accuracy to evaluate multimodal generalisation
performance. Furthermore, we also report the completeness score to quantitatively assess the concept
quality (for SHARCS and Concept Multimodal). The completeness score assesses how the learnt
concepts are suitable to solve the downstream task. To compute it, we train a decision tree, which
takes the binarised global concepts at the input. To evaluate the performance of SHARCS to the ones
of the ‘Relative representation’ and ‘Concept Multimodal’ variants in the missing modality settings,
we compute their accuracy in this scenario.


4     R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1   M ULTIMODAL GENERALISATION PERFORMANCE

SHARCS outperforms unimodal models. As a proof-of-principle of our method, we benchmarked it
against unimodal approaches (see Figure 8 in the Appendix D). SHARCS achieves good performance
across all four multimodal tasks, consistently outperforming (up to 81%) the unimodal baselines. On
tasks that are practically solvable using only one of the modalities, such as the case of HalfMNIST,
SHARCS can outperform the other baselines by up to 18%. While this behaviour is expected, these
experiments further validate our design decisions – that while for some problems, one modality may
be sufficient, employing all available modalities can provide great benefits.
SHARCS’ generalisation is on             Table 2: The performance of SHARCS (Accuracy (%)) in sce-
par with non-interpretable mul-          narios with missing modalities, compared to Relative representa-
timodal models.         The results      tion and Concept Multimodal variants. The global task accuracy
presented in Table 1 show that           is presented as a reference. SHARCS performs better than the
SHARCS achieves slightly better          baselines, particularly on harder tasks requiring both modali-
or comparable performance than           ties. In some scenarios, SHARCS is able to retrieve modalities,
the other multimodal baselines. In       leading to better downstream performance than the original data.
particular, our approach can main-
tain good performance, despite the                                          Missing Modality         Global Task
bottleneck introduced for comput-         Dataset          Model       1st Modality 2nd Modality       Accuracy
ing concepts and the constraint                            Relative      80.1 ± 6.4     82.8 ± 2.2    99.5 ± 0.3
of the shared space. More im-             XOR-AND-XOR      Concept       68.0 ± 2.0     57.0 ± 6.1    99.0 ± 0.8
                                                           SHARCS        98.6 ± 0.9     91.9 ± 1.2    98.7 ± 0.5
portantly, both concept-based ap-
proaches are the only two that can                         Relative      52.6 ± 4.9     30.1 ± 2.4    80.4 ± 0.2
                                          MNIST+SuperP.    Concept       13.7 ± 3.9     10.8 ± 2.6    88.2 ± 0.1
accurately model the CLEVR task,                           SHARCS        98.0 ± 0.0     82.5 ± 0.4    89.6 ± 0.1
which further justifies the utility of                     Relative      92.9 ± 1.4     60.1 ± 3.4    95.6 ± 0.1
the concept embeddings.                   HalfMNIST        Concept       89.4 ± 1.3     13.4 ± 2.1    93.9 ± 0.0
                                                           SHARCS        96.5 ± 0.0     55.1 ± 3.0    94.0 ± 0.1
SHARCS can successfully han-                          Relative   49.9 ± 0.0   49.0 ± 0.1  48.7 ± 0.5
dle missing modality situation. CLEVR                 Concept    51.4 ± 2.8   48.6 ± 2.7  90.1 ± 1.0
Table 2 shows that SHARCS gen-                        SHARCS     93.1 ± 0.6   93.4 ± 0.4  90.2 ± 0.2
eralisation performance is consis-
tently accurate in missing modality scenarios, significantly outperforming (in all but one case) the


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


other baselines. We attribute this to SHARCS’ ability to construct a better and less noisy concept
space, where concepts from the different modalities provide a better representation of the samples,
thus leading to more precise retrieval of the missing counterpart.
SHARCS with a missing modality outperforms all the baselines and itself with both modalities.
Table 2 shows that, in situations where a modality is more expressive than the other (such as
MNIST+Superpixels and CLEVR), SHARCS with a missing modality achieves higher performance
than all the other baselines and itself using both modalities. We further analyse these capabilities
of SHARCS by benchmarking its retrieval performance of samples with specific characterises.
Furthermore, we performed an analysis on CLEVR, where we checked for each model which
characteristics of the retrieved sample matched with the ones of the object used as the source (See
Table 5 in the Appendix D). SHARCS can better match such (semantically meaningful) concepts
than the other baselines. This analysis also shows that some characteristics are more challenging
to learn than others (such as colour), which can have a negative effect on downstream performance.
Nevertheless, SHARCS, being interpretable, allows for diagnosing and mitigating such issues, which
can be highly beneficial in practical scenarios.


4.2   I NTERPRETABILITY

SHARCS discovers meaningful concepts. SHARCS, as the Concept Multimodal baselines created
by us, is capable of learning useful concepts from a task viewpoint, as evidenced by a completeness
score close to the Accuracy in Table 3. In particular, SHARCS achieve a higher completeness score
on three of the four datasets than the solution without shared space, with an improvement of up to
10% completeness score in MNIST+Superpixels. By employing a shared space, SHARCS is able
to denoise some concepts using the other paired modality. By doing so, it is able to collapse some
(likely unimportant) concepts into one. For instance, in the case of CLEVR, samples from the text
modality labelled with "metal ball" can have a different concept representation from ones labelled
with "shiny ball". Since SHARCS can efficiently leverage the other (image) modality, such concepts
collapse into one - more semantically meaningful concept. This is supported by the number of shared
concept representation clusters (a cluster of shared concept representation is composed by samples
with the same binarised shared concept representation) found by each model. SHARCS reduce the
number of clusters by up to 3.7 times. This provides more valuable and clearer global explanations,
leading to fully interpretable results.
SHARCS’ concepts shed light on how the task can be solved. As we showed in Section 4,
SHARCS discovers concepts that are specifically important in solving the tasks. We can further
qualitatively assess and visualise this property by employing a decision tree (used for computing the
completeness score) on the prediction step, trained with the learnt concepts (Figure 2). In this manner,
the user can understand how different concepts are employed in the decision process. Specifically, it
allows insights into which are the most important concepts, understand better the task at hand, how
different concepts combine and why specific samples are classified in a certain way.
SHARCS explains one modality using the other. Finally, we focus on the ability of SHARCS to
retrieve and explain one modality by using the other. Specifically, we visualise examples from a
modality by sampling the shared concept space using its pair. We retrieve such samples and visually
compare them to samples retrieved by the ’Relative representation’ and ‘Concept Multimodal’
variants. Here we present only results from the MNIST+Superpixels dataset and provide additional
results and figures for the other datasets in Appendix D. The samples presented in Figure 3 show that
SHARCS, in general, can accurately retrieve such samples, whilst the other two counterparts struggle
and produce "random" retrievals. The same can be done on single concept values, illustrating how


Table 3: Accuracy (%) and Completeness Score (%) of SHARCS and Concept Multimodal. Generally,
they achieves high completeness score compared to the accuracy.

 Model        XOR-AND-XOR               MNIST+SuperP.               HalfMNIST                  CLEVR
                Acc.   Compl.            Acc.    Compl.             Acc.    Compl.            Acc.   Compl.
 Concept   99.0 ± 0.8   96.2 ± 1.2   88.2 ± 0.1   78.9 ± 1.4   93.9 ± 0.0   91.3 ± 0.1   90.1 ± 1.0   82.3 ± 1.2
 SHARCS    98.7 ± 0.5   98.0 ± 1.2   89.6 ± 0.1   88.7 ± 0.2   94.0 ± 0.1   92.6 ± 0.3   90.2 ± 0.2   81.5 ± 1.1



                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                Concept 11

                                                            not active (0)                   active (1)


                                                Concept 4

                               not active (0)                      active (1)


                                                                                Concept 5

                                                             not active (0)                               active (1)


Figure 2: First layers of the decision tree visualisation of SHARCS concepts on the XOR-AND-XOR
dataset. At every split, it shows the concept that is considered to make the decision, and it can be
active (right branch) or non-active (left branch). If the node is not the roof, it also shows three samples
with the highest (concept active) or the lowest (concept non-active) value for the concepts of the
previous split, among the ones that respect all the previous split conditions. Each leaf shows the class
distribution of the samples that it represents, in addition to the most characteristic samples.

one specific concept can be represented in the other modality. This can be done by retrieving the
examples with the closest values in that specific dimension/concept.
Different modalities are overlapped in the SHARCS’ shared space. Furthermore, Figure 3d
depicts the shared space of the MNIST+Superpixels dataset created by SHARCS. Here, it is evident
that similar examples from different modalities are mapped closer together. This, however, is expected,
as in the objective function, we are minimising the distance between similar concepts. Nevertheless,
we believe this to be an extremely useful property, especially in scenarios when modalities lack
expressiveness (from a human perspective) or the commonalities between the modalities are much
more nuanced. In such cases, our approach can elucidate important inner relationships between
modalities (and samples), which is beneficial for many downstream applications in domains such as
medicine, biology and healthcare.

5    R ELATED W ORK

Multimodal Learning SHARCS addresses multimodal learning by constructing a shared represen-
tation space from both modalities. As such, it is closely related to the method of (Moschella et al.,
2023), which builds on relative representations. (Moschella et al., 2023) constructs n models that
are trained on a particular (unimodal) local task and a set of randomly selected samples from each
modality, called anchors. The relative representation for a sample in a dataset i is calculated by
computing the relative distance between the representation given by the model mi for that sample


         (a)                   (b)                                      (c)                                            (d)

Figure 3: (a-c) Retrieval examples obtained by (a) SHARCS, (b) Relative representation, and (c)
Concept Multimodal; on the MNIST+Superpixels dataset. The top two rows are samples of retrieved
graphs using images, while the bottom two are retrieved images using graph samples. (d) tSNE plot
of the SHARCS concept space


                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and that of each anchor of that specific modality. However, such an approach can quickly lose
performance in scenarios where the two modalities differ significantly, which was also evident from
our results. In contrast, SHARCS can alleviate these shortcomings by constraining the concepts in a
shared space. In this context, our method is also related to contrastive multimodal approaches (Chen
et al., 2020a), such as the one used in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). Such approaches attempt to map
cross-modal samples by minimising/maximising cosine similarity to similar/dissimilar samples from
the two modalities. Although such methods are in principle applicable to any type and number of
modalities, they have only been only tested in scenarios with fully available pairs, apart from having
exponential complexity with respect to the number of modalities. Moreover, contrastive learning
models suffer from the modality gap problem (Liang et al., 2022), whereas SHARCS is designed to
reduce this gap.Our approach also relates to the methods used in visual question answering (Saqur
& Narasimhan, 2020), where GNNs are used to perform multimodal fusion. While related these
approaches are model/task-specific, whereas SHARCS is model agnostic and can be applied to any
type and number of models and modalities. More broadly, SHARCS relates to several methods that
address explainable multimodal learning (Rodis et al., 2023). However, in contrast to many methods
in this area (Kim et al., 2018b), that use one modality to solve the task and another to produce
explanations - SHARCS is more general and applicable to a wide range tasks, allowing explanations
that can relate either specifically to a modality or explaining the cross-modal relationships.
Concept-based Explanations ((Ghorbani et al., 2019)) Since we focus on interpretable representa-
tions in addition to multimodal learning, our work also relates to the class of concept-based models.
Concept-based models are interpretable architectures that allow predictions to be mapped directly
to human-understandable concepts, making the model’s decision-making process transparent (Kim
et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2020b; Koh et al., 2020; Rudin, 2019; Shen, 2022). Our solution builds
on these capabilities and follows CBM (Koh et al., 2020), which uses concept supervision to extract
understandable explanations. To this end, however, these approaches have been designed for unimodal
settings, underperforming when applied and evaluated on multimodal tasks (as discussed in Section
4). SHARCS attempts to overcome this challenge by extending these capabilities to local (unimodal)
and global (multimodal) tasks. SHARCS can learn concepts that share common characheristics. This
enables comprehensible explanations at different levels (modality-specific or global) and between
different modalities - a unique and novel property of our method.


6    C ONCLUSION


In this paper, we emphasise the need for multimodal approaches that are explicable. Specifically,
we propose SHARCS (SHAred Concept Space), a novel concept-based approach to explainable
multimodal learning that learns interpretable concepts from different heterogeneous modalities and
projects them into a unified concept manifold. An inherent limitation of our approach is that it assumes
some relationships between (the same) samples but from different modalities, e.g. multimodal datasets
considering different measurements of the same patient. Another possible shortcoming relates to the
assumption of the number of discoverable concepts. In some cases, this may lead to many redundant
concepts, but this can be mitigated by post-hoc inspection.
We demonstrate the utility and positive benefits of SHARCS, which relate to (i) substantial improve-
ments in generalisation performance compared to other multimodal models, (ii) valuable predictions
even when one modality is missing, (iii) high-quality concepts that match expected ground truths, and
(iv) enabling insights about the task and other modalities. Moreover, as we discussed in Section 4, in
some situations, one modality can be more expressive than the others, thus it can be used for retrieval.
This ability can be further extended to intervention tasks, where the model can propose possible
interventions applicable to the other modalities. Considering that one of the key characteristics of
CBMs is the possibility to interact with a human expert via allowing them to modify the concepts
(and as a consequence - the prediction), this capability of SHARCS can enable better quantitative and
qualitative analyses, particularly in many real-world safety-critic domains.
We believe that this work could form the basis for the development and analysis of interpretable
multimodal approaches.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY
In Section 2 we introduce our concept-based approach for explainable multimodal learning, and
further discuss the implementation details in Appendix A. To ensure the work is readily reproducible,
besides descriptions of the experimental setup provided in Section 3 and the supplementary material
(Appendices B and C) - we also provide code used for producing the results in the paper.

R EFERENCES
David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining
  neural networks, 2018.
Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett, Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K Su. This looks
  like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations, 2020a.
Zhi Chen, Yijie Bei, and Cynthia Rudin. Concept whitening for interpretable image recognition.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(12):772–782, 2020b.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Inderjit S. Dhillon, Yuqiang Guan, and Brian Kulis. Weighted graph cuts without eigenvectors a
  multilevel approach. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 29(11):
  1944–1957, 2007. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1115.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Matthias Fey, Jan Eric Lenssen, Frank Weichert, and Heinrich Müller. Splinecnn: Fast geometric
 deep learning with continuous b-spline kernels, 2018.
Amirata Ghorbani, Abubakar Abid, and James Zou. Interpretation of neural networks is fragile. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3681–3688, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition, 2015.
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):
   90–95, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax, 2017.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018a.
Jinkyu Kim, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, John Canny, and Zeynep Akata. Textual explanations
   for self-driving vehicles, 2018b.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional
  Networks. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017 - Conference
  Track Proceedings, pp. 11313–11320. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR, sep 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.
Jie Lei, Linjie Li, Luowei Zhou, Zhe Gan, Tamara L. Berg, Mohit Bansal, and Jingjing Liu. Less is
   more: Clipbert for video-and-language learning via sparse sampling, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qing Li, Qingyi Tao, Shafiq Joty, Jianfei Cai, and Jiebo Luo. Vqa-e: Explaining, elaborating, and
  enhancing your answers for visual questions, 2018.
Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Zou. Mind the gap:
 Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning, 2022.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Pietro Barbiero, Dmitry Kazhdna, Federico Siciliano, Gabriele Ciravegna,
  Fabrizio Silvestri, Pietro Liò, and Mateja Jamnik. Encoding concepts in graph neural networks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 2022. [Under review].
Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodolà, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns, 2016.
Luca Moschella, Valentino Maiorca, Marco Fumero, Antonio Norelli, Francesco Locatello, and
  Emanuele Rodolà. Relative representations enable zero-shot latent space communication, 2023.
Dong Huk Park, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Anna Rohrbach, Bernt Schiele, Trevor Darrell,
  and Marcus Rohrbach. Multimodal explanations: Justifying decisions and pointing to the evidence,
  2018.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
 Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
  9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
  pdf.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Nikolaos Rodis, Christos Sardianos, Georgios Th. Papadopoulos, Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis,
  Panagiotis Sarigiannidis, and Iraklis Varlamis. Multimodal explainable artificial intelligence: A
  comprehensive review of methodological advances and future research directions, 2023.
Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
  interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019.
Raeid Saqur and Karthik Narasimhan. Multimodal graph networks for compositional generalization
  in visual question answering. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 3070–3081. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/1fd6c4e41e2c6a6b092eb13ee72bce95-Paper.pdf.
Max W Shen. Trust in ai: Interpretability is not necessary or sufficient, while black-box interaction is
 necessary and sufficient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05302, 2022.
Cheng Wang, Haojin Yang, Xiaoyin Che, and Christoph Meinel. Concept-based multimodal learning
  for topic generation. In Xiangjian He, Suhuai Luo, Dacheng Tao, Changsheng Xu, Jie Yang, and
  Muhammad Abul Hasan (eds.), MultiMedia Modeling - 21st International Conference, MMM
  2015, Sydney, NSW, Australia, January 5-7, 2015, Proceedings, Part I, volume 8935 of Lecture
  Notes in Computer Science, pp. 385–395. Springer, 2015. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-14445-0\_33.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14445-0_33.
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Giannini,
 Michelangelo Diligenti, Zohreh Shams, Frederic Precioso, Stefano Melacci, Adrian Weller, Pietro
 Liò, and Mateja Jamnik. Concept embedding models. Advances in neural information processing
 systems, 2021. [Under review].


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     SHARCS IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

A.1     D IFFERENT CONFIGURATION OF SHARCS

End-to-end It is possible to train all SHARCS components simultaneously, allowing a joint opti-
misation of the task and the concepts found. Therefore, it is also possible to include the loss of
the local tasks in Equation 3. However, to use local supervision, we need to implement inside the
model n local label predictor function f1 , . . . , fn 2 N, one for each modality i = 1, . . . , n. The
local label predictor function fi : Ci ! Yi maps the local concepts from the i-th modality to the
downstream local task space Y ✓ Rli , where li is the number of classes of the local task of the
modality i. Therefore the objective function to minimise is the following:

                                                     X                                      n
                                                                                            X
           L(y, ŷ, s) = T (y, ŷ) +                                       si    sq   2
                                                                                        +         i Ti (yi , ŷi )   (7)
                                       |M |                {1,...,n}                        i=1
                                              (i,q)2M ✓(       2       )

where    i 2 R is a hyperparameter that controls the strengths of the local loss Ti .

Sequential The training process of this method is split in two parts. In the first one, a model similar
to Concept Multimodal is trained. Therefore, unimodal models g1 , . . . , gn are utilised to compute
local concepts, which are concatenated and passed through the label predictor function to solve the
downstream task. This part of the entire architecture is trained first, using an objective function
equals to T , solving the task using local concepts. Then, the concept encoders functions g1 , . . . , gn
are frozen. In the second part of the training, local concepts are projected into the shared space by
h1 , . . . , hn , concatenated and used by f to make the final prediction. At this point, the standard loss
described in Equation 3 is applied.
Local pre-training In this approach, SHARCS’ single modality components g1 , . . . , gn are trained
first, using the same local label predictor functions f1 , . . . , fn described in the end-to-end approach
to make a prediction. Each is trained using their specific local loss Ti . Then, the concept encoders
functions g1 , . . . , gn are frozen, while the other SHARCS’ modules are employed and trained using
the standard objective function described in Equation 3.

A.2     C ONCEPT F INDING ON G RAPH

Although our solution is model agnostic, it is important to treat every modality properly. Therefore,
we slightly modify the concept encoder function when it is composed of a Graph Neural Network.
Specifically, we applied a modified version of the Concept Encoder Module (CEM)(Magister et al.,
2022). In this case, the concept encoder function gi is composed of a Graph Neural Network
 i : Xi ! Hi , a Gumbel Softmax (Jang et al., 2017) to find the "node concepts", an add pooling
over the nodes of the graph, a batch scaling function and a sigmoid Function. Therefore to find cim ,
where i is a graph modality, the equation becomes the following:

                                                                       X
                              tim =     i (xim )      nim =                     (timd ))                             (8)
                                                                  d2xim

                                   ⇣        ⇣          ⇣                         ⌘⌘⌘ 1
                              cim = 1 + exp                 nim        ~ nij                                         (9)
                                                                  j2Bim


where i represents the Graph Neural Network applied to the modality i, which outputs the represen-
tation of each node d of graph m in the modality i, is the Gumbel Softmax, and n represents the
sum over the node concept of the graph m. Therefore, in our solution, the graph concept is related to
the occurrences of each node concept.
The issue with CEM is that when it aggregates node concepts, there is no one-to-one mapping
between a set of node concepts and graph concepts. This could lead to giving the wrong concept to a
graph. Figure 4 shows an example of a situation where two different graphs end up with the same
concepts.


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             0, 0, 1


    0, 1, 0

                                                              0, 1, 1          1, 0, 0           0, 1, 1
                                       0, 0, 1


              1, 1, 0



                        1, 2, 2                                              1, 2, 2

Figure 4: An example of two different graphs with a different set of node concepts described with the
same graph concept.


A.3       C ODE , LICENCES AND R ESOURCES

Libraries For our experiments, we implemented all baselines and methods in Python 3.9 and
relied upon open-source libraries such as PyTorch 2.0 (Paszke et al., 2019) (BSD license), Pytorch
Geometric 2.3 (Fey & Lenssen, 2019) (MIT license) and Sklearn 1.2 (Pedregosa et al., 2011) (BSD
license). In addition, we used Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007) 3.7 (BSD license) to produce the plots shown
in this paper and Dtreeviz1 2.2 (MIT license) to produce the tree visualisations. We will publicly
release the code to reproduce all the experiments under an MIT license.
Resources We run all the experiments on a cluster with 2x AMD EPYC 7763 64-Core Processor
1.8GHz, 1000 GiB RAM, and 4x NVIDIA A100-SXM-80GB GPUs. We estimate that all the
experiments require approximately 50 GPU hours to be completed.


B        DATASET DETAILS

We design the experiments to understand the potentiality of the proposed solution, described in
Section 2. Specifically, We create a synthetic dataset that can validate all the contributions of our
method, design two other tasks using existing datasets and use an existing dataset and task to test it in
less constrained situations. Each dataset is split into the train (80%) and test set (20%).

B.1       XOR-AND-XOR

We design a synthetic dataset (XOR-AND-XOR) that contains two modalities: tabular data and
graphs. The first contains 6 random bits, but only the first two are meaningful. The second modality
contains one of 4 kinds of graphs: (i) 10 nodes which are not connected; (ii) 4 nodes connected in
a circle and 6 not; (iii) 6 nodes connected in a circle and 4 not; (iv) 4 nodes connected in a circle,
6 other nodes connected in another circle and the two connected by an edge. They also have a few
random edges, and the initial nodes’ feature is its betweenness centrality. Each of these graphs can be
associated with a combination of the two significant bits of the table, as Figure 5 shows.
In this dataset, there is a local task and a global task. The local one is intra-modality and is the XOR
operator between the two meaningful bits or between the above-explained translation from graphs to
bits. On the other hand, the global task corresponds to the AND operator between the result of the
local tasks. The global task cannot be solved using just one modality, so both pieces of information
are needed to classify each entry correctly. However, on this dataset, we do not make supervision on
the local task available, letting the model understand it.
     1
         https://github.com/parrt/dtreeviz


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Examples of the conversion from the four main families of graphs to the meaningful bits of
the tabular data in the XOR-AND-XOR dataset. In the dataset, they have some additional random
edges.


                         (a)                                               (b)

Figure 6: (a) Examples from the MNIST+Superpixels dataset. The shown label is related to the task,
which is the sum of the two digits. (b) Examples from the HalfMNIST dataset. The shown label is
related to the task, which is the digit represented by joining both parts. Each half can be represented
with one of the two modalities.


The entire dataset contains 1000 samples for each modality, the translations from one modality to the
other for both modalities and the labels relative to the global task.

B.2   MNIST + S UPERPIXELS

The second dataset (MNIST+Superpixels) consists in predicting the sum of two digits described in
two different ways. One is in the shape of an MNIST image (Deng, 2012), and the other is represented
as a superpixel graph of another MNIST image (Monti et al., 2016). Here the local task is correctly
classifying the single digit, while the global is predicting the sum of the two. Figure 6a shows five
samples from this dataset, including the global label.
In this task, local supervision is available. Therefore, the dataset contains 60000 couple of digits,
both described as a graph and as an image (during training, we use the graph of digit 1 and the image
of digit 2), the labels for the local tasks and the ones for the global task.

B.3   H ALF -MNIST

The third experiment uses another dataset containing the same modalities as the previous one (MNIST
and MNIST Superpixels) but differently. In this case, the task is to predict the single digit, but one
half is in the shape of an image, and the other half is described as a superpixel graph. It is important


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


small blue metallic sphere   large blue shiny ball    big red rubber cylinder   large red metallic ball   small yellow matte cube


          label: True                  label: False             label: True               label: True              label: False


Figure 7: Examples from the CLEVR dataset, where there is a text caption and an image of an object.
The label is True if the caption correctly describes the image, otherwise is False.


to say that some of the upper halves are images, some are graphs, and the same last for the bottom
halves. Figure 6b shows five samples from this dataset.
Here, the global task is the same as the local one, but it is possible to use more information from a
different modality to solve it. Therefore, this dataset contains 60000 digits described as graphs and
images (only half image and half graph are used during training) and labels for the global task.

B.4       CLEVR

The last dataset used is a version of CLEVR we generate using the official repository. 2 Our version
is inspired by Saqur & Narasimhan (2020), where each image contains one object and the relative
caption can match or not the image. Specifically, in our case, every caption contains four attributes
used to describe the scene in the image. They are the shape (sphere, cylinder, cube), the size (big,
small), the colour (green, yellow, gray, red, purple, cyan, blue, brown) and the material (matte,
metallic) of the object. The task is to predict if the caption correctly describes the image. If the label
is equal to True, we consider that a connection between the two modalities, as it means that the two
modalities represent the same object. Figure 7 shows five samples taken from this dataset, the top
row represents the captions, while the bottom is about the images.
In this situation, there is no local task. Therefore, this dataset contains 8320 couple of captions and
images, their translation in the other modality and the labels.

C        M ODELS DETAILS
In this section, we describe in detail the configuration of SHARCS used in each experiment. Then,
we add only the missing or different information needed to build the other models used, as most of
the details are in common between our solutions and baselines.
In general, single modality models used only the DL model inside of the respective gi , with (or
without) a sigmoid function, if it is a concept-based (concept-less) solution. Simple Multimodal and
Relative representation solutions employ the DL models inside gi and the label predictor f , while
Concept Multimodal also uses batch scaling and the sigmoid inside gi .

C.1       XOR-AND-XOR

On this task, we trained SHARCS with the end-to-end configuration, as we do not have local
supervision. It is composed of two gi concept encoder functions, one for each modality. To handle the
    2
        https://github.com/facebookresearch/clevr-dataset-gen


                                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


graph modality, the DL model inside of g1 is composed of 5 layers of Graph Convolutional Networks
(Kipf & Welling, 2016) with LeakyReLU as the activation function. The input size is 1 as described
in Appendix B.1, the hidden size of all the intermediate layers is 30, while the output dimension of
g1 is 7. On the other hand, a simple 2-layer MLP with a ReLU as the activation function is the DL
model of g2 , which takes tabular data as input. The input size is 8, the hidden size is 30, and the
output dimension is equal to 7. SHARCS uses Batch Normalisation as batch scaling and Sigmoid to
compute concepts, but on the graph modality follows the approach described in Appendix A.2. The
second set of concept encoders h1 and h2 are 2-layer MLPs with a ReLU as the activation function,
with an input dimension of 8, as well as the hidden and output size. Finally, the label prediction
function f is a 2-layer MLP with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension of 16, a
hidden size of 10 and an output dimension equals to the number of classes, which is 2.
An additional detail for single modality models is their label prediction function fi , one for each
modality, which is a 2-layers MLPs with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension
of 8, a hidden size of 10 and an output dimension of 2.
In terms of learning process, we used a Binary Cross Entropy Loss (BCELoss) with Logits (which
incorporates a sigmoid layer before computing the BCELoss) as T , a equals to 0.1, and at every
iteration, we took 10% of randomly draw samples to compute the distance. Other hyperparameters
used to train the models are the Batch Size used (64), the number of epochs (150) and the Learning
Rate used by an Adam optimizer (0.001). However, we train the unimodality models of Relative
representation models for 150 epochs and its label predictor function for other 150 epochs.



C.2   MNIST+S UPERPIXELS AND H ALF MNIST

On MNIST+Superpixels and HalfMNIST, we used an almost identical setup. We trained SHARCS
with the local pre-training configuration, as we have local supervision. It is composed of two gi
concept encoder functions, one for each modality. To handle the graph modality, the DL model
inside of g1 is composed of 2 layers of SplineCNN (Fey et al., 2018) with ELU as the activation
function, similar to the SplineCNN model described in the original paper. Therefore, a max pooling
operator based on the Graclus method (Dhillon et al., 2007) is applied after every layer. The input
size is 1, the hidden size of all the intermediate layers is 32, and the output dimension of g1 is
12. On the other hand, a Convolutional Neural Network is the DL model of g2 . It is composed of
the following layers: a Convolutional Layer (input channel=1, output channel=16, kernel size=5,
padding=2, stride=1), a ReLU, a MaxPool with a kernel size of 2, a Convolutional Layer (input
channel=16, output channel=16, kernel size=5, padding=2, stride=1), a ReLU, a MaxPool with a
kernel size of 2, then the output is flattened and taken as input from a 2-layer MLP with a ReLU as the
activation function, with a hidden dimension of 64 and output size of 12. Moreover, SHARCS uses
Batch Normalisation as batch scaling and sigmoid to compute concepts, but on the graph modality
follows the approach described in Appendix A.2. The second set of concept encoders h1 and h2
are 2-layer MLPs with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension of 12, as well
as the output size and a hidden size of 64. Finally, the label prediction function f is a 2-layer MLP
with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension of 24, a hidden size of 128 and an
output dimension equals to the number of classes, which is 19 for MNIST+Superpixels and 10 for
HalfMNIST. As we apply the local pre-training configuration, in the first part of the training, we
used some local label predictor function fi , one for each modality. They are 2-layer MLPs with a
ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension of 12, a hidden size of 64 and an output
dimension equals to the number of classes of the local task, which is 10 for both datasets. Other
unimodal baselines also use these local label predictor functions.
Regarding the learning process, we used a BCELoss with Logits both with local and global tasks,
a equals to 0.1, and at every iteration, we took 10% of randomly drawn samples to compute the
distance. Other hyperparameters used to train the models are the Batch Size used (64), the number of
epochs used to pretrain the unimodal models (15) and the additional epochs used to train the second
part of SHARCS (15). The learning rate used by the Adam optimiser is equal to 0.01 for the Graph
Neural Network and 0.001 for all the other layers of the model. However, we train the unimodality
models of Relative representation models for 15 epochs and its label predictor function for other 20
epochs.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              XOR-AND-XOR         MNIST+Superpixels                 HalfMNIST                    CLEVR
                      100                   100                            100                       100


       Accuracy (%)
                       80   Random           80                             80                        80
                       60                    60                             60                        60   Random
                       40                    40                             40                        40
                       20                    20   Random                    20   Random               20
                        0                     0                              0                         0



                        Single Modality 1   Single Modality 2         CBM Modality 1            CBM Modality 2           SHARCS


Figure 8: Accuracy of unimodal models and SHARCS on all datasets. SHARCS outperforms all the
other models on all tasks.


C.3   CLEVR

On this task, we trained SHARCS with the sequential configuration, as we do not have local
supervision and want to discover local concepts that are not influenced by the other modality. It is
composed of two gi concept encoder functions, one for each modality. To handle the image modality,
the DL model inside of g1 is a pretreated ResNet18 (He et al., 2015), followed by a Dense layer that
reduced the output size of the ResNet to 24. On the other hand, a simple 2-layer MLP with a ReLU as
the activation function is the DL model of g2 , which takes the TF-IDF representation of the caption
received as input. The input size is 22, the hidden size is 48, and the output dimension is equal to 24.
SHARCS uses Batch Normalisation as batch scaling and sigmoid to compute concepts. The second
set of concept encoders h1 and h2 are 2-layer MLPs with a ReLU as the activation function, with an
input dimension of 24, as well as the hidden and output size. Finally, the label prediction function f
is a 2-layer MLP with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension of 48, a hidden
size of 10 and an output dimension equals to the number of classes, which is 2.
An additional detail for single modality models is their label prediction function fi , one for each
modality, which is a 2-layers MLPs with a ReLU as the activation function, with an input dimension
of 24, a hidden size of 24 and an output dimension of 2.
In terms of learning process, we used a BCELoss with Logits, a equals to 0.1, and at every iteration,
we took the samples with the label equals to True out of 20% of randomly drawn samples to compute
the distance. Other hyperparameters used to train the models are the Batch Size used (64), the number
of epochs used by all models and in the first part of the training of SHARCS (30), the additional
epochs used in the second part of the training of SHARCS (20) and the Learning Rate used by an
Adam optimizer (0.001). In addition, we train the unimodality models of Relative representation
models for 30 epochs and its label predictor function for other 20 epochs.


D     A DDITIONAL RESULTS

This section includes additional results and consideration of the experiments presented in Section 3.
Broader Impacts We do not believe this approach can have a direct harmful impact when applied in
AI systems. On the contrary, it can positively influence the development of models for safety-critical
domains, such as healthcare.
Detailed results of experiments
Figure 8 shows the performance of unimodal models compared to SHARCS in all tasks. It is clear
how 3 out of the 4 datasets we designed are not solvable by unimodal models, proving our design
choice. Furthermore, Table 4 shows the Accuracy for all the models trained and the Completeness
Score for the multimodal interpretable models. It gives more detailed results and compares together
all the trained models. On the other hand, Table 5, shows the result of an analysis we performed on
CLEVR, where we checked for each model which characteristics of the retrieved sam- ple matched
with the ones of the object used as the source.
Interpretability We present the visual results for each dataset to give a better idea of the performance
of our solution. We show the retrieved examples per modality in each dataset, the learnt shared


                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Accuracy (%) and Completeness Score (%) of SHARCS compared to non-interpretable
unimodal models (Simple Modality 1 and Simple Modality 2), non-interpretable multimodal models
(Simple Multimodal and Relative representation), interpretable unimodal models (CBM Modality
1 and CBM Modality 2) and interpretable multimodal baselines (Concept Multimodal). Generally,
SHARCS achieves better (or comparable) performance than the other baselines, producing better and
more compact concepts.

 Model           XOR-AND-XOR                MNIST+SuperP.                HalfMNIST                  CLEVR
                   Acc.   Compl.             Acc.    Compl.              Acc.    Compl.            Acc.   Compl.
 Mod 1       74.4 ± 0.7            -      8.7 ± 0.1             -   76.7 ± 0.2            -   48.3 ± 0.3            -
 Mod 2       75.9 ± 1.4            -      9.8 ± 0.1             -   92.6 ± 0.2            -   49.8 ± 0.1            -
 CBM 1       74.8 ± 0.0            -      9.4 ± 0.1             -   78.3 ± 0.1            -   49.1 ± 0.5            -
 CBM 2       76.6 ± 1.3            -      9.9 ± 0.2             -   92.9 ± 0.1            -   49.3 ± 0.4            -
 Simple      99.3 ± 0.5            -     86.6 ± 3.0            -    94.2 ± 0.2            -   59.5 ± 9.5            -
 Concept     99.0 ± 0.8   96.2 ± 1.2     88.2 ± 0.1   78.9 ± 1.4    93.9 ± 0.0   91.3 ± 0.1   90.1 ± 1.0   82.3 ± 1.2
 Relative    99.5 ± 0.3            -     80.4 ± 0.2            -    95.6 ± 0.1            -   48.7 ± 0.5            -
 SHARCS      98.7 ± 0.5   98.0 ± 1.2     89.6 ± 0.1   88.7 ± 0.2    94.0 ± 0.1   92.6 ± 0.3   90.2 ± 0.2   81.5 ± 1.1


Table 5: Accuracy (%) of Relative representation, Concept Multimodal and SHARCS in retrieving
a specific characteristic in a modality using the other. SHARCS attains higher figures than other
models on every characteristic.

         Model       Modality             Shape             Size       Material           Color            Mean
                            Text   31.7 ± 2.3         46.0 ± 3.0      52.1 ± 0.2     16.2 ± 3.7      36.5 ± 0.6
         Concept
                          Image    30.0 ± 0.2         45.4 ± 5.3      51.3 ± 2.6     10.8 ± 1.3      34.3 ± 0.6
                            Text   29.9 ± 1.0         50.5 ± 0.7      50.0 ± 0.6     13.3 ± 1.2      35.9 ± 0.3
         Relative
                          Image    33.0 ± 1.0         49.6 ± 0.2      49.0 ± 1.0     11.1 ± 0.7      35.6 ± 0.2
                            Text       56.8 ± 1.4     63.6 ± 3.5      53.9 ± 1.8     30.2 ± 5.6      51.1 ± 2.0
         SHARCS
                          Image        51.4 ± 2.4     61.5 ± 1.7      53.4 ± 2.6     27.5 ± 4.0      48.5 ± 1.9


space and the decision tree. The results presented here for the same dataset included in Section 3
are run with a different random seed to show how solid the performance of SHARCS is. Figure
9 shows the retrieved examples by SHARCS, Relative Representation and Concept Multimodal
in the XOR-AND-XOR dataset. In particular, in Figure 9a, it is interesting to see how SHARCS
retrieves tabular data that are not constrained to be closer but have the same semantic meaning for
the local task, which is False in the XOR operator. Figure 10 illustrates the same experiments with
MNIST+Superpixels and Figure 11 with HalfMNIST. Finally, Figure 12 shows the retrieval capability
of these models on the CLEVR dataset. In all these experiments, it can be seen that the quality of the
retrieved examples is higher than the others, where the Relative Representation is not always accurate
and Concept Multimodal resembles random retrieval. The second set of images visually confronts the
shared space learnt by SHARCS and Concept Multimodal. For this purpose, we visualise the tSNE
representation of the shared concepts for SHARCS and the local concepts for Concept Multimodal.
Figure 13 shows these shared spaces for the MNIST+Superpixels dataset, Figure 14 for HalfMNIST
and Figure 15 for CLEVR. It is clear how the concept representation learnt by SHARCS for one
modality overlaps with that for the other, especially when considering semantically similar examples
from different modalities that are closer in the space representation. All these results are expected
by design since we force the model to produce the shared space with these properties. Finally, part
of the decision trees used to compute the completeness score is visualised. At every split, it shows
the concept that is considered to make the decision, and it can be active (right branch) or non-active
(left branch). If the node is not the roof, it also shows three samples with the highest (concept active)
or the lowest (concept non-active) value for the concepts of the previous split, among the ones that
respect all the previous split conditions. Each leaf shows the class distribution of the samples that
it represents, in addition to the most characteristic samples. Moreover, the root of the tree uses the
most influential concept for the classification task, as it is by definition the one that brings the highest
Information Gain, and the same is applicable to the following splits. For example, Figure 16 shows
the decision tree used in the XOR-AND-XOR dataset. Specifically, you can see that if Concept
11 is active, the prediction is always Class 0 (False). As you can see, if a sample has Concept 11
active, it means that it has both tabular significant digits equal to 1, which implies that the local XOR


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  (a)


                                                  (b)


                                                  (c)

Figure 9: Retrieval examples obtained by (a) SHARCS, (b) Relative representation, and (c) Concept
Multimodal on the XOR-AND-XOR dataset. The top two rows are samples of retrieved graphs using
tabular data, while the bottom two are retrieved tabular entries using graph samples.


operation is False and as a consequence the global AND operation is False, no matter what is the
other modality. Furthermore, the following split is focused on Concept 4, which is curiously the
corresponding concept in the shared space of the graph modality for Concept 11 (7 is the number of
concepts per modality, so 11 - 7 = 4). This split represents the same underlying idea of the previous
one but for the graph modality. If the concept is active, it means that the graph is connected (False in
the local XOR operation). Therefore, it shows also how the concepts from one modality are related
and translated into the other, confirming that the concept shared space created is meaningful. Finally,
Figure 17 shows part of the first three layers of the Decision tree used in CLEVR.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               (a)


                                               (b)


                                               (c)

Figure 10: Retrieval examples obtained by (a) SHARCS, (b) Relative representation, and (c) Concept
Multimodal on the MNIST+Superpixels dataset. The top two rows are samples of retrieved graphs
using images, while the bottom two are retrieved images using graph samples.


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               (a)


                                               (b)


                                               (c)

Figure 11: Retrieval examples obtained by (a) SHARCS, (b) Relative representation, and (c) Concept
Multimodal on the MNIST+Superpixels dataset. The top two rows are samples of retrieved graphs
using images, while the bottom two are retrieved images using graph samples.


                                               (a)


                                               (b)


                                               (c)

Figure 12: Retrieval examples obtained by (a) SHARCS, (b) Relative representation, and (c) Concept
Multimodal on the CLEVR dataset. The top two rows are samples of retrieved text using images,
while the bottom two are retrieved images using graph samples.


                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (a)


                                              (b)

Figure 13: tSNE plot of the concept space. The images represent the centroid of the top-5 common
concepts per modality in the MNIST+Superpixels dataset (a) SHARCS (b) Concept Multimodal


                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (a)


                                              (b)

Figure 14: tSNE plot of the concept space. The images represent the centroid of the top-5 common
concepts per modality in the HalfMNIST dataset (a) SHARCS (b) Concept Multimodal


                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (a)


                                              (b)

Figure 15: tSNE plot of the concept space. The images represent the centroid of the top-5 common
concepts per modality in the CLEVR dataset (a) SHARCS (b) Concept Multimodal



                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                          Concept 11

                                                                      not active (0)                   active (1)


                                                        Concept 4

                                       not active (0)                        active (1)


                                                                                          Concept 5

                                                                        not active (0)                              active (1)


                                               Concept 10

                              not active (0)                        active (1)


Figure 16: Decision tree visualisation of SHARCS concepts on the XOR-AND-XOR dataset. Every
split shows the combined concept closer to the cluster’s centroid lower and greater than the splitting
criteria. In addition, each leaf shows the class distribution of the samples that it represents.


Figure 17: Visaulisation of part of the first 3 layers of a Decision tree trained on SHARCS concepts
on the CLEVR dataset. Every split shows the combined concept closer to the cluster’s centroid lower
and greater than the splitting criteria. In addition, each leaf shows the class distribution of the samples
that it represents.


                                                                    25
