Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A BSTRACTIVE S UMMARIZATION THROUGH
THE P RISM OF D ECODING S TRATEGIES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             In the realm of natural language generation, abstractive summarization (AS) is
             at the center of an unparalleled evolution driven by transformer-based language
             models (LMs). However, the significance of decoding strategies is often neglected,
             despite their influence on the generated summaries. Given the abundance of token
             selection heuristics and their accompanying hyperparameters, the community needs
             directions to steer well-founded decisions based on the task and the target metrics
             at hand. To fill this gap, we comparatively assess the effectiveness and efficiency of
             decoding-time techniques for short, long, and multi-document AS. We explore more
             than 2500 combinations of 3 widely used million-scale autoregressive encoder-
             decoder models, 6 datasets, and 9 decoding settings. Our findings shed light on
             the field, demonstrating that optimized decoding choices can yield substantial
             performance enhancements. In addition to human evaluation, we quantitatively
             measure effects using 10 automatic metrics, including dimensions such as semantic
             similarity, factuality, compression, redundancy, and carbon footprint. We introduce
             P RISM, a pioneering dataset that pairs AS gold input-output examples with LM
             predictions under a wide array of decoding options.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Abstractive summarization (AS) is one of the most emblematic and challenging tasks of natural
language generation (NLG), aimed at condensing and rephrasing the main gist of textual docu-
ments (Sharma & Sharma, 2023). With the advent of transformer-based solutions, autoregressive
language models (LMs) have repeatedly demonstrated their prowess in generating human-like sum-
maries (Zhang et al., 2022a). In this red-hot research area, the AS process is typically broken down
into two macro-steps: (i) training a neural network to estimate the next-token probability distributions
given the input and previously predicted output tokens, (ii) applying an out-of-the-model decoding
strategy to control how tokens are selected and strung together at inference time. Drawing paral-
lelism from optics, decoding methods act like a prism: depending on how they are built and tuned
with hyperparameters, they reflect model probabilities in different artificial summaries (Figure 1).
Therefore, decoding strategies are considered one of the most significant determinants of AS out-
put quality, also responsible for linguistic properties, prediction n-arity, reproducibility, extrinsic
hallucinations (van der Poel et al., 2022), and low information coverage (Meister et al., 2022a).
Lamentably, up-to-now AS contributions lean mainly on the conservative use of default decoding
settings inherited from existing tools or previous works (Shen et al., 2022). Sometimes, the choices
of the decoding algorithm are presented without much discussion (Guo et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022b) or are completely omitted (González et al., 2022). The absence of systematic practice in
rigorously scrutinizing the impact of decoding raises a natural fear of its underestimation (Gong &
Yao, 2023; Ji et al., 2023), fueled, among other things, by the increasing number of heuristics and the
complexity of text evaluation (Frisoni et al., 2022a). Thus, researchers urgently demand the release
of comprehensive studies to shed light on best decoding practices (Zarrieß et al., 2021). Meister
et al. (2022b) have recently demonstrated that decoding methods exhibit task-dependent variations,
revealing that broad assertions in favor of one approach over another could lack solid grounding.
However, an in-depth examination focused solely on AS is still pending.
    1
        Code, data, and predictions will be publicly released in case of acceptance (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0).


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     pk+1
                                                                                                   single-output       Greedy Search
                                                                                                                      Contrastive Search
                                                                                        deterministic

                             1 forward                                                                                   Beam Search
                                                                                                      multi-output   Diverse Beam Search

                                                                                                                          Sampling
                                 selected                                                          single-output       Top-k Sampling
                             2
Documents   Autoregressive       token(s)                                                                              Top-p Sampling
              Language                                                                                                   η Sampling
                Model                       Decoding Strategies
                                                                                         stochastic
                                              + Hyperparams
                                                                                                                       Beam Sampling
                                                                  Abstractive                         multi-output
                                                                  Summaries


Figure 1: Conceptual division between modeling and decoding in the neural abstractive summarization
pipeline (left). Decoding choices determine predicted summaries ( ). The taxonomy (right) shows
the assessed decoding strategies in this work; output n-arity refers to a single generation process.


Contributions Our paper fills this lacuna, providing the first side-by-side investigation into the
effect of decoding strategies for AS, encompassing short, long, and multi-document settings (see
Appendix A for a conceptual preamble). We extensively evaluate 9 well-founded decoding heuristics
across 3 state-of-the-art representative encoder-decoder models and 6 widely used datasets from
different domains, exploring a broad spectrum of hyperparameters. In addition to human assessment,
we put into play 10 distinct automatic evaluation metrics to scan the relationship between decoding
and predicted summaries on several quality axes, including naturalness and factuality. Moreover,
we judge efficiency by monitoring the carbon footprint and inference time. On balance, this work
provides a blueprint for the profitable use of decoding algorithms and helps AS practitioners make
confident choices that suit their needs. Our computational dedication shines through the genesis of
P RISM, an innovative dataset where gold AS input-output examples are accompanied by a panoply of
LM predictions and their decoding metadata. P RISM unleashes novel analysis possibilities, which we
posit could assist the community in refining NLG metrics, devising novel decoding strategies, and
approximating their inherently non-differentiable behavior.


2       R ELATED W ORK

Abstractive Summarization Transformers have assem-                             AS        D         AS + D

bled a fertile research ground for AS (Kalyan et al., 2021),        250
with efforts to design new large-scale architectures (Chowd-        200
                                                                                Count


hery et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2022), attention mecha-              150
                                                                    100
nisms (Huang et al., 2021a; Phang et al., 2022), and pretrain-       50
ing objectives (He et al., 2022; Wan & Bansal, 2022). Start-          0
ing in 2019, AS supports a continuous flow of 140+ yearly                ’14      ’16  ’18    ’20     ’22
publications (Figure 2).2 Many of these works show interest                           Years
in decoding strategies, referring to them in the title, abstract,
or keywords (cf. the blue line in Figure 2). Cross-cutting Figure 2: Annual rate SCOPUS com-
success has been achieved even in low-resource (Moro & parison between conference papers on
Ragazzi, 2022; 2023; Moro et al., 2023a;b;d) and multi- AS, decoding (D), and their intersec-
document (Moro et al., 2022; 2023e) scenarios. The latest tion. See Appendix B for exact queries.
trends revolve around the capture of structural properties
for neural document modeling (Cao & Wang, 2022) or knowledge injection (Frisoni et al., 2022b;
2023), but do not eliminate the need to choose a suitable heuristic. Reinforcement learning sequence-
level rewards for direct optimization of NLG metrics have emerged as an alternative to token-level
training signals (Ramamurthy et al., 2022; Frisoni et al., 2023). In contrast, this work targets popular
million-scale encoder-decoder models trained under maximum likelihood regimes.3

    2
     We direct the interested reader to Syed et al. (2021) and Sharma & Sharma (2023) for a complete overview.
    3
     After a wide literature analysis, we prioritized the presently dominant LMs for AS. However, we recognize
the lack of exploration in billion-scale networks (15.8% of works since 2020; details are in Appendices B and N).
We plan to analyze large LMs, centered on decoder-only architectures and prompting strategies, in future works.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Decoding Studies Prior work focused on improving the comprehension of decoding strategies,
providing general overviews (Zarrieß et al., 2021), analyzes of human production variability (Giu-
lianelli et al., 2023), or evaluations related to open-ended generation with incomplete optimization
processes (Holtzman et al., 2020; Das & Balke, 2022; Su et al., 2022). Studies on AS are often
superficial (e.g., only one dataset in single-document settings (Meister et al., 2022b)) or limited to the
development of new heuristics without systematic comparisons (Han et al., 2019). To our knowledge,
we are the first to (i) thoroughly examine the decoding results for AS in its various forms w.r.t. input
length and n-arity (i.e., single and multi-document), (ii) present findings and recommendations based
on a literature-supported grid search tuning for decoding hyperparameter spaces, and (iii) release a
pioneering decoding-oriented dataset for AS that opens new research directions.

3       M ETHOD
3.1      P ROBABILISTIC S UMMARY G ENERATION

We consider autoregressive encoder-decoder models, with trainable weights θ, that define the condi-
tional probability pθ (y|x) of a summary y = {y1 , . . . , y|y| } given a variable-length input sequence
x. Depending on the AS setting, the tokens in x originate from one or more source documents, while
the tokens in y are drawn from a finite vocabulary V. The output space of hypothetical summaries is
Y := {BOS ◦ v ◦ EOS | v ∈ V ∗ }, where ◦ denotes string concatenation and V ∗ Kleene closure of
V; valid outputs are enclosed by special tokens “begin-of-sequence” and “end-of-sequence.” The
models follow a local normalization scheme, factorizing the probability of y, as follows:
                                                 |y|
                                                 Y
                                    pθ (y|x) =         pθ (yt | x, y<t )                              (1)
                                                 t=1

where each pθ (·|x, y<t ) is a distribution over V̄ := V ∪ {EOS} and y0 := BOS. Commonly, weights θ
are learned by minimizing cross-entropy loss L(θ, C) between predicted tokens and ground truth
ones in a training corpus C (negative log-likelihood under p). To penalize overconfident output and
combat overfitting, L can be enhanced by label smoothing, discounting a certain probability mass
of the true token, and redistributing it uniformly across all other tokens (Gao et al., 2020). The
purpose of decoding is to find the most probable summary among all candidate hypotheses, i.e.,
y ∗ = argmaxy∈Y pθ (y|x). This optimization problem is known as the maximum a posteriori. Since
the number of possible summaries in the symbolic space increases as |V||y| , the exact search is
NP-hard. Furthermore, even if an exact solution were tractable, it would be far from high quality
text (Eikema & Aziz, 2020). Thus, decoding is exclusively approximated with heuristic methods.

3.2      D ECODING S TRATEGIES

We test the full inventory of heuristics supported by HuggingFace as of April 2023,4 except those
aimed at forcing or excluding the generation of specific tokens (out of our AS scope). Such algorithms
can be set up to satisfy different NLG needs and fall into two predominant categories: deterministic
and stochastic. The first optimizes for summary continuations with high probabilities, whereas the
second puts randomness in place. Table 1 shows our decoding landscape. Note that all algorithms
end when yt or the hypotheses in Yt reach EOS for some t < max_length. We do not consider other
early stopping rules because they generally do not affect generation quality (Meister et al., 2020).

4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
4.1      E XPERIMENT G OALS

We aim to answer the following research questions. Q1 Is there an absolute best decoding method for
AS? Q2 Are decoding methods sensitive to AS type? Q3 To what extent does proper decoding affect
LM metrics? Q4 Which decoding method provides the best effectiveness–efficiency trade-off? Q5
Which hyperparameter values best suit a particular AS quality attribute?
    4
        https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/internal/generation_utils


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: A summary of the decoding strategies benchmarked in this abstractive summarization study.

                                                                      DECODING STRATEGIES*,†
                 Greedy Search                                     Contrastive Search (Su et al., 2022)                   Beam Search (Lowerre, 1976)
 It selects the most probable token at each t                It extends Greedy Search by jointly considering      A pruned breadth-first search algorithm that
 (locally-optimal decision):                                 the model confidence (i.e., semantic coherence)      expands the hypotheses in a greedy left-to-right
                                                             and the similarity w.r.t. the previous context:      way, retaining the top-b candidates at each t:
 yt = argmax log pθ (y | x, y<t )              (for t > 0)
                                                                                                                                              ′

         y∈V̄                                                     yt = argmax (1 − α) × pθ (y|x, y<t )                  Yt = argmax S(Yt )        (for t > 0)
                                                                        y∈V̄ (k)                                              Y ′ ⊆Bt ,
                                                                                                                              |Y ′ |=b
                                                             −α × (max{s(hy , hyj ) : 1 ≤ j ≤ t − 1})
                                                                                                                  Bt denotes all possible roll-out extensions
                                                                                                    (for t > 0)
                                                                                                                  {yt−1 ◦ y | y ∈ V̄ and yt−1 ∈ Yt−1 }.
                                                              V̄ (k) is the set of top-k predictions from the     S : Y → R is a scoring
                                                                                                                                       P function on Y ⊆Y.
                                                             LM’s probability distribution (k ∈ Z+ ). The         By default, S(Y ) =      y∈Y log pθ (y|x).
                                                             second term is a degeneration penalty governed       y∗ is chosen from the final set YT .
                                                             by α ∈ [0, 1]; it is computed with the cosine
                                                             similarity s(·, ·) between the candidate
                                                             representation hy and the prior tokens. When
                                                             α = 0, Contrastive Search degenerates to
                                                             Greedy Search.
              Diverse Beam Search                                                                                                 Top-k Sampling
                                                                               Sampling
            (Vijayakumar et al., 2018)                                                                                            (Fan et al., 2018)
                                                                                         ∗
 In vanilla Beam Search, as t and b increase, the            Instead of approximating y , it makes a              It limits the sampling space to the top-k
 candidate summaries of a single beam                        random selection at each t, thus giving a            probable tokens, regardless of the distribution
 gradually occupy the top positions. This inner              non-zero chance to every token following the         shape. Here, the decoding maximizes:
 functioning results in a high overlap among                 model distribution (∼):
 hypotheses that often only differ by
                                                                                                                                 X
                                                                                                                                         pθ (y|x, y<t )
 punctuation and slight morphological                              yt ∼ pθ (·|x, y<t )       (for t > 0)
                                                                                                                              y∈V̄ (k)
 variations (Han et al., 2019), indicating poor
 search space coverage. Diverse Beam Search                   Softmax can be re-calibrated through a
                                                             temperature parameter τ ∈ (0, 1]. By                 where V̄ (k) ⊆ V̄ .
 splits a beam into sub-groups sequentially
 optimized and adds a penalty in S to encourage              decreasing τ (1 = no effect), we skew the
 inter-group dissimilarity:                                  distribution towards likely tokens and reduce
                                                             the mass in the unreliable tail:
                (g)        X
        S(Yt          )=           log pθ (y|x)                                           exp( u )
                                                                                               τ
                           y∈Y                                     pθ (y|x, y<t ) = P          uj
                                                                                         j exp( τ )
                                         (g ′ )
                       X
                −λ             ∆    y, Yt
                                                             where u ∈ U are logits.
                      g ′ <g

          (g ′ )
  ∆(y, Yt       ) is a diversity measure whose
 strength is controlled by λ, and g is a
 sub-group.
           Top-p (Nucleus) Sampling
                                                                 Beam Sampling (Caccia et al., 2020)                     η Sampling (Hewitt et al., 2022)
              (Holtzman et al., 2020)
 Instead of assuming a fixed-sized shortlist, it             It is a variant of Beam Search where, at each t,     It samples tokens above an entropy-dependent
 dynamically expands and contracts the                       the b next tokens for constructing B are             probability threshold to avoid unnecessary
 candidate pool according to the shape of the                sampled conditioned on the current hypotheses        cutting-offs. Eligible tokens come from:
 distribution (e.g., fewer contenders if sharp).             (no local optimum).
 When many next tokens are plausible, the

                                                                                                                           y ∈ V̄ | pθ (y|x, y<t ) > η
 allowed set reflects that. Formally, it samples                                                                         η = min ϵ, α exp(−ex,y<t )

 from the smallest subset of tokens whose
 cumulative probability mass exceeds a chosen                                                                      where exp(−ex,y<t ) is the expected next
 threshold p ∈ (0, 1]:                                                                                            token probability given the entropy ex,y<t ,
            X
                      pθ (y|x, y<t ) ≥ p                                                                          scaled by a constant α. To expose
                                                                                                                                               √       a single
                                                                                                                  hyperparameter, α is set to ϵ. The general
          y∈V̄ (p)
                                                                                                                  principle is to only truncate tokens whose
                                                                                                                  probabilities are low relative to the rest of the
                                                                                                                  distribution or an absolute threshold.
 *
   Basic notation. x = document(s), y = summary, θ = model weights, t = decoding step, V̄ := V ∪ {EOS},
   pθ = model probability distribution, Y = hypothetical summaries, b = beam size, y∗ = best summary.
 †
   • = deterministic, • = stochastic.


We plan a battery of generative experiments (SH , D, M), where SH denotes a decoding strategy with
fixed hyperparameters, D is the dataset that imposes particular AS challenges and length constraints,
and M is the autoregressive LM. In total, we executed 2656 runs (Table 2) for 73 GPU days. As far
as we know, we drive the finest-grained hyperparameter sweep in the NLG literature. Specifically, we
use grid search to simultaneously alter the generative variables of each heuristic, wisely choosing
range values based on hints given in previous studies. See Appendices D and E for more details.

4.2     DATASETS

We consider 6 noteworthy, English-language, domain-distinguished, and publicly available datasets
as testbeds, 2 for each AS family. Preprocessing is carefully applied (Appendix C).
         • Short Document Summarization (SDS). XS UM (Narayan et al., 2018), a dataset of BBC arti-
           cles from 2010-2017, designed for highly abstractive one-sentence extreme summarization.


                                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Table 2: Hyperparameters for each decoding strategy.
                                                   Deterministic                                                                          Stochastic
 HYPERPARAMS*,†
                    Greedy      Contrastive           Beam Search         Diverse Beam Search     Sampling       Top-k Sampling        Top-p Sampling       Beam Sampling         η Sampling
no_rep_ngram_size                                                                                 { 2, 3, 4, 5 }
early_stopping                                               ✓                      ✓                                                                               ✓
diversity_penalty                                                          0.{2, 4, 6, 8}, 1.0
num_beams                                             [2, 3, . . ., 10]      [2, 3, . . ., 10]                                                               [2, 3, . . ., 10]
temperature                                                                                      0.{8, 9}, 1.0     0.{8, 9}, 1.0        0.{8, 9}, 1.0
top_k                        [20, 30, . . ., 60]                                                                 [20, 30, . . ., 60]   {/, 20, . . ., 60}
top_p                                                                                                                                    0.{4, 6, 8}               0.9
penalty_alpha                0.{2, 4, 6, 8}, 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  {4, 2}×10−3 ,
eta_cutoff
                                                                                                                                                                                 {9, 6, 3}×10−4
do_sample                                                                                             ✓                  ✓                    ✓                     ✓                    ✓
# Runs               16             400                     144                   720                 48                240                  864                   144                  80
  *
      {. . .} = sets, [. . .] = series, ✓ = true, / = none.
  †
       orange and cyan initialization schemes are tested on 2 and 4 datasets, respectively; all other values are
      equally applied to all the 6 surveyed datasets.


           C NN /D M (Nallapati et al., 2016), a set of articles from different news outlets accompanied
           by short-sentence highlights written by journalists.
         • Long Document Summarization (LDS). P UB M ED and AR X IV (Cohan et al., 2018), two
           datasets of lengthy and structured scientific papers along with their abstracts.
         • Multi-Document Summarization (MDS). M ULTI -N EWS (Fabbri et al., 2019), composed
           of news articles and human-written summaries from newser.com, which brings together
           hundreds of US and international sources. M ULTI -L EX S UM (Shen et al., 2022), a collection
           of expert-authored summaries of court documents from federal civil rights lawsuits.5

Data Sampling Given the huge research space for decoding and evaluation, it is impractical to
work with entire datasets due to time and resource limitations. Thus, we opt for a representative
subset of each dataset, leaving out the compact M ULTI -L EX S UM. We use power analysis to estimate
the minimum sample size required to detect statistically significant metric effects (Appendix C). We
select a 10% dataset size by performing proportional stratified random sampling without replacement
to guarantee the adequate representation of each subgroup. We stratify based on the document and
summary length; tertiles are calculated to assign {short, medium, large} classes. For MDS, we also
consider the number of source documents. A compendium of the datasets is given in Appendix C.

4.3     M ODELS

To ensure fairness, we use 3 comparable state-of-the-art transformer-based models in their large
version for which original fine-tuned weights on the datasets in Section 4.2 already exist. BART (Lewis
et al., 2020) (SDS, 406M parameters) has quadratic memory complexity in input size, limited to
elaborate sequences up to 1024 tokens. L ED (Beltagy et al., 2020) (LDS, 447M) uses sparse attention
to endow BART with a linear input scale, processing up to 16,384 tokens. P RIMERA (Xiao et al., 2022)
(MDS, 447M) adapts L ED to multi-inputs through a summarization-specific pretraining objective,
concatenating the sources with a special token and forming a single input of up to 4096 tokens.

4.4     E VALUATION

Automatic We conjecture that AS quality estimation is similar in complexity to correctly performing
the task. On the path of good practice, we take advantage of a panoply of metrics that capture separate
attributes (Table 3). We share hyperparameters and takeaways in Appendix E.

Human In order to better gauge the merits of the decoding, we conduct a meticulous human
evaluation. Motivated by Narayan et al. (2018), Fabbri et al. (2019), and Huang et al. (2023), we use a
direct comparison strategy that has been shown to be more reliable, sensitive, and less labor-intensive
than rating scales. We sample 5 documents from every dataset. For each, three English-proficient
AS researchers are presented with summaries inferred by 2 out of 3 sources, i.e., the top-3 decoding
strategies on the dataset (optimal hyperparameter settings according to normalized average scores
of effectiveness-oriented metrics, i.e., R, BERTScore, BARTScore). We ask reviewers to select the
   5
     Given the multi-granularity nature of summaries in M ULTI -L EX S UM, we contemplate the D → S task,
namely synthesizing the source documents into a short summary.


                                                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 3: A summary of the metrics used in this study to assess the generated summaries.

                                                                       METRICS*,†
           ROUGE (Lin, 2004) [0, 1], ↑               BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020b) [−1, 1], ↑           Perplexity (Jelinek et al., 1977) [0, ∞[, ↓
 Unigrams (r1 ), bigrams (r2 ), and longest          Semantic recall formalized as:                     The naturalness of a summary w.r.t. the data
 common subsequence (rLsum ) lexical overlaps                                                           seen by a model (G PT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
 (%) between the inferred and gold summaries,                                              T
                                                           yi ∈y idf(yi ) maxŷj ∈ŷ e(yi ) e(yj )      in this paper) during training:
                                                        P
 i.e., a proxy for informativeness and fluency.
                                                                       yi ∈y idf(yi )
                                                                    P
 Inspired by Moro et al. (2023c), we measure an                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                             1 X
 aggregated judgment:                                                                                       ppl(y) = exp             log pθ (yi |y<i )
                                                      where e(·) is a B ERT (Devlin et al., 2019)                            t   i
                    avg(r1 , r2 , rLsum )            token embedding.                                   .
           R=                                  (2)
                               2
                          1 + σr

  where σr2 is the variance of 0-1 normalized
 ROUGE F1 scores. R penalizes model results
 with discrepant r1 , r2 , rLsum values.
    Coverage (Grusky et al., 2018) [0, 1], ↑            Density (Grusky et al., 2018) [0, |x|c ], ↓     Compression (Grusky et al., 2018) [0, |x|], ↑
 The percentage of summary words within the          The average length of the extractive fragments.    The document-summary word ratio: |x|/|y|.
 source text:                                        It is formulated as:
                1        X                                         1       X            2
                                  |f |                                              |f |c
               |y| f ∈F (x,y)                                     |y|c f ∈F (x,y)

  where F is the set of all fragments, i.e.,          where ||c is the character length. When low, it
 extractive character sequences. When low, it        suggests that most summary sentences are not
 suggests a high chance for unsupported entities     verbatim extractions from the sources
 and facts.                                          (abstractive).
         Unique N-gram Ratio (UNR)                       Normalized Inverse of Diversity (NID)
                                                                                                        BARTScore-F (Yuan et al., 2021) [−∞, 0], ↑
       (Xiao & Carenini, 2020b) [0, 1], ↑                   (Xiao & Carenini, 2020b) [0, 1], ↓
 The summary n-grams uniqueness:                     It reckons redundancy by inverting the entropy     The weights θ of a pretrained BART
                                                     of summary unigrams and applying length            model (Lewis et al., 2020) are used to estimate
             count(uniq_n_gram(y))                   normalization:                                     how likely hypothesis and reference are
               count(n_gram(y))                                                                         reciprocal paraphrases (i.e., probability of
                                                                 1 − entropy(y)/log(|y|)                generating one giving the other):
  where we take n from [1, 3] and divide the
 average by variance.                                                                                             |y|
                                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                                        log p(yt |y<t , x, θB )
                                                                                                                  t=1

                                                                                                     We measure faithfulness by mapping sources
                                                                                                    and predicted summaries to x and y.
                                                       Carburacy (Moro et al., 2023c) [0, 1], ↑
           Carbon-aware accuracy measure modeling both the AS model effectiveness and eco-sustainability: Υ = explogα R /1+C·β


        where R is defined in Equation 2, C is the kg of CO2 emissions produced by the model to process a single instance x at inference time,
                                                        α and β are trade-off hyperparameters.
 *
     Blue text indicates the bound value and the general reading key (i.e., ↑ = higher is better, ↓ = lower is better).
 †
     • = reference-based (gold-summary dependence), • = reference-free


better one w.r.t. 4 dimensions; a “tie” is declared if a judge perceives the two summaries to be of equal
quality. When considering all possible combinations of summary pairs, the total number of preference
labels per participant is 540. We randomize the order of pairs and summaries per example to guard
the rating against being gamed. Zooming in, the rating axes are defined as follows. Recall considers
whether the generated summary covers all target content. Precision checks if the generated summary
covers only the target content (i.e., no redundant or superfluous information). Faithfulness examines
whether the generated summary is factually consistent with the input document. Fluency dissects
the grammaticality and coherence of the summaries. The final score of each decoding strategy is the
percentage of times that its summaries are selected as the best, minus the percentage of times that
they are not. Appendix F illustrates our setup with human instructions.


5      R ESULTS

The core results (averaged by the decoding method across all inference runs) are plotted in Figure 3;
see Appendix G for tabulated data. Please note that the enumerated quantitative findings are estab-
lished on metrics that serve as proxies for the quality dimensions of interest. Input-output examples
for all decoding strategies are illustrated in Appendix M.

5.1      Q UANTITATIVE F INDINGS
         • A1 There is no one-size-fits-all strategy for AS. No single decoding method consistently
           achieves the highest quality score in all evaluation metrics. However, considering the mean
           average ranking in terms of R (the de facto standard AS metric), deterministic approaches
           secure the first position in every dataset. Properly calibrated stochastic methods perform


                                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Coverage    Perplexity ↓                                  Coverage       Perplexity ↓                                   Coverage      Perplexity ↓



                    Density ↓                              BERTScore          Density ↓                                 BERTScore           Density ↓                                BERTScore


                 Compr.                                             R      Compr.                                               R        Compr.                                              R


                      UNR                                   Carburacy           UNR                                     Carburacy             UNR                                    Carburacy



                                 NID ↓      BARTScore                                      NID ↓         BARTScore                                       NID ↓        BARTScore


                                 (a) XS UM                                                (b) P UB M ED                                             (c) M ULTI -N EWS

                                Coverage    Perplexity ↓                                  Coverage       Perplexity ↓                                   Coverage      Perplexity ↓



                    Density ↓                              BERTScore          Density ↓                                 BERTScore           Density ↓                                BERTScore


                 Compr.                                             R      Compr.                                               R        Compr.                                              R


                      UNR                                   Carburacy           UNR                                     Carburacy             UNR                                    Carburacy



                                 NID ↓      BARTScore                                      NID ↓         BARTScore                                       NID ↓        BARTScore


                                (d) C NN /D M                                              (e) AR X IV                                            (f) M ULTI -L EX S UM
           Greedy Search        Contrastive Search         Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search         Sampling           Top-k Sampling    Top-p Sampling           η Sampling         Beam Sampling



Figure 3: Metric-based comparison between artificial and gold summaries in the examined datasets.
Colored areas signify the normalized average scores of different decoding strategies (• = deterministic,
▲ = stochastic). The dominant color in each dataset-specific radar denotes the best overall strategy.
Succeeding Cao et al. (2022), [0, 1] rescaling is based on min-max normalization across all runs.

           10
            8
            6
Time (s)


            4

             2

                            XS UM                    C NN /D M                P UB M ED         AR X IV                              M ULTI -N EWS                  M ULTI -LS                   Average
                                                                                       Datasets
           Greedy Search        Contrastive Search         Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search         Sampling           Top-k Sampling    Top-p Sampling           η Sampling         Beam Sampling



Figure 4: Decoding time complexity (in seconds) for summarizing a single instance of sampled
dataset test sets. For each strategy, we also report the average time across all samples.


                    exceptionally well, always covering a podium position. When adequately tuned, Diverse
                    Beam Search demonstrates its prowess independently of the AS type. Details on metric
                    score distributions and per-dataset rankings are provided in Appendix H.
                  • A2 Influenced by AS type, decoding strategies exhibit prevailing performance patterns
                    across datasets. Deterministic strategies show greater suitability for AS, with Sampling,
                    Top-k Sampling, and Top-p Sampling struggling to keep up. The consistency of these
                    patterns is evident when comparing similar benchmarks, such as P UB M ED and AR X IV. A
                    deviation is observed in M ULTI -L EX S UM, which involves extremely long inputs (averaging
                    >88K words, as shown in Appendix C). In this case, truncation narrows the gap between
                    strategies, negatively affecting Contrastive Search. The hypothesized reason is the α>0
                    hyperparameter, which assigns less weight to model confidence—a critical factor for han-
                    dling uncertainty. Concerning AS types, Beam Search demonstrates robustness in MDS,
                    Diverse Beam Search emerges as the preferred strategy in LDS, and Greedy Search proves
                    particularly effective in SDS scenarios. These results raise warnings about claims made in
                    previous publications with task-agnostic or single-AS-type settings (Su & Collier, 2023).


                                                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           XS UM (0.03)                                    P UB M ED (0.39)                            M ULTI -N EWS (0.15)
   20                                                    50                                                   40
    0                                                                                                         20
                                                           0                                                   0
  −20                                                                                                        −20
                                                      −50

                      C NN /D M (0.30)                                      AR X IV (0.14)                            M ULTI -L EX S UM (-0.05)
   40                                                  40                                                     40
   20                                                  20                                                     20
    0                                                   0                                                      0
                                                      −20                                                    −20
  −20                                                                                                        −40
                                                      −40
                R           P      FA       FL                         R      P       FA        FL                    R          P     FA       FL

      Contrastive Search          Beam Search    Diverse Beam Search           Top-k Sampling        Top-p Sampling       η Sampling        Beam Sampling



Figure 5: Win - Lose (%) human evaluation results on four quality dimensions: Recall (R), Precision
(P), Faithfulness (FA), and Fluency (FL). The average Kendall’s τ coefficients among all inter-
annotator agreements are given in brackets.


         • A3 Changing the decoding strategy is not just about decimals. The decoding heuristic
           can substantially affect the LM scores within a given benchmark dataset. This choice can
           result in variations of up to 20 R points in P UB M ED, 9 BARTScore points in C NN /D M, and
           278 Perplexity points in M ULTI -L EX S UM.
         • A4 Deterministic methods generally balance effectiveness and efficiency. Figure 4 reveals
           that Greedy Search, Beam Search, and Beam Sampling are the fastest strategies. For Diverse
           Beam Search, Top-p Sampling, and η Sampling, the latency is highly variable depending on
           the hyperparameters. Regarding CO2 at inference time (cf. the green line in Figure 3 for
           Carburacy), Diverse Beam Search provides the best R–efficiency trade-off. We refer the
           reader to Appendix H for Carburacy-ranked decoding strategies.
         • A5 Not all quality attributes are easy to temper at decoding time. High beam size,
           high no_repeat_ngram_size, high temperature, and low diversity penalty promote
           factuality and semantic consistency. When transitioning to R, it is strongly advised to
           maintain a large beam size, while the use of 0.8 temperatures in Top-k Sampling and
           Top-p Sampling frequently results in degeneration clusters. Interestingly, no strategy or
           hyperparameter can greatly favor the naturalness of text in a predictable way. However, we
           observe a strong positive correlation between Perplexity and Density scores (0.73 Pearson
           coeff.). We offer a thorough examination in Appendix I, looking at how metrics respond to
           fine-grained variations in hyperparameters. Appendix J elucidates the best hyperparameter
           values across all datasets, while Appendix K shows a per-dataset evaluation.
         • Redundancy is ubiquitous, mainly in MDS. Our scores contradict Meister et al. (2022b),
           referring to redundancy as a rare phenomenon in AS. We pinpoint a tendency for recurring
           tokens as the input length increases, peaking with M ULTI -L EX S UM (-60.97% UNR avg.).
         • Stochastic vs. deterministic. Deliberate addition of randomness increases the chance
           of unconventional summaries and contradictions. Sampling, Top-k Sampling, and Top-p
           Sampling have a larger sample variance than all other strategies on five of six datasets. As
           expected, they have fewer repetitions (+27.63% UNR avg.) (Fan et al., 2018; Holtzman
           et al., 2020) but tend more to factual flaws (-40.58% BARTScore avg.) (Basu et al., 2021;
           Su et al., 2022). Notably, η Sampling and Beam Sampling stand out in the stochastic sphere,
           suffering less from hallucinations (+40.23% BARTScore avg.). Together with deterministic
           methods, they produce the highest R (+29.65% avg.) and BERTScore (+35.34% avg.).
         • The output length matters. Short summaries (i.e., those in XS UM and C NN /D M) are less
           redundant than longer ones (+46.59% UNR avg.) (Xiao & Carenini, 2020a).

5.2     Q UALITATIVE F INDINGS

The annotation process took approximately 6 hours per judge. The results are presented in Figure 5.
The average Kendall’s τ of 0.16, calculated between two annotators across all pair selection results,
reflects high competitiveness among the top-3 decoding strategies when correctly tuned, oftentimes
leading to subjective summary preferences.


                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          • Top-p Sampling shines in AS with concise inputs. While not indicated by the R metric on
            XS UM, Top-p Sampling gains SDS human preference by 75%. However, its effectiveness
            fades as the input length increases, tipping the balance in favor of deterministic alternatives.
            According to this principle, Beam Search prevails in MDS.
          • Fluency negatively correlates with Recall, Precision,
                                                              1          and Factuality.
                                                                   from datasets                   Fluency goes
                                                                                  import load_dataset
                                                                   # Download COMMA locally and load it as a Dataset
            opposite to Recall, Precision, and Factuality more23 than   66%      of  the time. "en")
                                                                   comma = load_dataset("COMMA",    Furthermore,
            Fluency preferences depend on the dataset and do not
                                                               4 always
                                                                   # The firstreward
                                                                               instance stochastic
                                                                                         of the test setstrategies.
                                                                       5   example = comma["test"][0]
                                                                       6   # The full text (epigraph + body + decision)
                                                                       7   example["full_text"]

6       T HE P RISM DATASET                                                 Figure 1: C OMMA HuggingFace Dataset.


Composition Building upon the experiments presented            1  from datasets import load_dataset
in the previous sections, we introduce P RISM, a first-of- 2 # Download PRISM locally and load it as a Dataset
its-kind dataset that collects over 2M artificial summaries    3
                                                               4
                                                                  prism = load_dataset("PRISM")
                                                                  # The first Beam Search run
generated over a range of heterogeneous decoding settings. 5 run = prism["beam_search"][0]
P RISM presents an instance for each inference run, detail- 7 #run["predictions"]
                                                               6    The predicted summaries

ing all metadata (dataset, model, decoding strategy, hy-
perparameter values), average decoding time per instance Figure     Figure 2: C OMMA HuggingFace Dataset.
                                                                        6: P RISM HuggingFace Dataset.
(milliseconds), carbon emissions (kg), and metric scores.
Its source files (≈10 GB) are stored in JSONL format and       1  from datasets import load_dataset
                                                                                            6
are publicly available for download through the HuggingFace    2 Datasets      platform.
                                                                  # Download COMMA  locally andFor
                                                                                                load example,     to
                                                                                                     it as a Dataset
access the summaries predicted by a Beam Search run, you need  3
                                                                       to  install
                                                                  constitution  =   the
                                                                                  load_dataset("COMMA",
                                                                  ,→ "constitution")
                                                                                         datasets          Python
library and follow the instructions shown in Figure 6. For the 4sake
                                                                  # Theoffirst
                                                                           space   efficiency, we separately
                                                                               article
release the gold document-summary AS pairs that each run relies5
                                                               6
                                                                     on.    Additional
                                                                  article = constitution[0]
                                                                                           information on the
                                                                  # The first article paragraph
project website7 will be updated regularly to incorporate any 7future    changes, additions, or erratum.
                                                                  article[0]


                                                                      Figure 3: C OMMA HuggingFace Dataset, Constitution.
Applications The potential applications of P RISM are extensive and diverse. Researchers can
exploit this dataset to study new NLG metrics (Frisoni et al., 2022a). Additionally, it provides a
unique opportunity to benchmark decoding strategies against a multitude of established baselines.
Beyond this, P RISM offers the ability to train LMs to emulate the token choice of one or more
strategies for style control (Goyal et al., 2022) or automatic hyperparameter optimization (Chen et al.,
2022). In fact, decoding strategies are complex algorithms that are hard to put in end-to-end networks
due to their non-differentiable nature. In light of the poor attempts to design exact differentiable
versions of decoding strategies (e.g., Top-k Sampling (Jang et al., 2017), Beam Search (Collobert
et al., 2019)), P RISM emerges as an indispensable asset for creating approximated modules.


7       C ONCLUSION

The rocketing growth witnessed by transformer-based summarizers is offset by the poor control over
decoding strategies, which exhibit cloudy task-specific qualities overshadowed by the continuous
distribution of new models. In this paper, we demystify the role of decoding-time methods for
abstractive summarization. Our full-scale study comprises comprehensive quantitative and qualitative
breakdowns, covering various decoding setups, autoregressive models, datasets, and evaluation
metrics. Empirical results demonstrate how generative heuristics and their hyperparameters can
overturn predicted summaries, where optimal choices depend on target quality dimensions and the
summarization type at hand (i.e., long, short, multi-document). Besides validating observations
already made in other tasks, our findings unveil the uniqueness of abstractive summarization and
the best procedures to follow depending on the case, serving as cautionary notes. Wrapping up our
core findings, we furnish practitioners with a practical and easy-to-follow guideline (Appendix L), 1
facilitating the right selection of decoding strategies and hyperparameters tailored to specific case
studies. Our breath study and the data collected unlock new research avenues, raising expectations
for a future marked by increased awareness of the implications of decoding and their control.

    6
        https://huggingface.co/datasets/[anonymized]/PRISM
    7
        https://prism.github.io. The web page will be public at the end of the anonymization window.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To help readers reproduce our experiments, we provide rationales for our decoding hyperparameter
search space in Appendix D, listing each dataset’s minimum and maximum input/output length. All
models, datasets, decoding strategies, and automatic metrics explored in this study are open source;
Appendix E elaborates on implementation specifics, hardware setup, and runtimes. Since our decoding
runs are performed on representative dataset samples, we also include details of the preprocessing
steps and the power analysis process completed before sampling (Appendix C). Appendix F describes
our human evaluation protocol. We plan to openly release the source codes in a dedicated GitHub
repository and P RISM on HuggingFace Datasets.

E THICS S TATEMENT

We honor ICLR Code of Ethics. As we recognize that the reported principles are not exhaustive, we
address the nine points explicitly mentioned in the NeurIPS 2023 Ethical Guidelines.

1. Does the data contain any personally identifiable information or sensitive personally identifi-
able information? Our data do not contain confidential information. All source documents are
available for free inspection, uncopyrighted, and fully public.

2. Does the data contain information that could be deduced about individuals that they have
not consented to share? Our data contain individual names. Nevertheless, such details are within
news reports published by authoritative sources, such as BBC and CNN, on which we rely.

3. Does the data encode, contain, or potentially exacerbate bias against people of a certain
gender, race, sexuality, or who have other protected characteristics?
No.

4. Does the paper contain human subject experimentation and whether it has been reviewed
and approved by a relevant oversight board?
No.

5. Does the paper rely on data that have been discredited by the creators?
No.

6. Consent to use or share the data. Explain whether you have asked the data owner’s permission
to use or share data and what the outcome was.
Consent is implicit for all content because the datasets used are publicly available.

7. Domain specific considerations when working with high-risk groups
Not applicable.

8. Filtering of offensive content. For instance, when collecting a dataset, how are the authors
filtering offensive content such as racist language or violent imagery?
Not applicable. Our data does not involve offensive content.

9. Compliance with GDPR and other data-related regulations. For instance, if the authors
collect human-derived data, what is the mechanism to guarantee individuals’ right to be
forgotten (removed from the dataset)?
As noted in the paper, our data are derived from multiple publicly available datasets, including news
reports, scientific papers, and court lawsuits that do not comply with privacy rules.

R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, et al. Falcon-40b:
  an open large language model with state-of-the-art performance, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rahul Aralikatte, Shashi Narayan, Joshua Maynez, Sascha Rothe, and Ryan McDonald. Focus
  attention: Promoting faithfulness and diversity in summarization. In Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6078–6095, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.474.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.474.
Sourya Basu, Govardana Sachitanandam Ramachandran, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Lav R. Varshney.
  Mirostat: a neural text decoding algorithm that directly controls perplexity. In ICLR. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2021.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   CoRR, abs/2004.05150, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05150.
Steven Bird. NLTK: the natural language toolkit. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Claire Cardie, and Pierre
  Isabelle (eds.), ACL 2006, 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference,
  Sydney, Australia, 17-21 July 2006. The Association for Computer Linguistics, 2006. doi: 10.3115/
  1225403.1225421. URL https://aclanthology.org/P06-4018/.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Massimo Caccia, Lucas Caccia, William Fedus, Hugo Larochelle, Joelle Pineau, and Laurent Charlin.
 Language gans falling short. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Shuyang Cao and Lu Wang. HIBRIDS: Attention with hierarchical biases for structure-aware
  long document summarization. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 786–807, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.58. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.58.
Yu Cao, Wei Bi, Meng Fang, Shuming Shi, and Dacheng Tao. A model-agnostic data manipulation
  method for persona-based dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7984–8002, Dublin,
  Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  550. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.550.
Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Richard Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya
  Kawakami, Greg Kochanski, Arnaud Doucet, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sagi Perel, and Nando
  de Freitas. Towards learning universal hyperparameter optimizers with transformers. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Er-
  ica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern,
  Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language model-
  ing with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311.
Arman Cohan, Franck Dernoncourt, Doo Soon Kim, Trung Bui, Seokhwan Kim, Walter Chang,
  and Nazli Goharian. A discourse-aware attention model for abstractive summarization of long
  documents. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp.
  615–621, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/N18-2097. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-2097.
Ronan Collobert, Awni Y. Hannun, and Gabriel Synnaeve. A fully differentiable beam search decoder.
  In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1341–1350. PMLR, 2019. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/collobert19a.html.
Mayukh Das and Wolf Tilo Balke. Quantifying bias from decoding techniques in natural language
 generation. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguis-
 tics, pp. 1311–1323, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, October 2022. International Committee on
 Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.112.
Alexandra DeLucia, Aaron Mueller, Xiang Lisa Li, and João Sedoc. Decoding methods for neural
  narrative generation. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Evalua-
  tion, and Metrics (GEM 2021), pp. 166–185, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.gem-1.16. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  gem-1.16.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Jay DeYoung, Iz Beltagy, Madeleine van Zuylen, Bailey Kuehl, and Lucy Lu Wang. Ms\ˆ2: Multi-
  document summarization of medical studies. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia
  Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican
  Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, pp. 7494–7513. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.594. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.594.
Bryan Eikema and Wilker Aziz. Is MAP decoding all you need? the inadequacy of the mode
  in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Com-
  putational Linguistics, pp. 4506–4520, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 2020. Interna-
  tional Committee on Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.398. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.398.
Alexander Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and Dragomir Radev. Multi-news: A large-scale
  multi-document summarization dataset and abstractive hierarchical model. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1074–1084, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1102. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1102.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
 Papers), pp. 889–898, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1082. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1082.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiachong Feng, Xiaocheng Feng, and Bing Qin. A survey on dialogue summarization: Recent
  advances and new frontiers. In Luc De Raedt (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022, pp. 5453–
  5460. ijcai.org, 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/764. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/
  ijcai.2022/764.
Giacomo Frisoni, Antonella Carbonaro, Gianluca Moro, Andrea Zammarchi, and Marco Avagnano.
  NLG-metricverse: An end-to-end library for evaluating natural language generation. In Proceedings
  of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 3465–3479, Gyeongju,
  Republic of Korea, October 2022a. International Committee on Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.306.
Giacomo Frisoni, Paolo Italiani, Francesco Boschi, and Gianluca Moro. Enhancing biomedical
  scientific reviews summarization with graph-based factual evidence extracted from papers. In
  Alfredo Cuzzocrea, Oleg Gusikhin, Wil M. P. van der Aalst, and Slimane Hammoudi (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Data Science, Technology and Applications,
  DATA 2022, Lisbon, Portugal, July 11-13, 2022, pp. 168–179. SCITEPRESS, 2022b. doi: 10.5220/
  0011354900003269. URL https://doi.org/10.5220/0011354900003269.
Giacomo Frisoni, Paolo Italiani, Stefano Salvatori, and Gianluca Moro. Cogito Ergo Summ:
  Abstractive Summarization of Biomedical Papers via Semantic Parsing Graphs and Consistency
  Rewards. In Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Washington,
  DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, pp. 1–9. AAAI Press, 2023.
Yingbo Gao, Weiyue Wang, Christian Herold, Zijian Yang, and Hermann Ney. Towards a bet-
  ter understanding of label smoothing in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
  1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  and the 10th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp. 212–223,
  Suzhou, China, December 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.25.
Mario Giulianelli, Joris Baan, Wilker Aziz, Raquel Fernández, and Barbara Plank. What comes
 next? evaluating uncertainty in neural text generators against human production variability.
 CoRR, abs/2305.11707, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.11707. URL https://doi.org/10.
 48550/arXiv.2305.11707.
Ning Gong and Nianmin Yao. A generalized decoding method for neural text generation. Comput.
  Speech Lang., 81:101503, 2023.
José Ángel González, Annie Louis, and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. Source-summary entity aggregation in
  abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 6019–6034, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, October 2022. International Committee
  on Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.
  526.
Tanya Goyal, Nazneen Rajani, Wenhao Liu, and Wojciech Kryscinski. HydraSum: Disentangling
  style features in text summarization with multi-decoder models. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 464–479, Abu Dhabi,
  United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2022.emnlp-main.30. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.30.
Max Grusky, Mor Naaman, and Yoav Artzi. Newsroom: A dataset of 1.3 million summaries with
 diverse extractive strategies. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
 1 (Long Papers), pp. 708–719, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational
 Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1065. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1065.
Nianlong Gu, Elliott Ash, and Richard Hahnloser. MemSum: Extractive summarization of long
  documents using multi-step episodic Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  6507–6522, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2022.acl-long.450. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.450.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mandy Guo, Joshua Ainslie, David Uthus, Santiago Ontanon, Jianmo Ni, Yun-Hsuan Sung, and
 Yinfei Yang. LongT5: Efficient text-to-text transformer for long sequences. In Findings of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pp. 724–736, Seattle, United States, July
 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.55. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-naacl.55.
Xu-Wang Han, Hai-Tao Zheng, Jin-Yuan Chen, and Cong-Zhi Zhao. Diverse decoding for abstractive
  document summarization. Applied Sciences, 9(3), 2019. ISSN 2076-3417. doi: 10.3390/
  app9030386. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/3/386.
Pengcheng He, Baolin Peng, Liyang Lu, Song Wang, Jie Mei, Yang Liu, Ruochen Xu, Hany Hassan
  Awadalla, Yu Shi, Chenguang Zhu, Wayne Xiong, Michael Zeng, Jianfeng Gao, and Xuedong
  Huang. Z-code++: A pre-trained language model optimized for abstractive summarization.
  CoRR, abs/2208.09770, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2208.09770. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2208.09770.
John Hewitt, Christopher Manning, and Percy Liang. Truncation sampling as language model
  desmoothing. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
  3414–3427, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.249.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Kung-hsiang Huang, Siffi Singh, Xiaofei Ma, Wei Xiao, et al. SWING: Balancing coverage and
  faithfulness for dialogue summarization. In EACL, pp. 512–525, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023.
 ACL. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-eacl.37.
Luyang Huang, Shuyang Cao, Nikolaus Parulian, Heng Ji, and Lu Wang. Efficient attentions for
  long document summarization. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  1419–1436, Online, June 2021a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2021.naacl-main.112. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.112.
Luyang Huang, Shuyang Cao, Nikolaus Nova Parulian, Heng Ji, et al. Efficient attentions for long
  document summarization. In Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek
  Hakkani-Tür, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11,
  2021, pp. 1419–1436. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021b. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  naacl-main.112. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.112.
Daphne Ippolito, Reno Kriz, João Sedoc, Maria Kustikova, and Chris Callison-Burch. Comparison
  of diverse decoding methods from conditional language models. In Proceedings of the 57th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3752–3762, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1365. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1365.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26,
  2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rkE3y85ee.
Fred Jelinek, Robert L Mercer, Lalit R Bahl, and James K Baker. Perplexity—a measure of the
  difficulty of speech recognition tasks. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 62(S1):
  S63–S63, 1977.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, et al. Survey of hallucination in natural language
  generation. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(12):248:1–248:38, 2023.
Katikapalli Subramanyam Kalyan, Ajit Rajasekharan, and Sivanesan Sangeetha. AMMUS : A survey
  of transformer-based pretrained models in natural language processing. CoRR, abs/2108.05542,
  2021.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel King, Zejiang Shen, Nishant Subramani, Daniel S. Weld, Iz Beltagy, and Doug Downey.
  Don’t say what you don’t know: Improving the consistency of abstractive summarization by
  constraining beam search. CoRR, abs/2203.08436, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.08436. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.08436.
Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senellart, and Alexander Rush. OpenNMT: Open-
  source toolkit for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations,
  pp. 67–72, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P17-4012.
Huan Yee Koh, Jiaxin Ju, He Zhang, Ming Liu, and Shirui Pan. How far are we from robust long
  abstractive summarization? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 2682–2698, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  emnlp-main.172.
Anastassia Kornilova and Vlad Eidelman. Billsum: A corpus for automatic summarization of US
  legislation. CoRR, abs/1910.00523, 2019a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.00523.
Anastassia Kornilova and Vladimir Eidelman. BillSum: A corpus for automatic summarization
  of US legislation. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, pp.
 48–56, Hong Kong, China, November 2019b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/D19-5406. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-5406.
Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul N. Bennett, and Marti A. Hearst. Summac: Re-visiting
  nli-based models for inconsistency detection in summarization. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
  10:163–177, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl\_a\_00453. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_
  a_00453.
Rémi Leblond, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Laurent Sifre, Miruna Pislar, Lespiau Jean-Baptiste, Ioannis
  Antonoglou, Karen Simonyan, and Oriol Vinyals. Machine translation decoding beyond beam
  search. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 8410–8434, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.662. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.662.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
 for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7871–7880, Online, July
 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.703.
Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Yacine Jernite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick von Platen,
  Suraj Patil, Julien Chaumond, Mariama Drame, Julien Plu, Lewis Tunstall, Joe Davison, Mario
  Šaško, Gunjan Chhablani, Bhavitvya Malik, Simon Brandeis, Teven Le Scao, Victor Sanh, Canwen
 Xu, Nicolas Patry, Angelina McMillan-Major, Philipp Schmid, Sylvain Gugger, Clément Delangue,
 Théo Matussière, Lysandre Debut, Stas Bekman, Pierric Cistac, Thibault Goehringer, Victor
  Mustar, François Lagunas, Alexander Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Datasets: A community library
  for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 175–184, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
 v1/2021.emnlp-demo.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-demo.21.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Bruce T Lowerre. The harpy speech recognition system. Carnegie Mellon University, 1976.
Clara Meister, Tim Vieira, and Ryan Cotterell. Best-first beam search. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 8:795–809, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00346. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.51.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Clara Meister, Tiago Pimentel, Gian Wiher, and Ryan Cotterell. Locally typical sampling. 2022a.

Clara Meister, Gian Wiher, and Ryan Cotterell. On decoding strategies for neural text generators.
  Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:997–1012, 2022b.

Gianluca Moro and Luca Ragazzi. Semantic self-segmentation for abstractive summarization of long
  documents in low-resource regimes. In Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  AAAI 2022, Thirty-Fourth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI
  2022, The Twelveth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2022
  Virtual Event, February 22 - March 1, 2022, pp. 11085–11093. AAAI Press, 2022. URL https:
  //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/21357.

Gianluca Moro and Luca Ragazzi. Align-then-abstract representation learning for low-resource
  summarization. Neurocomputing, 548:126356, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2023.126356. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2023.126356.

Gianluca Moro, Luca Ragazzi, Lorenzo Valgimigli, and Davide Freddi. Discriminative marginal-
  ized probabilistic neural method for multi-document summarization of medical literature. In
  Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 180–189, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.15. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.15.

Gianluca Moro, Nicola Piscaglia, Luca Ragazzi, and Paolo Italiani. Multi-language transfer learning
  for low-resource legal case summarization. Artif. Intell. Law, 31, 2023a.

Gianluca Moro, Luca Ragazzi, and Lorenzo Valgimigli. Graph-Based Abstractive Summarization of
  Extracted Essential Knowledge for Low-Resource Scenarios. 09 2023b. ISBN 9781643684369.
  doi: 10.3233/FAIA230460.

Gianluca Moro, Luca Ragazzi, and Lorenzo Valgimigli. Carburacy: Summarization models tuning
  and comparison in eco-sustainable regimes with a novel carbon-aware accuracy. In Brian Williams,
  Yiling Chen, and Jennifer Neville (eds.), Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI
  2023, Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023,
  Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, pp. 14417–14425. AAAI Press, 2023c. URL
  https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/26686.

Gianluca Moro, Luca Ragazzi, Lorenzo Valgimigli, Giacomo Frisoni, Claudio Sartori, and Gustavo
  Marfia. Efficient memory-enhanced transformer for long-document summarization in low-resource
  regimes. Sensors, 23(7):3542, 2023d. doi: 10.3390/s23073542. URL https://doi.org/10.
  3390/s23073542.

Gianluca Moro, Luca Ragazzi, Lorenzo Valgimigli, and Lorenzo Molfetta. Retrieve-and-rank end-to-
  end summarization of biomedical studies. In Oscar Pedreira and Vladimir Estivill-Castro (eds.),
  Similarity Search and Applications - 16th International Conference, SISAP 2023, A Coruña, Spain,
  October 9-11, 2023, Proceedings, volume 14289 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 64–78.
  Springer, 2023e. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-46994-7\_6. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-031-46994-7_6.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos, Çaglar Gülçehre, and Bing Xiang. Abstractive
  text summarization using sequence-to-sequence RNNs and beyond. In Proceedings of the 20th
  SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 280–290, Berlin, Germany,
  August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/K16-1028. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/K16-1028.

Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the summary!
  topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In Proceedings of the 2018
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1797–1807, Brussels,
  Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  D18-1206. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1206.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ramakanth Pasunuru, Mengwen Liu, Mohit Bansal, Sujith Ravi, and Markus Dreyer. Efficiently
  summarizing text and graph encodings of multi-document clusters. In Proceedings of the 2021
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 4768–4779, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.380. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2021.naacl-main.380.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
 Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina
  Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp.
  8024–8035, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Abstract.html.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive
  summarization. In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2018.
Jason Phang, Yao Zhao, and Peter J. Liu. Investigating efficiently extending transformers for long
  input summarization. CoRR, abs/2208.04347, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2208.04347. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2208.04347.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Rajkumar Ramamurthy, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Kianté Brantley, Jack Hessel, Rafet Sifa, Christian
  Bauckhage, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. Is reinforcement learning (not) for natural
  language processing?: Benchmarks, baselines, and building blocks for natural language policy
  optimization. CoRR, abs/2210.01241, 2022.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, et al. BLOOM: A 176b-parameter
  open-access multilingual language model. CoRR, abs/2211.05100, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
  2211.05100. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.05100.
Grishma Sharma and Deepak Sharma. Automatic text summarization methods: A comprehensive
  review. SN Comput. Sci., 4(1):33, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s42979-022-01446-w. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1007/s42979-022-01446-w.
Zejiang Shen, Kyle Lo, Lauren Yu, Nathan Dahlberg, Margo Schlanger, and Doug Downey.
  Multi-lexsum: Real-world summaries of civil rights lawsuits at multiple granularities. CoRR,
  abs/2206.10883, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.10883. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2206.10883.
Yixuan Su and Nigel Collier. Contrastive search is what you need for neural text generation.
  Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  GbkWw3jwL9.
Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Yan Wang, Dani Yogatama, Lingpeng Kong, and Nigel Collier. A contrastive
  framework for neural text generation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=V88BafmH9Pj.
Ayesha Ayub Syed, Ford Lumban Gaol, and Tokuro Matsuo. A survey of the state-of-the-art models
  in neural abstractive text summarization. IEEE Access, 9:13248–13265, 2021. doi: 10.1109/
  ACCESS.2021.3052783. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3052783.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and
  fine-tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liam van der Poel, Ryan Cotterell, and Clara Meister. Mutual information alleviates hallucinations
  in abstractive summarization. CoRR, abs/2210.13210, 2022.
Ashwin K. Vijayakumar, Michael Cogswell, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Qing Sun, Stefan Lee,
  David J. Crandall, and Dhruv Batra. Diverse beam search for improved description of complex
  scenes. In AAAI, pp. 7371–7379. AAAI Press, 2018.
David Wan and Mohit Bansal. FactPEGASUS: Factuality-aware pre-training and fine-tuning for
  abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1010–1028,
  Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2022.naacl-main.74. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.74.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, et al. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark
  and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Tal Linzen, Grzegorz Chrupala,
  and Afra Alishahi (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural
  Networks for NLP, BlackboxNLP@EMNLP 2018, Brussels, Belgium, November 1, 2018, pp.
  353–355. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi: 10.18653/v1/w18-5446. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w18-5446.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, et al. Superglue: A stickier
  benchmark for general-purpose language understanding systems. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo
  Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp.
  3261–3275, 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  4496bf24afe7fab6f046bf4923da8de6-Abstract.html.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Wen Xiao and Giuseppe Carenini. Systematically exploring redundancy reduction in summarizing
 long documents. In Kam-Fai Wong, Kevin Knight, and Hua Wu (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st
 Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
 the 10th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, AACL/IJCNLP 2020,
 Suzhou, China, December 4-7, 2020, pp. 516–528. Association for Computational Linguistics,
 2020a. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.51/.
Wen Xiao and Giuseppe Carenini. Systematically exploring redundancy reduction in summarizing
 long documents. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Asso-
 ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 10th International Joint Conference on Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 516–528, Suzhou, China, December 2020b. Association for Computa-
 tional Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.51.
Wen Xiao, Iz Beltagy, Giuseppe Carenini, and Arman Cohan. PRIMERA: Pyramid-based masked
 sentence pre-training for multi-document summarization. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5245–
 5263, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 2022.acl-long.360. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.360.
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text
 generation. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and
 Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021,
 virtual, pp. 27263–27277, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
 2021/hash/e4d2b6e6fdeca3e60e0f1a62fee3d9dd-Abstract.html.


                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sina Zarrieß, Henrik Voigt, and Simeon Schüz. Decoding methods in neural language generation: A
  survey. Inf., 12(9):355, 2021.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. PEGASUS: pre-training with
   extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 37th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of
   Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11328–11339. PMLR, 2020a. URL http:
   //proceedings.mlr.press/v119/zhang20ae.html.
Mengli Zhang, Gang Zhou, Wanting Yu, Ningbo Huang, and Wenfen Liu. A comprehensive
 survey of abstractive text summarization based on deep learning. Computational Intelligence and
 Neuroscience, 2022, 2022a.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with BERT. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2020b.
Yusen Zhang, Ansong Ni, Ziming Mao, Chen Henry Wu, Chenguang Zhu, Budhaditya Deb, Ahmed
  Awadallah, Dragomir Radev, and Rui Zhang. Summn : A multi-stage summarization framework for
  long input dialogues and documents. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1592–1604, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.112. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.112.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, et al. A survey of large language models.
 CoRR, abs/2303.18223, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.18223. URL https://doi.org/10.
 48550/arXiv.2303.18223.


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A BSTRACTIVE S UMMARIZATION FAMILIES
We define the problem of AS with the following setup. For single-source tasks (SDS and LDS), the
input is a document X = {x1 , . . . , xx }, where each xi ∈ X is a token. For multi-source scenarios
(MDS), the input is a cluster C = {X1 , . . . , Xz } of documents.

       • In SDS, X is a brief document, generally shorter than 1024 tokens, which is the maximum
         size that transformer-based LMs with quadratic complexity (Lewis et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
         2020a) can process without input truncation.
       • In LDS, the number of input tokens could be potentially large (e.g., > 10,000). For this
         reason, quadratic LMs would ignore summary-worthy information and are thus replaced
         by efficient transformers with linear complexity that can read up to 16,384 tokens (Beltagy
         et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021b; Guo et al., 2022; Phang et al., 2022).
       • In MDS, C is a cluster consisting of multiple documents related to a topic (e.g., newspaper
         articles detailing the same recent event). Generally, X is assembled by concatenating the
         documents in C to form a single long textual input (DeYoung et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2022),
         treating the summarization problem as in LDS.

B    SCOPUS Q UERIES
The bibliometric results reported in the main paper (Figure 2) are obtained by executing the following
queries on the SCOPUS search engine:

       • Abstractive Summarization
         TITLE-ABS-KEY(abstractive AND summarization);
       • Decoding Strategies
         TITLE-ABS-KEY(((text AND generation) OR nlg) AND decoding);
       • Abstractive Summarization + Decoding Strategies
         TITLE-ABS-KEY(summarization AND decoding);

We also show in Figure 7 the intersection between abstractive summarization and large language
models (LLMs), obtained with the subsequent query:

       • Abstractive Summarization + Large Language Models
         TITLE-ABS-KEY(abstractive AND summarization AND ((large AND
         language AND (model OR models)) OR LLM)).

We only consider conference papers on Computational Science by appending the following: AND
(LIMIT-TO(SUBJAREA, "COMP")) AND (LIMIT-TO(DOCTYPE, "cp")).

                                                     AS           AS + LLM

                                   250
                                   200
                           Count


                                   150
                                   100
                                    50
                                     0
                                         ’14   ’16         ’18        ’20    ’22
                                                          Years

Figure 7: Annual rate SCOPUS comparison between conference papers on abstractive summarization
(AS) and their intersection with large language models (LLMs).


C    DATASET P REPROCESSING AND P OWER A NALYSIS
According to best practices in summarization corpora construction (Kornilova & Eidelman, 2019b),
our preprocessing pipeline foresees (i) lowercasing, (ii) ASCII encoding, (iii) extra space, URL,


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


special character, and bullet point removal, (iv) HTML cleaning, (v) dash sequences deletion, (vi)
newline and tabs erasure, (vii) empty sentence and non-alphabetic starter cut, (viii) between-sentence
demarcation space assurance, (ix) word contraction expansion, and (x) quotes normalization.
A prudent preliminary operation is to determine the required sample size to ensure that the study
has sufficient statistical power to detect meaningful metric effects across decoding runs if they exist.
To this end, we perform a power analysis for the t-tests using the statsmodels Python library
(v 0.14.0). The resulting needed sample size is 393.4. Technically, we consider the following factors:

              • Power level. It denotes the probability of correctly detecting a true effect if it exists. Higher
                power indicates greater ability to detect effects. We use the commonly recommended value
                0.8, which corresponds to an 80% chance of correctly detecting a true effect.
              • Significance level. It is the threshold used to determine statistical significance. We choose
                0.05, which corresponds to a 5% chance of incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis.
              • Effect size. It is the magnitude of the difference that we expect to observe among different
                decoding strategies. We employ Cohen’s d, calculated by taking the difference in means
                between two groups and dividing it by the pooled standard deviation, i.e., (x¯1 −x¯2 )/s. Follow-
                ing preliminary experiments, we make an educated guess about the aggregate effect size
                across all NLG metrics. We set x¯1 − x¯2 at 0.01 and s at 0.05.

After preprocessing, the dataset statistics (before and after sampling) are listed in Table 4. The
number of words is derived from nltk.word_tokenize (Bird, 2006).

Table 4: Dataset statistics before and after sampling, including test set size, number of sources per
instance, and the words in the source and target texts. All values are averaged except “# Samples.”

      Before sampling                             Source        Target         After sampling                              Source        Target
           Dataset             # Samples   # Docs    # Words    # Words             Dataset             # Samples   # Docs    # Words    # Words
           XS UM               11,333      1         421.2      22.9                XS UM               1134        1         414.1      22.8
 SDS


                                                                          SDS


           C NN /D M           11,490      1         761.3      57.4                C NN /D M           1148        1         753.8      58.0
           P UB M ED           6658        1         3070.4     206.7               P UB M ED           667         1         3095.5     207.2
 MDS LDS


                                                                          MDS LDS


           AR X IV             6440        1         5733.2     161.6               AR X IV             644         1         5770.7     160.6
           M ULTI -N EWS       5621        2.8       2026.3     245.9               M ULTI -N EWS       555         2.8       1947.9     248.0
           M ULTI -L EX S UM   616         10.3      88,122.9   126.5               M ULTI -L EX S UM   616         10.3      88,122.9   126.5


D           D ECODING H YPERPARAMETERS

For Contrastive Search, we modulate α and k in {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} and {20, 30, 40, 50, 60},
respectively. For Beam Search, we choose the beam size b from [2, 10], a large window that
allows a trade-off between quality and performance. We keep b unchanged for Diverse Beam
Search, implementing ∆ with the Hamming distance, as suggested by Vijayakumar et al. (2018),
and considering a diversity penalty λ ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}; the number of subgroups is set
equal to b. We keep the same exploration range for b when we try out Beam Sampling. For Top-
k Sampling, we pick k from {20, 30, 40, 50, 60}. For Top-p Sampling, supported by the results
of DeLucia et al. (2021), we choose p from {0.4, 0.6, 0.8}. For η Sampling, we search η-cutoff
over {0.0003, 0.0006, 0.0009, 0.002, 0.004} (Hewitt et al., 2022). For pure (ancestral), Top-k, and
Top-p Sampling, we also perform an ablation on the temperature hyperparameter, exploring τ ∈
{0.8, 0.9, 1.0}, the best values according to Holtzman et al. (2020) and Pasunuru et al. (2021). Where
not specified, we maintain default hyperparameters depending on the model configuration.
Artificial summaries often suffer from high redundancy (Xiao & Carenini, 2020b). Therefore,
we investigate non-negligible word-level n-grams penalties as introduced by Klein et al. (2017)
and Paulus et al. (2018), precisely for AS. In a nutshell, we force the decoder to never output the
same sequence of words more than once during testing by manually setting the probability of already
hypothesized n-grams to 0. We extract n from {3, 4, 5} for P UB M ED, AR X IV, M ULTI -N EWS, and
M ULTI -L EX S UM, and from {2, 3} for XS UM (one-line output) and C NN /D M. This setting gives a
minimum of 16 runs per decoding strategy.


                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 5: List of the utilized datasets and relative length constraints.
                                                                                                                                                  Input               Output
 Dataset                    URL
                                                                                                                                                 Max Len         Min Len Max Len
 XS UM                      https://huggingface.co/datasets/xsum                                                                                   1024            20        100
 C NN /D M                  https://huggingface.co/datasets/cnn_dailymail                                                                          1024            20        100
 P UB M ED                  https://huggingface.co/datasets/ccdv/pubmed-summarization                                                              4096           100        256
 AR X IV                    https://huggingface.co/datasets/ccdv/arxiv-summarization                                                               4096           100        256
 M ULTI -N EWS              https://huggingface.co/datasets/multi_news                                                                             4096           100        256
 M ULTI -L EX S UM          https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/multi_lexsum                                                                   4096            50        256


                                      Table 6: Related work on decoding strategies comparison.
                                                                                                                                                                               Systematic
Source                      Decoding Strategies                 Hyperparameters*                                                   Task** Automatic Metrics
                                                                                                                                                                               Benchmark
                            Greedy Search                       /
                            Beam Search                         b ∈ {4, 8, 16}
                                                                                                                                          Perplexity, Self-BLEU,
Holtzman et al. (2020)      Sampling                            τ ∈ [0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0]                                        OEG                                         ✗
                                                                                                                                          Repetition, Zipf Coefficient
                            Top-k Sampling                      k ∈ 5 × 2[1,2,...,12]
                            Top-p Sampling                      ≈ p ∈ [0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9, 0.95]
                            Greedy Search                       /
                                                                                                                                   OEG,
                            Beam Search                         b ∈ {5, 10}                                                               BLEU, COMET, ROUGE
                                                                                                                                   MT,
                            Diverse Beam Search                 ∆ = Hamming, λ = 0.7, |g| = b = 5                                         BLEURT, DIST-n, ENT-n,
Meister et al. (2022b)                                                                                                             SDS,                                        ✔
                            Sampling                            /                                                                         n-GRAM DIV., Self-BLEU,
                                                                                                                                   DG,
                            Top-k Sampling                      k = 30                                                                    Repetition
                                                                                                                                   SG
                            Top-p Sampling                      p = 0.85
                            Beam Search                         b = 10
                            Diverse Beam Search                 ∆ = Hamming, λ = 0.8, |g| = b = 10
                            NPAD Beam Search                    b = 10, σ0 = 0.3
                                                                                                                                   DG,    Perplexity, DIST-n, ENT-n,
Ippolito et al. (2019)      Clustered Beam Search               b = 10, c = 5                                                                                                  ✔
                                                                                                                                   IC     SPICE
                            Top-g Capping Beam Search           b = 10, g_c = 3
                            Iterative Beam Search               b = 10, i = 5
                            Sampling                            τ ∈ {0.5, 0.7, 1.0}
                            Greedy                              /
                                                                b ∈ [2, 4, . . . , 10, 20], logits τ ∈ [0.6, 0.8, . . . , 1.4]
                            Beam Search
                                                                normalization τ ∈ [0.4, 0.6, . . . , 1.0]
Leblond et al. (2021)                                           b = 6, logits τ ∈ [0.6, 0.8, . . . , 1.4],                         MT     BLEU, BERTScore                      ✗
                            Value-Guided Beam Search
                                                                αlc ∈ [0, 0.1, . . . , 0.9, 0.95, 1.0]
                            Monte Carlo Tree Search             logits τ ∈ {0.9, 1.1, 1.3}, cpuct ∈ [1.0, 2.0, . . . , 6.0, 8.0]
                            Sampling + Ranking Variants         τ ∈ [0.15, 0.25, . . . , 0.95]
                            Greedy                              /
                                                                                                                                   OEG,
                            Contrastive Search                  k ∈ [2, 3, . . . , 10], α ∈ [0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1]
                                                                                                                                   DG,    Perplexity, Accuracy,
Su et al. (2022)            Beam Search                         b ∈ {4, 5, 10}
                                                                                                                                   SDS,   Repetition, n-GRAM DIV.,             ✗
Su & Collier (2023)         Typical Sampling                    τ = 0.95
                                                                                                                                   CG,    MAUVE, Semantic Coherence
                            Top-k Sampling                      k = 50
                                                                                                                                   MT
                            Top-p Sampling                      p = 0.95
                            Greedy                              no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5}
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            Contrastive Search
                                                                k ∈ [20, 30, . . . , 60], α ∈ [0.2, 0.4, . . . , 1]
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            Beam Search
                                                                b ∈ [2, 3, . . . , 10]
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            Diverse Beam Search                 ∆ = Hamming, λ ∈ [0.2, 0.4, . . . , 1.0],
                                                                |g| = b ∈ [2, 3, . . . , 10]                                              ROUGE, BERTScore,
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},                           SDS,   Perplexity, Coverage,
                            Sampling
Ours                                                            τ ∈ {0.8, 0.9, 1.0}                                                LDS,   Density, Compression,                ✔
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},                           MDS    UNR, NID, BARTScore-F,
                            Top-k Sampling
                                                                τ ∈ {0.8, 0.9, 1.0}, k ∈ [20, 30, . . . , 60]                             Carburacy + Runtime
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            Top-p Sampling                      τ ∈ {0.8, 0.9, 1.0}, k ∈ [None, 20, 30, . . . , 60]
                                                                p ∈ 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            Beam Sampling
                                                                b ∈ [2, 3, . . . , 10], p = 0.9
                                                                no_repetition_ngram_size ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5},
                            η Sampling
                                                                η ∈ {0.0003, 0.0006, 0.0009, 0.002, 0.004}
 *
    b = beam size, τ = temperature, k/p = top-k/p thresholds for selecting candidate pools, ∆ = diversity measure, λ = diversity penalty, |g| = number of sub-groups, σ0 = decoder-level random
    noise, c = number of clusters, g_c = top parent hypotheses considered at each time step, i = number of iterations, αlc = linear combination weights, η = entropy-dependent cutting-off.
 **
    OEG = Open-Ended (Unconditional) Generation, MT = Machine Translation, DG = Dialogue Generation, SG = Story Generation, IC = Image Captioning, CG = Code Generation, SDS = Short
    Document Summarization, LDS = Long Document Summarization, MDS = Multi-Document Summarization.


As common in AS, we define a minimum and maximum summary length for each dataset (Table 5),
avoiding the production of an EOS token before or after a certain threshold. These constraints are
determined by examining the summary sizes in the validation tests.

Decoding Runs There is a strong paucity of research on generative effects governed by the available
next-token selection strategies. To our knowledge, only two systematic benchmarks focus on intertask
behaviors and output diversity (Ippolito et al., 2019; Meister et al., 2022b). Most comparative
studies originate primarily from papers that introduce novel decoding techniques with the intention
of providing either theoretical justification or empirical evidence for their effectiveness. Although the
selection of the decoding strategy is widely known to be task-dependent, the emphasis in community
efforts primarily lies on open-ended generation, leaving several questions unanswered in application
fields such as AS. In this area, Beam Search is often lazily treated as the de-facto standard, with
limited exploration of alternative decoding strategies (Beltagy et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020; Xiao


                                                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Table 7: List of the utilized models.

 Model            Dataset             URL
                  XS UM               https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-xsum
 BART-large
                  C NN /D M           https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-cnn
                  P UB M ED           https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten/led-large-16384-pubmed
 L ED-large
                  AR X IV             https://huggingface.co/allenai/led-large-16384-arxiv
                  M ULTI -N EWS       https://huggingface.co/allenai/PRIMERA-multinews
 P RIMERA-large
                  M ULTI -L EX S UM   https://huggingface.co/allenai/primera-multi_lexsum-source-short



et al., 2022). Despite the collective superficiality and the latest heuristics, we want to step back and
question this leap of faith. Furthermore, research efforts that already incorporate AS often draw
task-level conclusions based on the analysis of a single dataset and a limited research scope, resorting
to SDS for the sake of experimental efficiency (Meister et al., 2022b; Su & Collier, 2023). Fanning
the flames, the efficiency data on runtime and CO2 are rarely mentioned. Compared to previous work
(Table 6), our task-specific investigation is offset by the high diversity of heuristics and their settings,
detailing the characteristics of the SDS/LDS/MDS family. Consequently, we consider this work the
most extensive decoding study, also w.r.t. the diversity of AS models evaluated. For example, previous
research by Meister et al. (2022b) and Su et al. (2022); Su & Collier (2023) considered exclusively
one AS model each: BART (Lewis et al., 2020) and G PT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), respectively.

E       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Hardware Configuration Inference runs are performed on a workstation that has 4 Nvidia GeForce
RTX3090 GPUs with 24 GB of dedicated memory each, 64 GB VRAM, and an Intel® Core™ i9-
10900X1080 CPU @ 3.70GHz.

Models, Datasets, and Decoding Our code is founded on PyTorch 1.10.2 (Paszke et al., 2019), the
HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) and Datasets (Lhoest et al., 2021) libraries. Table 5
and Table 7 enumerate datastore references and model checkpoints fine-tuned on them. Sticking
to Xiao et al. (2022), the input for P RIMERA is the concatenation of documents within the clusters (in
the same order), where truncation is applied to each document based on the input length limit divided
by the size of the cluster, thus guaranteeing the representation of all sources. All decoding runs for
autoregressive summary generation are subject to the generate() method of HuggingFace. We
set the global seed to 42 to guarantee the reproducibility of all runs of our work.

Metrics We quantify automatic metric scores                   Table 8: Hyperparameters of the NLG metrics.
using NLG-M ETRICVERSE (Frisoni et al.,
2022a), moving to external official repositories           Metric       Hyperparameters
where it is impossible. Table 8 lists all hyperpa-                      rouge_types=["rouge1","rouge2","rougeLsum"],
                                                           ROUGE
rameters. Due to the greater correlation with                           use_stemmer=True
human judgment, we computed BERTScore                                   lang="en",
with D E BERTA-large instead of the default                             model_type="microsoft/deberta-large-mnli",
                                                           BERTScore    idf=True,
RO BERTA-large, as recommended by the au-                               batch_size=32,
thors from version 0.3.11. We conducted tests                           rescale_with_baseline=True
using SummaC (Laban et al., 2022), which is                Perplexity   model_id="gpt2", add_start_token=False
considered the main factuality metric for ab-                           checkpoint="facebook/bart-large-cnn",
                                                           BARTScore
stractive LDS (Koh et al., 2022). However, its                          batch_size=4
computational demands proved to be too time-               Carburacy    alpha=10, beta=100
consuming, leading us to prefer BARTScore.

Experiment Tracking We tracked all our runs
with Weights & Biases8 and monitor CO2 emissions with CodeCarbon.9 Our experiments can be
publicly found on our Weights and Biases project.10 The cumulative processing time of the GPU for
    8
       https://wandb.ai
    9
       https://github.com/mlco2/codecarbon
    10
       https://wandb.ai/decoding-summ/prism


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 9: Average FLOPs computational performance of the evaluated decoding strategies.

 Greedy       Contrastive        Beam Search           DBS        Sampling        Top-k       Top-p       η Sampling         Beam Sampling
 1.7e17          1.7e17              1.9e17           2.6e17        2.1e17        1.8e17      2.4e17         2.6e17                1.8e17


generating all summaries amounts to ≈60 days. Computing all metric scores requires ≈13 days: 12
hours for R, 18 hours for BERTScore, 3.6 hours for Perplexity, 198 hours for Coverage, Density, and
Compression, 38 minutes for UNR and NID, 75 hours for BARTScore, and 10 seconds for Carburacy.
Table 9 reports FLOPs computational performance of the decoding strategies as an additional measure
of processing power and efficiency.



F     H UMAN E VALUATION

Our setup is sketched in Figure 8, inspired by Gu et al. (2022). We instruct the annotators to
distinguish quality dimensions by presenting the example reported in Table 10.


                Figure 8: Screenshot of the interface used to perform the human evaluation.


                                Table 10: Example attached to annotation instructions.
                                                                   Document
 African elephants are the largest land animals on Earth. They are known for their distinctive large ears and tusks, which are actually
 elongated incisor teeth. These gentle giants live in herds led by a matriarch and have a complex social structure. African elephants face
 threats from poaching and habitat loss, which have led to a decline in their population.
                                                               Gold Summary
 African elephants live in herds led by a matriarch. Despite their gentle nature, they face endangerment due to poaching and habitat loss,
 leading to a declining population.
 Topics: African elephants - Social structure - Threats they face.
                                        Summary 1 (High Recall, High Precision, Low Faithfulness)
 African elephants live in herds led by a matriarch. They are not endangered and face no threats.
 Explanation: Summary 1 has a high Recall because it includes all relevant information/topics of the gold summary; it has a high Precision
 because it includes only the relevant information/topics without adding irrelavant details; the Faithfulness is low because it includes incorrect
 information about their endangerment status.
                                         Summary 2 (High Recall, Low Precision, Low Faithfulness)
 African elephants, the Earth’s largest land animals, are known for their large ears and tusks. They live individually and face threats from
 poaching and habitat loss, causing a decline in their population.
 Explanation: Summary 2 has a high Recall because it includes all relevant information/topics of the gold summary; it has a low Precision
 because it also includes additional information/topics that are not within the gold summary; the Faithfulness is low because it includes
 incorrect information about their social structure.



                                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G      N ORMALIZED TABULATED S CORES

For better interpretability, Table 11 offers the tabulated version of Figure 3. Data are categorized by
dataset, metric, and decoding strategy, with a 0-10 normalization imposed by the magnitude of values
and graphical reasons. We prioritize the relative relationships among the strategies rather than the
precise score values achieved by each. Please note that the exact metric scores are openly released in
our P RISM dataset.

Table 11: Normalized tabulated scores categorized by dataset, metric, and decoding strategy. For
each dataset, the decoding strategies are sorted by decreasing AVG.

 Strategy               R     BERTScore   Perplexity ↓   Coverage    Density ↓   Compression   UNR    NID ↓   BARTScore   Carburacy
 XS UM
 Beam Sampling         3.44     7.31         1.49          5.95          0.31       0.03       6.67   4.65      7.51        4.25
 Greedy Search         3.25     8.05         1.28          6.28          0.35       0.04       5.96   6.22      8.11        4.24
 Contrastive Search    3.27     8.01         1.37          6.17          0.32       0.04       5.97   6.16      8.09        4.27
 η Sampling            3.27     8.01         1.40          6.08          0.35       0.03       5.96   6.17      8.10        4.26
 Beam Search           3.30     7.97         1.30          6.27          0.35       0.04       5.85   6.37      8.06        4.28
 Diverse Beam Search   3.80     6.82         1.65          5.96          0.28       0.05       4.48   8.21      7.25        4.80
 Sampling              2.34     5.16         1.37          3.78          0.14       0.03       7.51   3.54      5.21        3.04
 Top-k Sampling        2.22     5.48         1.37          4.23          0.23       0.03       7.09   4.25      5.45        2.90
 Top-p Sampling        2.30     5.34         1.48          4.37          0.25       0.03       6.88   4.37      5.41        3.00
 C NN /D M
 Greedy Search         8.28     9.88         6.55          9.94          5.22       0.07       7.33   4.40      9.91        8.77
 η Sampling            8.25     9.86         6.24          9.70          5.26       0.07       7.32   4.40      9.89        8.76
 Beam Search           8.30     9.87         6.49          9.98          5.58       0.08       7.42   4.40      9.93        8.80
 Diverse Beam Search   8.44     9.90         6.12          9.86          6.12       0.08       7.30   4.49      9.80        8.92
 Beam Sampling         8.20     9.79         6.36          9.71          5.28       0.08       7.36   4.38      9.84        8.48
 Contrastive Search    8.26     9.87         6.27          9.93          6.20       0.09       7.31   4.40      9.89        8.77
 Top-k Sampling        6.51     7.17         6.24          6.49          3.01       0.02       8.23   2.95      6.82        7.14
 Sampling              6.46     7.12         6.30          6.49          3.08       0.02       8.20   2.94      6.79        6.99
 Top-p Sampling        5.67     5.53         6.15          6.78          3.07       0.08       8.45   2.27      5.02        6.37
 P UB M ED
 Diverse Beam Search   8.75     8.81         3.95          9.73          7.01       0.23       3.43   5.71      8.44        9.10
 Contrastive Search    9.14     9.07         4.22          9.87          8.55       0.20       3.70   5.40      8.59        9.41
 Greedy Search         9.11     9.06         4.25          9.86          8.89       0.19       3.82   5.34      8.65        9.31
 Beam Search           8.97     8.99         4.17          9.86          9.13       0.19       3.98   5.28      8.71        9.26
 Beam Sampling         9.04     9.03         4.23          9.73          8.88       0.19       3.85   5.34      8.62        9.24
 η Sampling            9.13     9.07         4.23          9.75          8.90       0.18       3.71   5.39      8.59        9.27
 Top-k Sampling        5.71     5.33         4.24          6.35          4.75       0.22       6.66   2.75      4.58        6.32
 Sampling              5.74     5.33         4.32          6.34          4.71       0.21       6.64   2.75      4.57        6.33
 Top-p Sampling        5.81     5.32         3.99          6.33          4.69       0.24       6.31   2.99      4.55        6.36
 AR X IV
 Diverse Beam Search   9.16     8.37         8.58          9.51          3.66       0.81       3.84   6.34      7.54        9.35
 η Sampling            9.53     8.64         9.12          9.73          5.65       0.66       3.91   6.06      7.71        9.59
 Contrastive Search    9.50     8.64         9.30          9.72          5.83       0.67       3.92   6.06      7.72        9.77
 Beam Sampling         9.47     8.62         9.11          9.73          5.68       0.64       3.94   6.04      7.74        9.30
 Greedy Search         9.45     8.59         9.32          9.73          6.62       0.65       3.86   6.02      7.85        9.62
 Beam Search           9.37     8.57         9.29          9.79          7.14       0.63       3.90   5.97      7.91        9.55
 Top-p Sampling        7.10     5.97         9.29          6.62          3.39       0.64       5.84   3.95      4.68        7.62
 Sampling              7.02     6.05         9.40          6.64          3.82       0.62       6.11   3.78      4.76        7.56
 Top-k Sampling        7.04     6.06         9.48          6.66          3.88       0.62       6.11   3.79      4.78        7.55
 M ULTI -N EWS
 Greedy Search         8.69     8.93         0.33          8.38          1.32       0.15       4.39   5.81      8.36        9.05
 Beam Search           8.64     8.90         0.35          8.35          1.34       0.15       4.37   5.82      8.35        9.00
 Contrastive Search    8.58     8.87         0.37          8.27          1.25       0.15       4.36   5.84      8.33        8.98
 η Sampling            8.60     8.88         0.36          8.18          1.25       0.15       4.38   5.82      8.32        8.95
 Beam Sampling         8.49     8.79         0.38          8.14          1.24       0.14       4.31   5.85      8.27        8.90
 Diverse Beam Search   8.16     8.65         0.43          8.09          0.88       0.16       4.07   6.15      8.18        8.61
 Top-k Sampling        6.13     5.69         0.37          5.36          0.75       0.14       6.54   3.50      4.90        6.77
 Sampling              6.07     5.68         0.36          5.36          0.71       0.14       6.53   3.51      4.90        6.74
 Top-p Sampling        6.14     5.55         0.36          5.40          0.74       0.14       6.36   3.60      4.81        6.80
 M ULTI -L EX S UM
 Beam Search           7.66     7.99         0.18          9.40          0.42       8.75       3.33   5.93      8.10        8.25
 Diverse Beam Search   7.32     7.96         0.12          7.52          0.43       9.19       3.58   6.15      7.85        7.98
 Beam Sampling         7.59     7.97         0.08          7.70          0.40       8.45       3.20   5.93      8.07        8.05
 Greedy Search         7.09     7.59         0.10          8.61          0.40       8.70       1.82   6.69      7.83        7.81
 Contrastive Search    5.89     6.87         0.52          8.59          0.44       8.81       3.42   5.75      7.26        6.79
 η Sampling            5.94     6.92         0.47          7.65          0.41       8.47       3.36   5.78      7.29        6.81
 Top-p Sampling        6.86     7.47         0.26          5.92          0.23       8.46       2.15   6.51      7.73        7.61
 Sampling              6.13     6.99         0.37          5.78          0.23       8.66       3.10   5.93      7.38        6.98
 Top-k Sampling        6.12     7.02         0.42          5.75          0.22       8.33       3.16   5.93      7.38        6.98


H      M ETRIC S CORE D ISTRIBUTIONS

We show the distributions of the metric scores by decoding strategy and dataset in Figure 9. Depending
on the hyperparameters chosen, Sampling, Top-k Sampling, and Top-p Sampling display the highest


                                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


degree of result variability. Out of the deterministic methods, Diverse Beam Search is characterized by
high redundancy. MDS consistently yields a lower perplexity than the other task families, reflecting
the difficulty of current models in achieving high naturalness. The extractive nature of a summary in
LDS scenarios can vary greatly depending on the strategy implemented. As expected, the length of
the target is strongly correlated with the R score, which implies a higher probability of generating
n-grams of overlap with longer references, especially in LDS scenarios.
We offer per-dataset rankings on R (lexical overlap, Figure 10), BARTScore (semantic overlap and
faithfulness, Figure 12), and Carburacy (R–efficiency trade-off, Figure 11), recognized as useful
metrics for practical applications. Visualizing the decoding strategy ranks offers a complementary
perspective for a comparative fine-grained evaluation alongside individual and averaged observations.
We found temperature=0.8 in Top-k Sampling and Top-p Sampling being the reason for the
pronounced negative metric score clusters in XS UM, C NN /D M, P UB M ED, AR X IV, and M ULTI -
N EWS. The lowest ranks in M ULTI -L EX S UM are attributable to η Sampling and Contrastive Search.


I   O N H YPERPARAMETERS E FFECT

To encourage a conscious configuration of decoding strategies, we now consider the relation between
each hyperparameter value and the primary metrics (i.e., R, BERTScore, BARTScore, Perplexity).

Overall Unexpectedly, while the value of no_repeat_ngram_size (abbreviated as no_rep)
rises, there is a decrease in R and BERTScore, but a simultaneous increase in factuality (BARTScore).
Our conjecture is that this can be explained by the elevated abstractiveness of the datasets, a hypothesis
reinforced by human evaluation. In fact, there is a tension between staying close to the source
document and allowing abstractive modification. Taking a wider perspective, we find that no_rep, a
frequently overlooked parameter, plays a substantial role in shaping the output.

Greedy Search (Table 15) In the case of SDS and LDS, an increase in no_rep is accompanied
by a corresponding increase in the value of R, except for XS UM. MDS follows an inverse pattern:
with the growth of no_rep, both R and BERTScore decline, while BARTScore increases. The data
show a notable correlation between tasks, with only two outliers: R and BERTScore in XS UM, and
Perplexity in M ULTI -L EX S UM.

Contrastive Search (Table 16) It is difficult to pinpoint the selection guidelines for top_k, but
lower values achieve better results. Decreasing no_rep in XS UM leads to improved R scores. In
M ULTI -L EX S UM, choosing a low penalty_alpha is preferable.

Beam Search (Table 17) When delving into the SDS scenarios, it becomes evident that factuality
experiences enhancement as both no_rep and beam size b increase. Looking at BERTScore, we also
detect a positive trend with no_rep and b as well, peaking at b = 4 and b = 5. On the contrary, when
examining XS UM, there is a declining trend in R relative to high values for no_rep and b. However,
this trend is less pronounced in C NN /D M, which benefits from a central b and no_rep = 3. This
dissimilarity can likely be ascribed to the varying length of the summaries. Specifically, since XS UM
is much more concise, imposing a stringent non-repetition constraint can significantly affect lexical
similarity. This opposition is also apparent in terms of Perplexity. As for LDS, AR X IV and P UB M ED
experience an increase in R and BERTScore with high no_rep and low b. Again, the value of b sets
a boundary on the attainable level of factuality. In the context of MDS, there is a remarkable shift in
the trajectory of R, which increases with no_rep and b. BARTScore maintains the same pattern as
shown in SDS and LDS. BERTScore fluctuates more and confirms its dataset-specific conduct, but
generally benefits from higher values of b, irrespective of no_rep.

Diverse Beam Search (Table 18) In SDS, artificial summaries from XS UM achieve high R scores
when there is an increase in no_rep, a decrease in b, and a low diversity_penalty Λ. On the
other hand, better semantic alignment is achievable with low no_rep, high b, and low Λ. Optimally
tuned hyperparameters make Diverse Beam Search superior to standard Beam Search. In LDS, the R
trend is unchanged, and Λ has less impact on the syntactic surface. In particular, the effectiveness
curve according to BERTScore changes radically, favoring high no_rep, low b, and low Λ. Moving


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 40
                 30

       R
                 20
                 10

               40
BERTScore



               20
                0
              −20
BARTScore


                  0
                 −5
              −10
                   1
  Coverage


                 0.8
                 0.6
                 0.4
                 0.2
                  40
    Density ↓


                 20

                  0
Compression


              800
              600
              400
              200
                0
                  1
   UNR


                 0.9
                 0.8

                 0.3
  NID ↓


                 0.2
                 0.1
                   0
                 400
 Perplexity ↓


                 300
                 200
                 100
                   0
                  70
     Carburacy


                  60
                  50
                  40
                  30
                            XS UM                  C NN /D M               P UB M ED              AR X IV           M ULTI -N EWS              M ULTI -LS
            Greedy Search   Contrastive Search   Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search   Sampling   Top-k Sampling   Top-p Sampling   η Sampling     Beam Sampling



                       Figure 9: Graphical metric score distributions grouped by datasets and strategies.


to MDS, the general results of M ULTI -N EWS improve with increasing b and Λ. In all task families,
there is a consistent upward trend in BARTScore as b and no_rep values increase, except for XS UM.

Sampling (Table 19) In the case of SDS and MDS, the behavior is well-established, suggesting
the adoption of high temperatures to maximize R, BERTScore, and BARTScore. The only outlier
is M ULTI -L EX S UM, hypothesizing that it is due to the extreme length of its inputs, which causes
inaccurate summaries to be generated. Perplexity varies across datasets and shows a weak correlation
with changes in hyperparameters.


                                                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              XS UM                                                                 C NN /D M
               20                                                                       30
 R
               15                                                                       25
               10                                                                       20
                                                                                        15
                                             P UB M ED                                                                AR X IV
                                                                                        35
               30                                                                       30
 R


               20                                                                       25
                                                                                        20

                                        M ULTI -N EWS                                                         M ULTI -L EX S UM
                                                                                       30
               30
               25                                                                      28
 R


               20                                                                      26
               15                                                                      24
                                   25%         50%         75%         100%                                   25%      50%         75%       100%
        Greedy Search   Contrastive Search   Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search   Sampling    Top-k Sampling    Top-p Sampling   η Sampling   Beam Sampling



                              Figure 10: Per-dataset decoding strategy ranking according to R.

                                              XS UM                                                                 C NN /D M
               50                                                                       60
Carburacy


               45                                                                       55
               40                                                                       50
               35                                                                       45
                                             P UB M ED                                                                AR X IV
                                                                                        65
Carburacy


               60                                                                       60
               50                                                                       55
                                                                                        50
               40
                                        M ULTI -N EWS                                                         M ULTI -L EX S UM
               60
Carburacy


                                                                                       58
               55
               50                                                                      56
               45                                                                      54
                                   25%         50%         75%          100%                                  25%      50%         75%       100%
        Greedy Search   Contrastive Search   Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search   Sampling    Top-k Sampling    Top-p Sampling   η Sampling   Beam Sampling



                        Figure 11: Per-dataset decoding strategy ranking according to Carburacy.


Top-k Sampling (Table 20) and Top-p Sampling (Table 21) Excluding M ULTI -L EX S UM, R,
BERTScore and BARTScore improve as temperatures increase. When compared to temperature,
top-k, top-p, and no_rep have very little effect on the metrics. The disparity between Top-k
and Top-p Sampling mainly arises from Perplexity in longer inputs, favoring the latter approach.

η Sampling (Table 22) The behavior of η Sampling appears to be difficult to predict and control.
As for BARTScore, results get better with high no_rep, while cut_off has a large impact only


                                                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                XS UM                                                                 C NN /D M
             −2                                                                                0
BARTScore    −4
             −6                                                                           −5
             −8
            −10                                                                         −10
                                               P UB M ED                                                                AR X IV
                                                                                         −2
BARTScore


             −2
             −4                                                                          −4
             −6                                                                          −6
             −8                                                                          −8
            −10                                                                         −10
                                          M ULTI -N EWS                                                         M ULTI -L EX S UM
                                                                                              −2
BARTScore


             −2
             −4
             −6                                                                         −2.5
             −8
            −10                                                                               −3
                                     25%         50%         75%         100%                                   25%        50%        75%       100%
        Greedy Search     Contrastive Search   Beam Search   Diverse Beam Search   Sampling    Top-k Sampling   Top-p Sampling   η Sampling   Beam Sampling



                        Figure 12: Per-dataset decoding strategy ranking according to BARTScore.

                        Table 12: Best R hyperparameters for decoding strategies across all datasets.
                        Greedy Search                            Contrastive Search                       Beam Search
                                                                 no_repeat_ngram_size=5,
                                                                                                          no_repeat_ngram_size=3,
                        no_repeat_ngram_size=3                   top_k=20,
                                                                                                          num_beams=9
                                                                 penalty_alpha=0.2
                        Diverse Beam Search                      Sampling                                 Top-k Sampling
                        no_repeat_ngram_size=3,                                                           no_repeat_ngram_size=5,
                                                                 no_repeat_ngram_size=5,
                        num_beams=10,                                                                     temperature=1.0
                                                                 temperature=1.0
                        diversity_penalty=0.2                                                             top_k=50
                        Top-p Sampling                           η Sampling                               Beam Sampling
                        no_repeat_ngram_size=3,
                        temperature=1.0,                         no_repeat_ngram_size=5,                  no_repeat_ngram_size=3,
                        top_k=20,                                cut_off=0.002                            num_beams=10
                        top_p=0.4


on M ULTI -L EX S UM. The rise in R often aligns with an increase in no_rep, while variations in
cut_off exhibit a comparatively weaker impact.

Beam Sampling (Table 23) In the case of XS UM, there is a conspicuous positive correlation
between b and the metrics R, BERTScore, and BARTScore (no_rep has a small influence). A
similar pattern is observed for C NN /D M, where optimal performance is achieved with b = 6, followed
by slight oscillations. In LDS, R and BERTScore have opposite trends in P UB M ED and AR X IV. In
MDS, R increases with b and no_rep, with few exceptions in M ULTI -L EX S UM.


J           B EST H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 12 presents the hyperparameters that lead to the best R score (i.e., ≥ 0.9 quantile).


K           B EST D ECODING S TRATEGIES PER DATASET

Table 13 reports the configuration of the top-3 R decoding strategies per evaluated dataset.


                                                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 13: Hyperparameters for the top-3 R decoding strategies per dataset.

 Strategy                 no_rep   num_beams   div_penalty   temperature   penalty_alpha   top_k   top_p   cutoff
 XS UM
 1. Contrastive Search      2          -            -             -             1.0         20       -       -
 2. Top-k Sampling          2          -            -            0.9             -          50       -       -
 3. Top-p Sampling          2          -            -            0.9             -          50      0.6      -
 C NN /D M
 1. Diverse Beam Search     3          5           0.2            -              -           -       -       -
 2. Top-k Sampling          3          -            -            0.9             -          50       -       -
 3. Top-p Sampling          3          -            -            0.9             -           -      0.4      -
 P UB M ED
 1. Contrastive Search      5          -            -             -             0.8         30       -       -
 2. Top-p Sampling          5          -            -            1.0             -          50      0.8      -
 3. Beam Sampling           5          3            -             -              -           -       -       -
 AR X IV
 1. Diverse Beam Search     5         10           0.6            -              -           -       -        -
 2. Top-p Sampling          5          -            -            1.0             -          20      0.6       -
 3. η Sampling              5          -            -             -              -           -       -     0.0003
 M ULTI -N EWS
 1. Contrastive Search      5          -            -             -             0.2         30       -       -
 2. Beam Search             4         10            -             -              -           -       -       -
 3. Beam Sampling           5          9            -             -              -           -       -       -
 M ULTI -L EX S UM
 1. Beam Search             3          8            -             -              -           -       -       -
 2. Diverse Beam Search     3          7           0.2            -              -           -       -       -
 3. Beam Sampling           3          8            -             -              -           -       -       -


L      G UIDELINE
Based on average scores, ranking positions, and hyperparameter sensitivity, we suggest a small-size
decoding space depending on the optimization target and AS type (Figure 13).


                                      🎯


                                                                  🎯
                                                                  🔋



                                                                  🎯
                                                                  🔋



                                                                  🎯
                                                                  🔋


Figure 13: Visual guideline for decoding strategy selection. Optimization target = “What are you
interested in?”; AS type = “What is your Abstractive Summarization scenario?”. The hit symbol,
when included, denotes hyperparameter value recommendations for achieving maximum effectiveness
on the proxy metric. In contrast, the battery symbol signifies the optimal effectiveness-efficiency
trade-off as proposed by Moro et al. (2023c).


M       G ENERATION E XAMPLES
Table 14 shows some input-output examples in an XS UM instance.

N      L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
Additional Decoding Strategies We focused on broadly applicable decoding methods that imple-
ment the same likelihood objective as the models. However, some recent strategies add substantial
further assumptions, goals, non-metric-agnostic outputs, and task-specific constraints to generation.
Among these, we mention FAME (Aralikatte et al., 2021), which dynamically biases the decoder to


                                                         30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Table 14: XS UM case study.
                                                                      Document
 A penalty try and scores from alex goode and chris wyles gave sarries a 24-3 lead at half-time. The bonus point was wrapped up four
 minutes after the break as maro itoje crossed, shortly before richard wigglesworth touched down. Arthur aziza went over for oyonnax but
 schalk brits was awarded a late effort to complete the rout for saracens. Aziza is try was a deserved consolation for the french side, who
 were committed and spirited in their first ever home game in the champions cup, but were outclassed by a saracens team that sits nine
 points clear at the top of pool one. The premiership leaders dominated the scrum, until the introduction of a series of replacements in the
 second half upset their rhythm, and attacked with speed and purpose to signal their credentials as title candidates. New england head coach
 eddie jones will name his first squad next month, and there were plenty of performances from saracens’ english contingent that would have
 caught the attention of the australian. But it was farrell who stood out with creativity and quickness that belied his reputation as a defensive,
 pragmatic fly-half. The england number 10 crashed through a gap in the oyonnax rearguard before swinging a looping pass out wide to
 wyles, who slipped in goode for the visitors’ second try. and farrell was central to the next score, popping up an offload from the ground to
 allow will fraser to find the on-rushing wyles on his way to touching down under the posts. In fact, it may be 26-year-old fraser who gave
 jones the most to think about after this display. the uncapped open-side flanker was impressive with the ball in hand and could provide
 competition for the england number seven shirt, particularly with the future of england captain chris robshaw under scrutiny. Saracens can
 take a step closer to progressing when they host oyonnax in the reverse fixture next weekend. Saracens full-back alex goode said: we are
 really coming alive when we get the ball in good positions at the moment. We are using our strike runners very well. We are getting them in
 the game and we are picking them out. Guys like chris ashton are doing brilliantly in terms of the support lines they are running. We have
 had a young team over the last few years and we have grown together and added layers to our game. We have been close in this tournament
 before, we have our foundations, we are in a good place but we know there is a long journey ahead yet. Teams oyonnax: etienne; tian,
 bousses, taufa, codjo; clegg, cibray; tonga’uiha, maurouard, pungea; power, fabbri; ursache, missoup, wannenburg. replacements: lespinas
 for clegg (51), aziza for cibray (51), m. clerc for pungea (53), guillamon for fabbri (63), faure for wannenburg (60). Not used: bordes,
 rapant, gunther. saracens: goode; ashton, bosch, barritt, wyles; farrell, wigglesworth; m. vunipola, george, figallo; j. hamilton, itoje; rhodes,
 fraser, b. vunipola. replacements: ellery for wyles (55), hodgson for farrell (59), gill for m. vunipola (52), brits for george (52), du plessis
 for figallo (50), brown for itoje (63). not used: wray, de kock. Attendance: 11,400 referee: marius mitrea (italy).
                                                                    Gold Summary
 Saracens ran in six tries to thrash oyonnax and take control of their European Champions Cup group.
                                                                    Greedy Search
 Saracens eased to a bonus-point win over oyonnax in their Champions Cup opener at the Stade Gilbert Brutus in Toulon on Friday night to
 move to the top of Pool One in the tournament for the second year in a row, and extend their unbeaten run to seven matches.. the first time
 they have done so since 1999. and the third time since 2007. in that same match, when they were also beaten by the same French side in
 Paris.
                                                                 Contrastive Search
 Saracens continued their impressive start to the European Champions Cup with a bonus-point win over oyonnax at Stade Gilbert Brutus
 in Toulon on Friday night, to go top of Pool One.The home side ran in six tries against the French side, who were outclassed by a
 much-improved england side at the Madejski Stadium in Sydney on Saturday. the visitors have a game in hand in their next match against St
 Helens on Sunday.
                                                                     Beam Search
 Saracens cruised to a bonus-point win over oyonnax at the Stade Gilbert Brutus in Paris to move top of Pool One of the European Champions
 Cup, and set up a home quarter-final against Tonga or Fiji on 5 March, either side of the second leg of their tie at Twickenham on 7 March..
 andrew farrell scored a hat-trick of tries as saracens thrashed the French side in their opening match of the tournament.
                                                                Diverse Beam Search
 Saracens ran in five tries as they thrashed oyonnax to move top of their Champions Cup pool... the visitors were given a huge boost by the
 decision to award them a bonus-point win.. and. the first try was scored by alex goode..- the first of a number of tries that were scored by the
 visitors in the win over the French side.. alexgoode. and the second try was a penalty..
                                                                       Sampling
 Will fraser scored a try and set up another as saracens ran in four tries to thrash oyonnax in their Champions Cup opener at the Stade Gilbert
 Brutus in Leuven. sacrificial lamb, that was how it was for the English side, who made light work of their first match in the competition
 since taking over from Australia’s Eddie Jones in 2014.adiator farrell was the star of the show, running in two tries and setting up two others.
                                                                   Top-k Sampling
 Saracens ran in six tries to thrash oyonnax in their opening match of the European Champions Cup at the Stade Gilbert Brutus in Paris on
 Friday night, and put themselves in a strong position to progress to the quarter-finals of a tournament they have won three times in the last
 four years, with the highest ever total of 14 tries scored by a British and Irish Lions team in such a fixture. the game was played in English,
 not French, but the score was never in doubt.
                                                                   Top-p Sampling
 Saracens eased to a bonus-point win over oyonnax in their Champions Cup opener at the Stade Gilbert Brutus in Toulon on Friday night, to
 move to the top of Pool One with one game to play in the competition, and to give themselves a chance of progressing to the quarter-finals
 of the European Champions Cup in New Zealand on Sunday, 3 January, with a win over Tonga in their second game of the same fixture on
 the same day.
                                                                      η Sampling
 Saracens eased to a bonus-point win over oyonnax in their Champions Cup opener at the Stade Gilbert Brutus in Toulon on Friday night, to
 move to the top of Pool One. the premiership leaders dominated the scrum, until the introduction of a series of replacements in the second
 half, and have the chance to reach the quarter-finals of the competition for the first time since 2007. hasan farrell scored a hat-trick of tries.
                                                                    Beam Sampling
 Saracens eased to a bonus-point win over French champions oyonnax at Murrayfield in their opening Champions Cup match of the 2016-17
 season.arian farrell scored a hat-trick of tries for the visitors, and they extended their lead at the top of Pool One. eddie jones’ new side got
 their first win under way with victory over the French side at Twickenham. FAA. Wakefield. Omnia.aii. Mahlon. Raganski.


                                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


proactively generate summary tokens that are topically similar to the input, and P INOCCHIO (King
et al., 2022), which restricts Beam Search only to consider tokens that are likely to be supported by
the source text. Future work should investigate their inclusion in the analysis.

Additional Models We conducted a diligent model selection process to identify representative state-
of-the-art encoder-decoder solutions within each AS family (short, long, multi-document). Chosen
models have gained widespread recognition and feature fine-tuned checkpoints from reputable sources
(Meta and AllenAI). In the scope of this study, our emphasis was on evaluating the models most
commonly used by the AS community, rather than those that might gain prominence in the future.
These models belong to a million parameter scale or hardly overcome 10B, a lower boundary often
cited when discussing LLMs (Zhao et al., 2023). Extending our study to LLMs such as GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) and open source alternatives would be noteworthy. However, we underline that resorting
to multiple LLMs would be essential to avoid reaching decoding-level conclusions solely based
on the behavior of a particular model (and not an entire spectrum of modeling techniques), an
aspect frequently overlooked in previous publications (Meister et al., 2022b; Su et al., 2022; Su
& Collier, 2023). Furthermore, limiting the LLM analysis to a subset of AS types would not be
a sound assessment choice. Also, note that, according to our experimental tests, moving from the
440M parameters to the 7B versions of B LOOM (Scao et al., 2022), FALCON (Almazrouei et al.,
2023), or LL A MA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023) averagely increases the decoding time per instance by a
factor of x150. As a result, this would inadvertently multiply the required computational needs and
runtimes. We thereby believe that incorporating LLMs and decoder-only architectures deserves an ad
hoc extension. We know that the choice of the model may introduce bias in interpreting the results
between different families. However, each AS type notoriously requires specific adaptions. Thus, we
opt for the best representative models for each type, following BART-inspired architectures.

Additional Datasets Regarding testbeds, we carefully considered two well-known representative
public datasets per AS type; further analysis should contemplate additional datasets from each AS fam-
ily (e.g., B ILL S UM (Kornilova & Eidelman, 2019a) for SDS and G OV R EPORT (Huang et al., 2021b)
for LDS). Future work should investigate other AS fields, such as dialogue summarization (Feng
et al., 2022), and other NLG tasks, such as question answering.

Multi-Lingual Resources The experimental analysis is focused solely on English. However, it is
important to recognize that this choice was influenced by several factors, including the availability of
datasets and fine-tuned models in the AS settings analyzed. English serves as a lingua franca in many
domains, achieving a broader impact and enabling a substantial body of research to be conducted
effectively due to the wealth of resources. Shifting towards multi-lingual insights necessitates an
entirely new set of models and datasets for each AS type, thus doubling the number of runs and
computational days. We plan to extend our analysis to multi-lingual settings in future work.

Increased Sample Size We recognize that we used a limited set of samples in comparative experi-
ments. Testing all delineated configurations on all entire datasets would inadvertently multiply the
required computational needs and runtimes, becoming unsustainable with our hardware configuration
(Appendix E). To mitigate this problem, we performed stratified sampling, reflecting the population
rightly and avoiding common pure random sampling.

Novel Decoding Strategy This research centers on a thorough comparison of existing decoding
methods alongside exhaustive hyperparameter permutations and evaluation axes. The goal is to grasp
the impact of well-established decoding strategies on AS tasks from a neutral point of view and provide
fresh insights to the community. In contrast to previous work, such as Top-p Sampling (Holtzman
et al., 2020) and Contrastive Search (Su et al., 2022), we avoid presenting another decoding technique
with a shallow evaluation related to affected quality attributes (e.g., naturalness and diversity for
Top-p, coherence for Contrastive Search). For these reasons, the introduction of a new heuristic falls
beyond the scope of our study in favor of a horizontal assessment on an unprecedented scale.

Diversity Metrics We acknowledge that there are multiple ways to summarize a document and that
the lack of diversity in decoded solutions is crippling in the NLG sector, which highlights a relevant
development for our paper. However, the quality and diversity criteria are not equally important in all
tasks, where improving one often comes at the cost of the other (Aralikatte et al., 2021). According


                                                  32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to Meister et al. (2022b), we argue that AS goals place a higher premium on accurate outputs than
alternative ones. This factor is opposite to open-ended domains and tasks such as dialogue generation,
aiming to maintain an enjoyable conversation with a human partner, avoiding repetitions.

Unified Metric Unlike other benchmarks such as GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and SuperGLUE (Wang
et al., 2019), this study uses metrics to evaluate orthogonal quality dimensions in generated summaries,
from prediction-target semantic similarity to source-target compression and actuality. These aspects
encompass different goals, boundaries, and interpretation keys, which make it not viable or sound
to establish a single overall score. It is worth noting that, based on our analysis of the literature, no
previous research has computed a set of 10 distinct NLG metrics to assess artificial summaries, as we
have in P RISM. We hope that our work will help researchers grapple with the identification of the
finest decoding options for AS and set the stage for a new wave of heuristics.

                                  Table 15: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Greedy Search.
                       17.9                                                                 −2.03                                   76.5
                                                              19.8
                      17.85                                                                 −2.04                                    76
                                                              19.7
                                                                                            −2.05                                   75.5
                       17.8
                                                              19.6
                                                  BERTScore


                                                                                       BARTScore
                                                                                                                                     75


                                                                                                                       Perplexity
                      17.75                                                                 −2.06
  XS UM


                                                              19.5                                                                  74.5
                      R


                       17.7                                                                 −2.07
                                                              19.4                                                                   74
                      17.65                                                                 −2.08
                                                              19.3                                                                  73.5
                       17.6                                                                 −2.09
                                                              19.2                                                                   73
                      17.55
                                                                                               −2.1                                 72.5
                                                              19.1
                       17.5
                              2               3                      2            3                   2            3                       2            3
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep
                                                                                                                                    273
                      31.65
                                                              30.1                          −0.34                                   272
                       31.6

                                                               30                                                                   271
                      31.55
                                                                                       BARTScore
                                                  BERTScore


                                                                                            −0.36
  C NN /D M


                                                                                                                       Perplexity
                                                                                                                                    270
                       31.5
                                                              29.9
                      R


                      31.45                                                                 −0.38                                   269
                                                              29.8
                       31.4                                                                                                         268
                                                                                               −0.4
                                                              29.7                                                                  267
                      31.35

                       31.3                                   29.6                          −0.42                                   266

                              2               3                      2            3                   2            3                       2            3
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep
                                                                                            −1.45                                   189
                                                              25.8
                                                                                                                                    188
                       33.8                                                                    −1.5
                                                              25.6                                                                  187
                                                                                       BARTScore
                                                  BERTScore
  P UB M ED


                                                                                                                       Perplexity


                                                                                            −1.55                                   186
                      33.75                                   25.4
                      R


                                                                                                                                    185
                                                              25.2                             −1.6
                       33.7                                                                                                         184

                                                               25                                                                   183
                                                                                            −1.65

                      33.65                                                                                                         182
                                                              24.8
                                                                                               −1.7
                              3        4      5                      3     4      5                   3     4      5                       3     4      5
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep
                                                              22.7
                        35                                                                  −2.26
                                                         22.65                                                                      373
                       34.8                                                                 −2.28
                                                                                       BARTScore
                                                  BERTScore


                                                                                                                       Perplexity


                                                              22.6
  AR X IV


                                                                                                                                    372
                      R


                       34.6                                                                    −2.3
                                                         22.55
                                                                                                                                    371
                       34.4                                                                 −2.32
                                                              22.5


                       34.2                                                                 −2.34                                   370
                                                         22.45

                              3        4      5                      3     4      5                   3     4      5                       3     4      5
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep
                       32.6                                   24.5                                                             38.95
                                                                                            −1.81
  M ULTI -N EWS


                                                         24.48                                                                 38.95
                      32.59
                                                                                            −1.82
                                                                                       BARTScore
                                                  BERTScore


                                                         24.46                                                                 38.94
                                                                                                                       Perplexity


                      32.58                                                                 −1.83
                      R


                                                         24.44                                                                 38.94

                      32.57                                                                 −1.84
                                                         24.42                                                                 38.93

                      32.56                                   24.4                          −1.85                              38.93

                                                         24.38                              −1.86                              38.92
                      32.55
                              3        4      5                      3     4      5                   3     4      5                       3     4      5
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep
                        29                                                                  −2.26                                   31.4
  M ULTI -L EX S UM


                       28.8                                                                 −2.28                                   31.2
                                                              17.5
                       28.6                                                                    −2.3                                  31
                                                  BERTScore


                                                                                       BARTScore


                                                                                                                       Perplexity


                       28.4                                                                 −2.32                                   30.8
                                                               17
                      R


                       28.2                                                                 −2.34                                   30.6

                                                                                                                                    30.4
                        28                                    16.5                          −2.36
                                                                                                                                    30.2
                       27.8                                                                 −2.38
                                                                                                                                     30
                       27.6                                    16                              −2.4
                                                                                                                                    29.8
                              3        4      5                      3     4      5                   3     4      5                       3     4      5
                                     no_rep                              no_rep                           no_rep                               no_rep


                                                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Table 16: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Contrastive Search.
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                          18                                                                                                                                                 −2.04
                                                                                                                                                                    19.6                                                                                                                                            84
                                                                                          17.9                                                                                                                                                −2.06
                                      1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                    19.4                    1                                                                          1                                            82
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha
 XS UM


                                     0.8                                                  17.8                   0.8                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −2.08                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80
                                     0.6                                                                         0.6                                                19.2                   0.6                                                                        0.6
                                                                                          17.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                      78
                                     0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                       0.4                                                −2.1                    0.4

                                     0.2                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                    19                     0.2                                                                                                                      76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                 60       17.6                                                                 60                                                                        60                                                                   60
                                       2
                                                                            50
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50         −2.12                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                           no_                         40                                              no_                         40               18.8                         no_                         40                                             no_                    40               74
                                                 rep                   _k                                                    rep                                                                     r ep                                                                       r
                                                              30
                                                                   top
                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                               to   p_k                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to   p_k                                                ep          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p_k
                                                       3 20                                                                        3 20                                                                      3 20                                                                     3 20        to
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                        Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                    30.1                                                                                                                                       268
                                                                                          31.6                                                                                                                                                −0.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               266
                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −0.38                                                            264
 C NN /D M


                                      1                                                   31.5                    1                                                                         1                                                                          1
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha
                                                                                                                                                                    29.9                                                                                                                                       262
                                     0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                        0.8
                                                                                          31.4                                                                      29.8                                                                      −0.4                                                             260
                                     0.6                                                                         0.6                                                                       0.6                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               258
                                     0.4                                                                         0.4                                                29.7                   0.4                                                                        0.4
                                                                                          31.3                                                                                                                                                −0.42                                                            256
                                     0.2                                                                         0.2                                                                       0.2
                                                                                 60                                                                            60   29.6                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60   254
                                       2                                                                           2                                                                         2                                                                          2
                                                                            50                                                                           50                                                                        50                                                                 50
                                           no_                         40                 31.2                         no_                         40               29.5                         no_                         40               −0.44                         no_                  40            252
                                                 rep                    k                                                    rep                    k                                                r ep                        k                                              rep
                                                              30
                                                                    op_
                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                op_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             op_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30     _k
                                                       3 20        t                                                               3 20        t                                                             3 20        t                                                            3 20      top
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                   26.2                                                                      −1.5
                                                                                          34.2                                                                      26                                                                        −1.55                                                                 190
                                                                                                                                                                    25.8
 P UB M ED


                                      1                                                                           1                                                                         1                                                                          1
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha
                                                                                          34
                                     0.8                                                                         0.8                                                25.6                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1.6                                                                  185
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8

                                     0.6                                                  33.8                   0.6                                                25.4                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1.65                   0.6

                                     0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    180
                                                                                                                                                                    25.2                                                                                              0.4

                                     0.2
                                                                                          33.6                   0.2                                                                       0.2                                                −1.7                    0.2
                                                                                 60                                                                            60   25                                                                   60                                                                   60    175
                                       3                                                                           3                                                                         3                                                                          3
                                                                            50                                                                           50                                                                        50                                                                    50
                                           no_                         40                 33.4                         no_                         40               24.8                         no_                         40               −1.75                         no_ 4                  40
                                              rep4                    _k                                                  rep4                          _k                                          rep4                          _k                                           rep
                                                              30                                                                          30                                                                        30                                                                                  _k          170
                                                                   top                                                                         top                                                                       top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                       5 20                                                                        5 20                                                                      5 20                                                                     5 20        top
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                   23.4
                                                                                          35.4                                                                                                                                                −2.38                                                                 385
                                                                                                                                                                    23.2
                                                                                          35.2                                                                                                                                                −2.4                                                                  380
                                      1                                                                           1                                                                         1                                                                          1
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha
 AR X IV


                                     0.8
                                                                                          35                     0.8                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −2.42                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                          34.8                                                                      22.8
                                     0.6                                                                         0.6                                                                       0.6                                                −2.44                   0.6                                           370
                                     0.4                                                  34.6                   0.4                                                22.6                   0.4                                                −2.46                   0.4                                           365
                                     0.2                                                  34.4                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                    22.4                   0.2                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    360
                                       3
                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60   −2.48                                                           60
                                                                            50                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                          34.2                                                           50                                                                        50                                                                    50
                                           no_                         40                                              no_                         40               22.2                         no_                         40               −2.5                          no_ 4                  40               355
                                              rep4                    _k                                                  rep4                     _k                                               rep4                     _k                                                rep
                                                              30                          34                                              30                                                                        30                                                                                _k
                                                                   top                                                                         top                                                                       top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                       5 20                                                                        5 20                                                                      5 20                                                                     5 20        top
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                          32.6                                                                      24.4                                                                                                                                            43
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1.84
                                                                                          32.5                                                                      24.3
                                      1                                                                           1                                                                         1                                                                          1                                            42
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha


                                                                                          32.4                                                                      24.2                                                                      −1.86
                                     0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                        0.8
                                                                                          32.3                                                                      24.1                                                                                                                                            41
                                     0.6                                                                         0.6                                                                       0.6                                                                        0.6
                                                                                          32.2                                                                      24                                                                        −1.88
                                     0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                       0.4                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                     0.2                                                  32.1                   0.2                                                23.9                   0.2                                                                        0.2
                                                                                 60                                                                            60                                                                        60   −1.9                                                            60
                                       3
                                                                            50
                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                         50         23.8                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50         39
                                           no_                                            32                           no_                                                                       no_
                                              rep4
                                                                       40
                                                                                                                          rep  4                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rep  4                   40                                             no_ 4                  40
                                                              30      _k                                                                  30            _k          23.7                                            30            _k                                           rep                      _k
                                                                   top                                                                         top                                                                       top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                       5 20                                                                        5 20                                                                      5 20                                                                     5 20        top
                                                                                      R                                                                       BERTScore                                                                 BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                          25.6                                                                                                                                                −2.8                                                                  70
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                                                                                                                    13.8
                                                                                          25.4                                                                      13.6                                                                      −2.82                                                                 65
                                      1                                                                           1                                                 13.4                    1                                                                          1
                     penalty_alpha


                                                                                                 penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                           penalty_alpha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      penalty_alpha


                                                                                          25.2                                                                      13.2                                                                      −2.84                                                                 60
                                     0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                        0.8

                                     0.6                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                    13                     0.6                                                −2.86
                                                                                          25                                                                        12.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                           55
                                     0.4                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                    12.6
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4                                                −2.88                   0.4
                                                                                          24.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                     0.2                                                                         0.2                                                12.4                   0.2                                                                        0.2
                                       3
                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60   −2.9                                                            60
                                                                            50
                                                                                          24.6                                                           50         12.2                                                           50                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50         45
                                           no_                         40                                              no_                         40                                            no_                         40               −2.92                         no_ 4                  40
                                              rep4                    _k                                                  rep4                          _k          12                              rep4                          _k                                           rep
                                                              30                                                                          30                                                                        30                                                                                  _k
                                                                   top                                                                         top                                                                       top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  top
                                                       5 20                                                                        5 20                                                                      5 20                                                                     5 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40


                                                                                                                                                                    34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Table 17: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Beam Search.
 XS UM


                      19
                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                                       20                                                                   −2

                                                                        3                                                                3                                                               3               80                                                3
                     R↑


                                                                                       18                                                             −2.2
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rep
                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                      18
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_
                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                                      −2.4
                                                                                       16                                                                                                                                70
                          2    3   4    5                                                2      3   4    5                                                2      3   4    5                                                2      3   4    5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                    6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             102                                                              102                                                             102                                                               102
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams
 C NN /D M


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                      −0.3
                                                                        3                                                                3                                                               3              270                                                3
                                                                                           30
                     R↑


                      31.5                                                                                                                            −0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        260


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                     29.5
                           2                                                                2                                                         −0.52                                                                   2
                               3   4     5   6                                                  3   4     5   6                                                  3   4    5   6                                                   3   4     5   6
                                                 7   8   9   102                                                  7   8   9   102                                                 7   8   9   102                                                   7   8   9   102
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams
 P UB M ED


                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        190
                      34                                                                                                                              −1.4
                                                                        5                                                                5                                                               5                                                                 5
                                                                                       25
                     R↑


                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        180
                                                                                                                                                      −1.6
                      33                                           4                                                                4                                                               4                                                                 4
                                                                                       24
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_
                          2    3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                   2   3   4     5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                    6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                              103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams
 AR X IV


                                                                                       23                                                                                                                               380
                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓


                      35                                                5                                                                5            −2.2                                               5                                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                       22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        370
                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rep
                                                                                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                      34                                                                                                                              −2.4
                                                                   4                   21                                           4                                                               4                                                                 4
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_
                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                      332                                                                                                                             −2.6                                                              3602
                               3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                2      3   4    5                                                       3   4     5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                    6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                              103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams
 M ULTI -N EWS


                      33                                                               25
                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓


                                                                                                                                                      −1.8
                                                                        5                                                                5                                                               5                                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                       24                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ep
                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                      32                                                                                                                              −1.9
                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r


                                                                                                                                    4                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                       23
                          2    3   4    5                                                2      3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                  2    3   4    5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                    6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                              103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                                                                                                            −2                                                           40
                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓


                                                                                       20
                      30
                                                                        5                                                                5                                                               5               35                                                5
                                                                                                                                                      −2.1
                     R↑


                                                                                       19
                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ep


                                                                   4                                                                4                                                               4                    30                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r


                                                                                                                                                      −2.2
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      no_


                      29                                                               18
                        2      3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                   2   3   4    5                                                  2    3   4    5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                    6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                              103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams                                                        num_beams


                                                                                                                                         35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          Table 18: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Diverse Beam Search.
                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                                         BARTScore                                                                                    Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14                                                                                                −2.5
                                                                                                                                                 20.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.6
                                                                                                                                                 20                                                                                    13                                                                                                −2.7                                                                                      92
                     diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   diversity_penalty
                                                1                                                                                                                            1                                                                                         1                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.8                                                                                      90
 XS UM


                                               0.8                                                                                               19.5                       0.8                                                        12                            0.8                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.9
                                               0.6                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                         88
                                                                                                                                                 19                                                                                                                                                                                      −3
                                               0.4                                                                                                                          0.4                                                                                      0.4                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −3.1                                                                                      86
                                               0.2                                                                                               18.5                       0.2                                                        10                            0.2                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                    10                                                                                            10                                                                                                10                                                                                       10
                                                 2                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                9                                             2                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9                                            2                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9        −3.2                            2                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9         84
                                                                                                                7                                                                                                     7                                                                                             7                                                                                            7
                                                         no_                                                                                                                      no_                                                  9                                       no_                                                                                           no_
                                                                                                                        ms                                                                                                ms                                                                                            ms
                                                                                                        6                                                                                                        6                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                                                                 18                                                                                                                                                                                      −3.3                                                               6
                                                               rep                              5
                                                                                                a                                                                                    r    ep                 5                                                                       rep                   5                                                                       rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  bea                                                                                              bea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                            _be                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bea
                                                                                        4                                                                                                                4                                                                                            4
                                                                                3                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             _                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _                          82
                                                                                        num                                                                                                              num                                                                                          num                                                                                           num
                                                                         3 2                                                                                                                   3 2                                                                                          3 2                                                                                           3 2


                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                        BARTScore                                                                                                     Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.4
                                                                                                                                                 32.3                                                                                  30.4                                                                         −0.42                                                                                                          264
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.44                                                                                                          262
                                                                                                                                                 32.2
                     diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   diversity_penalty
                                                1                                                                                                                            1                                                         30.2                           1                                                                                                                                                            260
 C NN /D M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.46
                                                                                                                                                 32.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              258
                                               0.8                                                                                                                          0.8                                                                                      0.8                                            −0.48                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                 32                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                256
                                               0.6                                                                                                                          0.6                                                        30                            0.6                                            −0.5                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   254
                                               0.4                                                                                               31.9                       0.4                                                                                      0.4                                            −0.52                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   252
                                               0.2                                                                                                                          0.2                                                        29.8                          0.2                                            −0.54                                              0.2                                                         250
                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                    10           31.8                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                                          10
                                                 2
                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                        8                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8        −0.56                                                2                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   248
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                         no_                                       ms
                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                 31.7                             no_                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ms               29.6                                    no_                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m s     −0.58                                                    no_                            6            s
                                                               rep                                                                                                                   r                                                                                               rep                                                                                           rep                           eam
                                                                                                5                                                                                                            5                                                                                      5                                                                                                                              246
                                                                                                                                                                                          ep
                                                                                               bea                                                                                                                bea                                                                                     a                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _be
                                                                                        4                                                                                                                4                                                                                        4                                                                                                 4
                                                                                3
                                                                                            um_
                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             _                                                                                  3                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _b
                                                                                                                                                                                                         num                                                                                      num                                                                                               num
                                                                         3 2                                                                                                                   3 2                                                                                          3 2                                                                                           3 2
                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                                     BARTScore                                                                                        Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                 34                                                                                    25                                                                                                −1.7                                                                                      185
                                                                                                                                                 33                                                                                    24
                           diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  diversity_penalty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   180
 P UB M ED


                                                     1                                                                                                                       1                                                                                        1                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −1.75
                                                0.8                                                                                              32                         0.8                                                        23                            0.8                                                                                               0.8

                                                0.6                                                                                                                         0.6                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   175
                                                                                                                                                 31                                                                                                                                                                                      −1.8                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22
                                                0.4                                                                                                                         0.4                                                                                      0.4                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   170
                                                                                                                                                 30                                                                                    21
                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −1.85                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                     3                                                                              9                                         3                                               9                                        3                                                    9                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                            8                                                                                             8                                                                                             8                                                3                                           8             165
                                                         no_                                                        7                            29                               no_                                 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               no_                                 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             no_                                 7
                                                                                                                            ms                                                                                            ams
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ams
                                                                                                            6                                                                                                    6                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ams
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                             r  ep
                                                                     4                              5                                                                                 rep
                                                                                                                                                                                           4                 5                                                                       rep4                 5                                                                        rep4
                                                                                                            bea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _be                                                                                          _be                        −1.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _be
                                                                                            4                                                                                                            4                                                                                            4                                                                                             4
                                                                                    3
                                                                                               _                                                                                                     3                                                                                            3                                                                                             3
                                                                                            num                                                                                                          num                                                                                          num                                                                                           num
                                                                          5 2                                                                                                                  5 2                                                                                          5 2                                                                                           5 2


                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                                     BARTScore                                                                         Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                 36                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 370
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       23                                                                                                −2.5
                                                                                                                                                 35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 365
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22                                                                                                −2.55
                           diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  diversity_penalty


                                                     1                                                                                                                       1                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    360
                                                                                                                                                 34                                                                                                                                                                                      −2.6                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21
 AR X IV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    355
                                                0.8                                                                                                                         0.8                                                                                      0.8                                                                 −2.65                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                 33                                                                                    20                                                                                                                                                                           350
                                                0.6                                                                                                                         0.6                                                                                      0.6                                                                 −2.7                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19                                                                                                                                                                           345
                                                0.4                                                                                              32                         0.4                                                                                      0.4                                                                 −2.75                         0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18                                                                                                                                                                           340
                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                        10       31
                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.8                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                     3                                                                              9                                         3                                               9                                        3                                                    9                                            3                                  9       335
                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8            17                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8                −2.85                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                         no_                                                6
                                                                                                                            ms                                                    no_                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ms                                                  no_                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ms                                                   no_                    6      s        330
                                                             r  ep
                                                                     4                              5
                                                                                                        ea                                       30                                   rep
                                                                                                                                                                                           4                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ea                                                                 rep4                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ea                         −2.9                                      rep4           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _be
                                                                                            4                                                                                                            4                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                    m_b                                                                                                       m_b                                                                                         m_b
                                                                                    3                                                                                                                3                                                                                            3                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                num
                                                                          5 2                                                                                                                  5 2                                                                                          5 2
                                                                                            nu                                                                                                           nu                                                                                           nu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5 2


                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                                     BARTScore                                                                                        Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                 31.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       23.4                                                                                              −1.96
                                                                                                                                                 31.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              44
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       23.2                                                                                              −1.98                                                                                     43.5
                     diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 diversity_penalty


                                                1                                                                                                31.3                        1                                                                                        1                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       23                                                                                                −2                                                                                        43
                                               0.8                                                                                               31.2                       0.8                                                                                      0.8                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22.8                                                                                                                                                                                        42.5
                                               0.6                                                                                               31.1                       0.6                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.02                         0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22.6                                                                                                                                                                                        42
                                               0.4                                                                                               31                         0.4                                                                                      0.4                                                                                               0.4

                                               0.2                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.04                                                                                     41.5
                                                                                                                                    10           30.9                                                                             10   22.4                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                 3                                                                              9                                             3                                               9                                        3                                                    9                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                        8                                                                                                 8                                                                                             8                                                3                                           8             41
                                                         no_                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                 30.8                             no_                                 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22.2                                    no_                                 7                     −2.06                               no_                                 7
                                                            rep4                               am
                                                                                                        6                   s                                                         r    4                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     am       s                                                      rep4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  am        s                                                                               6            s
                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                       ep                    5                                                                                            5                                                                     rep4                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                am                 40.5
                                                                                           _be                                                                                                                   _be                                                                                          _be                                                                                           _be
                                                                                        4                                                                                                                4                                                                                            4                                                                                             4
                                                                                3                                                                                                                    3                                                                                            3                                                                                             3
                                                                                        num                                                                                                              num                                                                                          num                                                                                           num
                                                                         5 2                                                                                                                   5 2                                                                                          5 2                                                                                           5 2


                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                BERTScore                                                                                     BARTScore                                                                                        Perplexity
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                                                                                                 29.4                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.28                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19.5
                     diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                        diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              diversity_penalty


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  diversity_penalty


                                                1
                                                                                                                                                 29.2                        1                                                                                        1                                                                                                                                                            38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.3                            1

                                               0.8                                                                                               29                         0.8                                                        19                            0.8                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2.32                                                                                     36
                                               0.6                                                                                               28.8                       0.6                                                                                      0.6                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18.5                                                                                              −2.34                                                                                     34
                                               0.4                                                                                               28.6                       0.4                                                                                      0.4                                                                                               0.4

                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                 28.4                       0.2                                                                                      0.2                                                                                               0.2                                                         32
                                                 3                                                                              9
                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                              3                                               9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18                              3                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10   −2.36                                                                           9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                        8                                                                                                 8                                                                                             8                                                3                                           8
                                                                                                                7                                                                                                     7                                                                                            7
                                                         no_                                                                                     28.2                             no_                                                                                          no_                                                                                           no_                                 7                 30
                                                                                                            ms                                                                                                           ms                                                                                        ms
                                                                                                        6                                                                                                        6                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                            rep4                                5                                                                                     rep
                                                                                                                                                                                           4                 5                                                                       rep4                 5                              −2.38                                     rep4
                                                                                                        bea                                                                                                          bea                                                                                       bea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bea
                                                                                        4                                                                                                                4                                                                                            4                                                                                             4
                                                                                3
                                                                                           _                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                        num                                                                                                              num                                                                                          num                                                                                           num
                                                                         5 2                                                                                                                   5 2                                                                                          5 2                                                                                           5 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Table 19: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Sampling.


                                                                                                                                                                               80
 XS UM


                                                                             20


                                                                                                                 BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓
                                                               BERTScore ↑


                      15                                  3                                                 3                                                  3                                                 3
                                                                              0                                                −5
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                                               78


                                                                                                           rep
                                                         rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep
                      10                                                                                                                                                       76


                                                                                                       no_
                                                     no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_
                                                                        −20
                          0.8                                             0.8                                             −100.8                                                   0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                12                                                12                                                 12                                                12
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature
 C NN /D M


                                                                                                                  BARTScore ↑   0                                             265


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓
                                                               BERTScore ↑


                      30
                                                                             20
                                                          3                                                 3                                                  3                                                 3
                     R↑


                                                                                                                           −5                                                 260


                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep
                                                         rep


                                                                                                           rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep
                                                                              0
                      20


                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_
                                                     no_


                                                                                                       no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_
                                                                        −200.8                                                                                                255
                          0.8                                                                                                   0.8                                             0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                12                                                12                                                 12                                                12
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature
 P UB M ED


                                                                                                                 BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓
                                                               BERTScore ↑


                                                                             20
                      30
                                                          5                                                 5                                                  5              190                                5
                     R↑


                                                                                                                               −5
                                                                              0
                                                         rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep
                                                                                                           rep


                      20
                                                     4                                                 4                                                  4                   180                           4
                                                     no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_
                                                                                                       no_


                          0.8                                           −200.8                                            −100.8                                                   0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                13                                                13                                                 13                                                13
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature
 AR X IV


                                                                                                                 BARTScore ↑
                                                                BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓


                                                                         20
                      30                                  5                                                 5                  −5                              5              380                                5
                     R↑


                                                         rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep
                                                                                                           rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep


                                                                              0
                      20                             4                                                 4                                                  4                                                 4
                                                     no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_
                                                                                                       no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_


                                                                                                                                                                              360
                          0.8                                                 0.8                                         −100.8                                                0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                13                                                13                                                 13                                                13
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                 BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓
                                                               BERTScore ↑


                      30                                                     20                                                                                                42
                                                          5                                                 5                                                  5                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                                                               −5
                                                                              0
                                                         rep


                                                                                                           rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep



                                                                                                                                                                               40
                      20                             4                                                 4                                                  4                                                 4
                                                     no_


                                                                                                       no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_


                          0.8                                           −200.8                                            −100.8                                                   0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                13                                                13                                                 13                                                13
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                 BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                    Perplexity ↓


                      26                                                 14
                                                          5                                                 5                                                  5               45                                5
                     R↑


                                                                                                                         −2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                rep
                                                         rep


                                                                                                           rep


                                                                                                                                                              rep


                      25
                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                     4                   12                            4                                                  4                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                            no_
                                                     no_


                                                                                                       no_


                                                                                                                                                          no_


                      240.8                                                   0.8                                              −30.8                                               0.8
                                     0.9                                                 0.9                                                0.9                                               0.9
                                                13                                                13                                                 13                                                13
                                temperature                                         temperature                                        temperature                                       temperature


                                                                                                            37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Table 20: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Top-k Sampling.
                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                     BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    84
                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                            −3
                                                                                                        16                                                                      10                                                                            −4                                                                    82
                                             1                                                                                1                                                                               1                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                5
                         temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                          temperature
 XS UM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −5                                                                    80
                                                                                                        14                                                                      0
                                        0.9                                                                                  0.9                                                                         0.9                                                  −6                    0.9                                             78
                                                                                                                                                                                −5
                                                                                                        12                                                                      −10                                                                           −7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    76
                                        0.8                                                                                  0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                        0.8
                                             2
                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                           60   −15                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60   −8                                                              60
                                                                                         50                                                                          50                                                                            50                                 2                                             74
                                                                                                        10                                                                      −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                 no_                               40                                              no_                         40                                                 no_                        40               −9                          no_                      40
                                                       rep                              _k                                               rep                        _k                                               rep                          _k                                         rep
                                                                          30                                                                          30                                                                           30                                                                                   _k
                                                                               top                                                                         top                                                                           top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                  3 20                                                                         3 20                                                                         3 20                                                                   3 20        top
                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                     BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                        32                                                                     30                                                                                                                                                   264
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                                                                                          262
                                                                                                                                                                                20                                                                            −2
                                                                                                        28                                                                                                                                                                                                                          260
 C NN /D M


                                             1                                                                                1                                                                               1                                               −3                     1
                         temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                          temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature
                                                                                                        26                                                                                                                                                    −4                                                                    258
                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9                                                                         0.9                                                  −5                    0.9                                             256
                                                                                                        22                                                                      0                                                                             −6                                                                    254
                                        0.8
                                                                                               60       20                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60   −7                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60    252
                                             2                                                                                 2                                                                              2                                                                       2
                                                                                         50                                                                          50         −10                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −8                                                         50
                                                 no_                               40                   18                         no_                         40                                                 no_                        40                                           no_                      40               250
                                                       rep                          k                                                    rep                    k                                                    rep                       k                                             rep                    k
                                                                                op_                                                                         op_                                                                            op_                                                                  op_
                                                                          30                                                                          30                                                                           30                         −9                                          30
                                                                  3 20         t                                                               3 20        t                                                                3 20         t                                                         3 20        t
                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                     BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                               25                                                                             −2
                                                                                                        32
                                                                                                                                                                                20                                                                                                                                                  190
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                    −3
                                                                                                                                                                                15
 P UB M ED


                                             1                                                          28                    1                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −4                     1
                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                          temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    185


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature
                                                                                                        26                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −5
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                5                        0.9                                                                        0.9
                                                                                                        22                                                                                                                                                    −6                                                                    180
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                        20                                                                      −5                                                                            −7
                                        0.8                                                                                  0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                        0.8
                                                                                               60       18                                                                 60                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −8                                                              60    175
                                             3
                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                     50         −10                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                 no_                               40                   16                         no_                         40                                                 no_ 4                      40                                           no_ 4
                                                       rep4                                                                           rep4                                      −15                                  rep                                      −9                             rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                          30            _k              14                                            30            _k                                                              30            _k                                                                    _k
                                                                               top                                                                         top                                                                           top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               top
                                                                  5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                   5 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    170

                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                     BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    395
                                                                                                        34                                                                      20                                                                            −3
                                                                                                        32                                                                                                                                                                                                                          390
                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                            −4
                                             1                                                                                1                                                                               1                                                                      1
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                                                                                          385
 AR X IV

                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                          temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −5
                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                                                                                5                                                                                                                                                   380
                                        0.9                                                             26                   0.9                                                                         0.9                                                  −6                    0.9

                                                                                                        24                                                                      0                                                                             −7                                                                    375
                                        0.8
                                                                                               60
                                                                                                        22                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                −5                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60   −8                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    370
                                             3                                                                                 3                                                                              3                                                                       3
                                                                                         50                                                                          50                                                                            50
                                                                                                        20                                                                      −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                 no_                               40                                              no_                         40                                                 no_ 4                      40               −9                          no_ 4                    40               365
                                                       rep4                        _k                   18                            rep4                     _k                                                    rep                     _k                                              rep                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   op_
                                                                          30                                                                          30                                                                            30
                                                                               top                                                                         top                                                                           top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                  5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                   5 20        t
                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                     BARTScore                                                             Perplexity
                                                                                                        32                                                                                                                                                   −2
                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                    −3
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                                                                                                  43
                                             1                                                          28                    1                                                                               1                                               −4                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                10
                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                          temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature


                                                                                                        26                                                                                                                                                    −5
                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9                                                                         0.9                                                  −6                    0.9                                             41
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                        22                                                                                                                                                    −7
                                                                                                                                                                                −5                                                                                                                                                  40
                                        0.8                                                             20                   0.8                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                             3
                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                           60   −10                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                         50                                                                          50                                                                            50                                                                    50
                                                 no_                                                    18                         no_                                                                            no_ 4                                                                                                             39
                                                       rep 4                       40
                                                                                                                                      rep  4                   40               −15                                  rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40               −9                          no_ 4                    40
                                                                          30            _k                                                            30            _k                                                              30            _k                                         rep                        _k
                                                                               top                                                                         top                                                                           top
                                                                                                        16                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                  5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                         5 20                                                                   5 20        top
                                                                                                    R                                                                     BERTScore                                                                    BARTScore                                                              Perplexity
                                                                                                        26.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                        54
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                                                        26.2                                                                    14.5                                                                          −2.65                                                                 52
                                        1                                                               26                    1                                                                          1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                14                                                                            −2.7
                     temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                       temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature


                                                                                                        25.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                        48
                                                                                                        25.6                                                                    13.5                                                                          −2.75                                                                 46
                                       0.9                                                                                   0.9                                                                        0.9                                                                         0.9
                                                                                                        25.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                        44
                                                                                                                                                                                13                                                                            −2.8                                                                  42
                                                                                                        25.2
                                       0.8                                                                                   0.8                                                                        0.8                                                                         0.8
                                         3
                                                                                              60        25                     3
                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                12.5                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −2.85                                                           60    40
                                                                                        50                                                                           50                                                                           50                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                 no_                           40                       24.8                       no_                         40                                                 no_ 4                   40                                              no_ 4                    40               38
                                                    rep4                          _k                                                  rep4                     _k                                                    rep                     _k                                              rep
                                                                         30                                                                           30                        12                                                 30                         −2.9                                                 _k
                                                                              top                                                                          top                                                                           top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30                        36
                                                                 5 20                                                                          5 20                                                                        5 20                                                                    5 20        top


                                                                                                                                                                                38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Table 21: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Top-p Sampling.
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                         BARTScore                                                                  Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90
                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −3                                                                       88
                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                             1                                                          16                    1                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −4                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             86
                         temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                         temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −5                                                                       84
 XS UM


                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                        14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   82
                                        0.9                                                                                  0.9                                                                        0.9                                                         −6                     0.9

                                                                                                                                                                               −10                                                                                  −7                                                                       80
                                                                                                        12
                                        0.8                                                                                  0.8                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −8                     0.8                                               78
                                             2                                           0.8|50.0                              2                                    0.8|50.0                                 2                                           0.8|50.0                            2                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                        10                                                                     −20                                                                                                                                                           76
                                                 no_                              0.6|60.0                                         no_                       0.6|60.0                                            no_                              0.6|60.0          −9                           no_                       0.6|60.0
                                                       rep                                                                               rep                                                                        rep
                                                                           0.4|nan
                                                                                        o  p_k                                                        0.4|nan
                                                                                                                                                                    o p_k                                                                  0.4|nan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to     p_k                                      rep             0.4|nan         p_k      74
                                                                 3
                                                                 0.4|20.0
                                                                                _  p|t
                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                               0.4|20.0
                                                                                                                                                              _p|
                                                                                                                                                                 t                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4|20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _p|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4|20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _p |to
                                                                            top                                                                           top                                                                               top                                                                         top
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                         BARTScore                                                                  Perplexity
                                                                                                        32                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −1                                                                       260
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                          −2
                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                                                                                                            258
                                             1                                                          28                    1                                                                              1                                                      −3                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             256
 C NN /D M

                         temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                         temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             temperature
                                                                                                        26                                                                     10                                                                                   −4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             254
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9                                                                        0.9                                                         −5                     0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             252
                                                                                                        22                                                                     0                                                                                    −6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             250
                                        0.8
                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                             0.8                                                                        0.8                                                         −7                     0.8
                                             2                                           0.8|50.0                              2                                    0.8|50.0   −10                           2                                           0.8|50.0                            2                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             248
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −8
                                                 no_                              0.6|60.0              18                         no_                       0.6|60.0                                            no_                              0.6|60.0                                       no_                       0.6|60.0          246
                                                       rep                                                                               rep                                                                        rep
                                                                           0.4|nan
                                                                                       o   p_k                                                        0.4|nan
                                                                                                                                                                 to   p_k                                                                  0.4|nan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to     p_k      −9                              rep             0.4|nan         p_k
                                                                                   p|t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                                                              _p|                                                                               _p|
                                                                 3                                                                             3                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _p|
                                                                 0.4|20.0                                                                      0.4|20.0                                                                          0.4|20.0                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4|20.0
                                                                                 _
                                                                            top                                                                           top                                                                               top                                                                         top
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                         BARTScore                                                                  Perplexity
                                                                                                        34                                                                    25                                                                                                                                                             190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2
                                                                                                        32                                                                     20
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                          −3                                                                       185
                                             1                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                               15                            1
                                                                                                        28                                                                                                                                                          −4                       1
 P UB M ED

                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                         temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             temperature
                                                                                                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                                            180
                                                                                                        26                                                                                                                                                          −5
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                               5                        0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −6                     0.9                                               175
                                                                                                        22                                                                     0
                                                                                                        20                                                                     −5                                                                                   −7                                                                       170
                                        0.8                                                                                  0.8                                                                        0.8                                                                                0.8
                                             3                                                          18                     3                                               −10                           3                                                      −8
                                                                                         0.8|50.0                                                                   0.8|50.0                                                                             0.8|50.0                            3                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                        16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   165
                                                 no_                              0.6|60.0                                         no_                       0.6|60.0          −15                               no_                              0.6|60.0          −9                           no_                       0.6|60.0
                                                       rep4                                                                           rep4                                                                          r       4
                                                                                           p_k                                                                        p_k                                                                                  p_k                                      r    4
                                                                           0.4|nan                      14                                            0.4|nan                                                           ep                 0.4|nan                                                      ep          0.4|nan         p_k
                                                                 5
                                                                                 p|     to                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                              p|t
                                                                                                                                                                 o                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p|t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o                                                                             to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p|
                                                                 0.4|20.0                                                                      0.4|20.0                                                                          0.4|20.0                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4|20.0
                                                                            top_                                                                          top_                                                                              top_                                                                        top_
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                         BARTScore                                                                  Perplexity

                                                                                                        34                                                                     20                                                                                   −3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             390
                                                                                                        32                                                                     15                                                                                   −4
                                             1                                                                                1                                                                              1                                                                               1
                                                                                                        30                                                                     10                                                                                                                                                            380
                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                         temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             temperature
 AR X IV


                                                                                                        28
                                        0.9                                                                                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                               5                        0.9                                                         −6                     0.9
                                                                                                        26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   370
                                                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                    −7
                                                                                                        24
                                        0.8
                                                                                                        22                   0.8                                               −5                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −8                     0.8                                               360
                                             3                                           0.8|50.0                              3                                    0.8|50.0                                 3                                           0.8|50.0                            3                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                        20                                                                     −10
                                                 no_                              0.6|60.0                                         no_                       0.6|60.0                                            no_                              0.6|60.0          −9                           no_                       0.6|60.0
                                                       rep4                                                                           rep4                                                                          r       4
                                                                                           p_k                                                                        p_k                                                                                  p_k                                      r    4
                                                                           0.4|nan                      18                                            0.4|nan                                                           ep                 0.4|nan                                                      ep          0.4|nan         p_k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             350
                                                                 5                   |to                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                            _p|
                                                                                                                                                                to                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _p|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to                                                                             to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _p|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                 0.4|20.0
                                                                                  _p                                                           0.4|20.0                                                                          0.4|20.0                                                                    0.4|20.0
                                                                            top                                                                         top                                                                               top                                                                           top
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                         BARTScore                                                                  Perplexity
                                                                                                        32                                                                                                                                                      −2                                                                           42
                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                        30                                                                                                                                                          −3                                                                       41.5
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                             1                                                          28                    1                                                                              1                                                      −4                      1                                                41
                                                                                                                                                                               10
                        temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                         temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            temperature


                                                                                                        26                                                                                                                                                          −5                                                                       40.5
                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                        0.9                                                             24                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9                                                         −6                     0.9                                               40
                                                                                                        22                                                                     −5                                                                                   −7                                                                       39.5
                                        0.8                                                             20                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                               −10                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −8                     0.8                                               39
                                             3                                           0.8|50.0                              3                                    0.8|50.0                                 3                                           0.8|50.0                            3                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                        18                                                                     −15                                                                                                                                                           38.5
                                                 no_                              0.6|60.0                                         no_                       0.6|60.0                                            no_                              0.6|60.0          −9                           no_                       0.6|60.0
                                                       rep4                                                                           rep4                                                                          r       4
                                                                                           p_k                                                                        p_k                                                                                  p_k                                      r    4
                                                                           0.4|nan                      16                                            0.4|nan                                                           ep                 0.4|nan                                                   ep             0.4|nan         p_k      38
                                                                                        to                                                                          to                                                                               to                                                                         to
                                                                                  _p|                                                                           _p|                                                                              _p|
                                                                 5                                                                             5                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _p|
                                                                 0.4|20.0                                                                      0.4|20.0                                                                          0.4|20.0                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4|20.0
                                                                            top                                                                           top                                                                               top                                                                         top
                                                                                                    R                                                                    BERTScore                                                                        BARTScore                                                                   Perplexity
                                                                                                                                                                               18                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.3
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                                                        28.5
                                                                                                                                                                               17.5                                                                                                                                                          250
                                        1                                                                                     1                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.35                    1
                                                                                                        28                                                                     17
                     temperature


                                                                                                               temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                      temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             temperature


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.4                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                               16.5
                                       0.9                                                              27.5                 0.9                                                                       0.9                                                          −2.45                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                                               16                                                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                        27                                                                     15.5                                                                                 −2.5
                                       0.8                                                                                   0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                 0.8                                               100
                                         3                                           0.8|50.0                                  3                                    0.8|50.0   15                        3                                           0.8|50.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.55                    3                                    0.8|50.0
                                                                                                        26.5
                                                 no_                          0.6|60.0                                             no_                       0.6|60.0                                            no_                          0.6|60.0                                           no_                       0.6|60.0          50
                                                    rep4                                                                              rep4                                                                          r   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −2.6
                                                                                       p_k                                                                            p_k                                                                              p_k                                          r    4
                                                                       0.4|nan                                                                        0.4|nan                  14.5                                  ep                0.4|nan                                                          ep          0.4|nan         p_k
                                                                                       to                                                                           to                                                                               to                                                                          to
                                                                                _p|                                                                             _p|                                                                             _p|
                                                                5                                                                              5                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              _p|
                                                                0.4|20.0                                                                       0.4|20.0                                                                         0.4|20.0                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4|20.0
                                                                           top                                                                            top                                                                              top                                                                          top


                                                                                                                                                                               39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Table 22: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – η Sampling.
 XS UM


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                     19.5                                                             −2.05
                      17.8                                              3                                                                3                                                               3                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                                                                                           19                                                           −2.1
                      17.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         75
                           0.3 0.6 0.9                                                      0.3 0.6 0.9                                                     0.3 0.6 0.9                                                   0.3 0.6 0.9
                                             2                                                                2                                                               2                                                                2
                                                              42                                                               42                                                              42                                                           42
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3
 C NN /D M


                      31.6                                                                                                                                                                                              265
                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑
                                                                                                                                                      −0.35


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                           30
                                                                        3                                                                3                                                               3                                                                3
                      31.4                                                                                                                                                                                              260
                     R↑


                                                                                     29.8                                                               −0.4
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                      31.2                                                           29.6
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        255
                           0.3 0.6 0.9                                                      0.3 0.6 0.9                                               −0.450.3 0.6 0.9                                                    0.3 0.6 0.9
                                             2                                                                2                                                               2                                                                2
                                                              42                                                               42                                                              42                                                               42
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3
 P UB M ED


                                                                                           26
                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                       −1.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                          34                                                                                                                                                                                            190
                                                                        5                                                                5                                                               5                                                                5
                                                                                     25.5                                                              −1.6
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                                                                                                                                        rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                   4                                                                4                                                               4                   180                                          4
                      33.5                                                                 25                                                          −1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                           0.3 0.6 0.9                                                      0.3 0.6 0.9                                                     0.3 0.6 0.9                                                      0.3 0.6 0.9
                                             2                                                                2                                                               2                                                                2
                                                              43                                                               43                                                          43                                                                   43
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3
 AR X IV


                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        380
                                                                        5                                                                5             −2.4                                              5                                                                5
                     R↑


                                                                                           23
                       35
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        360
                                                                   4                                                                4                                                               4                                                                4
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                                                                                     22.5
                          0.3 0.6 0.9                                                   0.3 0.6 0.9                                                    −2.50.3 0.6 0.9                                                       0.3 0.6 0.9
                                             2                                                                2                                                               2                                                                2
                                                          43                                                                   43                                                          43                                                                   43
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓
                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                      32.6                                                                                                                                                                                               42
                                                                                     24.4                                                             −1.85
                                                                        5                                                                5                                                               5                                                                5
                      32.4
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                     24.2                                                                                                                                40
                      32.2                                         4                                                                4                                                               4                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                           24                                                           −1.9
                           0.3 0.6 0.9                                                      0.3 0.6 0.9                                                    0.3 0.6 0.9                                                       0.3 0.6 0.9
                                             2                                                                2                                                               2                                                                2
                                                              43                                                               43                                                              43                                                           43
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                              BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity ↓


                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                              BARTScore ↑


                      25.5
                                                                        5                                                                5              −2.8                                             5               45                                               5
                     R↑


                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                      −2.85
                                                                   4                                                                4                                                               4                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                      24.50.3 0.6                                                           0.3 0.6 0.9                                                 −2.90.3 0.6                                                          0.3 0.6 0.9
                                  0.9        2                                                                2                                                     0.9       2                                                                2
                                                              43                                                           43                                                                  43                                                           43
                                         eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                              eta_cutoff   ·10−3                                               eta_cutoff   ·10−3


                                                                                                                                         40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Table 23: Hyperparameters effect grouped by datasets – Beam Sampling.
 XS UM


                      18.5
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                        3                                                              3            −2.5                                               3                                                                 3
                                                                                      15
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                          −3
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80
                          18
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                      10                                                            −3.5
                           2   3   4     5                                              2      3   4    5                                               2      3   4    5                                                  2    3   4    5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                  6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             102                                                            102                                                             102                                                               102
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams
 C NN /D M


                                                                                      30
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓
                      31.5                                                                                                                                                                                            270
                                                                                                                                                    −0.4
                                                                        3                                                              3                                                               3                                                                 3
                                                                                      29
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      260
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                          31                                                                                                                        −0.6
                                                                                      28
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                                    −0.82                                                             250
                           2   3   4     5                                                 2   3   4    5                                                      3   4    5                                                2      3   4     5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                  6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             102                                                            102                                                             102                                                               102
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams
 P UB M ED


                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                      26                                                                                                                              200


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓
                                                                                                                                                    −1.4
                      34                                                5                                                              5                                                               5                                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                    −1.6
                                                                                      25
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                                                                   4                                                              4                 −1.8                                          4   rep             180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_
                      33                                                              24
                        2      3   4    5                                               2      3   4    5                                                  2   3   4    5                                                   2   3   4     5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                  6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                            103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams
 AR X IV


                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓


                                                                                      23
                      35
                                                                        5                                                              5            −2.4                                               5                                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                      22                                                                                                                              360
                                                                                                                                      rep
                                                                       rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep
                      34
                                                                   4                                                              4                 −2.6                                          4                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                  no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_
                                                                                      21
                      332                                                               2                                                                  2                                                                2
                               3   4    5    6                                                 3   4    5   6                                                  3   4    5   6                                                   3   4     5   6
                                                 7   8   9   103                                                7   8   9   103                                                 7   8   9   103                                                   7   8   9   103
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams
 M ULTI -N EWS


                                                                                                                                                    −1.8
                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓


                                                                                      24                                                                                                                               45
                                                                        5                                                              5                                                               5                                                                 5
                      32
                     R↑


                                                                                                                                                          −2
                                                                       ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rep
                                                                                                                                      ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                   4
                                                                       r


                                                                                                                                  4                                                               4
                                                                                                                                      r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                      22
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_
                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                      31
                        2      3   4    5                                                  2   3   4    5                                                  2   3   4    5                                                  2    3   4    5
                                             6   7   8   9                                                  6   7   8   9                                                   6   7   8   9                                                     6   7   8   9
                                                             103                                                            103                                                             103                                                               103
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams
 M ULTI -L EX S UM


                                                                             BERTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                            BARTScore ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perplexity ↓


                      30                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                        5                                                              5            −2.1                                               5                                                                 5
                     R↑


                                                                                      19
                                                                                                                                                                                                      rep
                                                                       ep


                                                                                                                                      ep


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rep


                                                                                                                                                    −2.2
                      29                                           4                                                                                                                              4                    30
                                                                       r


                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                      r


                                                                                      18                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  no_
                                                                   no_


                                                                                                                                  no_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    no_


                           2                                                               2                                                        −2.32                                                                  2
                               3   4    5    6                                                 3   4    5   6                                                  3   4    5   6                                                   3   4    5    6
                                                 7   8   9   103                                                7   8   9   103                                                 7   8   9   103                                                   7   8   9   103
                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                       num_beams                                                        num_beams


                                                                                                                                      41
