Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S OFT M IXTURE D ENOISING : B EYOND THE E XPRES -
SIVE B OTTLENECK OF D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Yangming Li, Boris van Breugel, Mihaela van der Schaar
 Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
 University of Cambridge
 yl874@cam.ac.uk



                                             A BSTRACT

         Because diffusion models have shown impressive performances in a number of
         tasks, such as image synthesis, there is a trend in recent works to prove (with
         certain assumptions) that these models have strong approximation capabilities. In
         this paper, we show that current diffusion models actually have an expressive bot-
         tleneck in backward denoising and some assumption made by existing theoretical
         guarantees is too strong. Based on this finding, we prove that diffusion models
         have unbounded errors in both local and global denoising. In light of our the-
         oretical studies, we introduce soft mixture denoising (SMD), an expressive and
         efficient model for backward denoising. SMD not only permits diffusion models
         to well approximate any Gaussian mixture distributions in theory, but also is sim-
         ple and efficient for implementation. Our experiments on multiple image datasets
         show that SMD significantly improves different types of diffusion models (e.g.,
         DDPM), espeically in the situation of few backward iterations.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) have become highly popular generative mod-
els for their impressive performance in many research domainsвҖ”including high-resolution image
synthesis (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), natural language generation (Li et al., 2022), speech process-
ing (Kong et al., 2021), and medical image analysis (Pinaya et al., 2022).
Current strong approximator theorems. To explain the effectiveness of diffusion models, re-
cent work (Lee et al., 2022a;b; Chen et al., 2023) provided theoretical guarantees (with certain
assumptions) to show that diffusion models can approximate a rich family of data distributions with
arbitrarily small errors. For example, Chen et al. (2023) proved that the generated samples from dif-
fusion models converge (in distribution) to the real data under ideal conditions. Since it is generally
intractable to analyze the non-convex optimization of neural networks, a potential weakness of these
works is that they all supposed bounded score estimation errors, which means the prediction errors
of denoising functions (i.e., reparameterized score functions) are bounded.
Our limited approximation theorems. In this work, we take a first step towards the opposite
direction: Instead of explaining why diffusion models are highly effective, we show that their ap-
proximation capabilities are in fact limited and the assumption of bounded score estimation errors
(made by existing theoretical guarantees) is too strong.
In particular, we show that current diffusion models suffer from an expressive bottleneckвҖ”the
Gaussian parameterization of backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q is not expressive enough to fit the
(possibly multimodal) posterior probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q. Following this, we prove that diffusion
models have arbitrarily large denoising errors for approximating some common data distributions
qpx0 q (e.g., Gaussian mixture), which indicates that some assumption of prior worksвҖ”bounded
score estimation errorsвҖ”is too strong, which undermines their theoretical guarantees. Lastly and
importantly, we prove that diffusion models will have an arbitrarily large error in matching the
learnable backward process pОё px0:T q with the predefined forward process qpx0:T q, even though
matching these is the very optimization objective of current diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021b). This finding indicates that diffusion models might fail to fit complex data distributions.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) Baseline: vanilla LDM; FID: 11.29.            (b) Our model: LDM w/ SMD; FID: 6.85.

Figure 1: SMD improves quality and reduces the number of backward iterations. Results for
CelebA-HQ 256 ЛҶ 256 with only 100 backward iterations, for LDM with and without SDM. SDM
achieves better realism and FID. Achieving the same FID with vanilla LDM would require 8ЛҶ more
steps (see Fig. 3). Note that SMD differs from fast samplers (e.g., DDIM (Song et al., 2021a)
and DPM (Lu et al., 2022)): while those methods focus on deterministic sampling and numerical
stability, SMD improves the expressiveness of diffusion models.


Our method: Soft Mixture Denoising (SMD). In light of our theoretical findings, we propose Soft
Mixture Denoising (SMD), which aims to represent the hidden mixture components of the posterior
probability with a continuous relaxation. We prove that SMD permits diffusion models to accurately
approximate any Gaussian mixture distributions. For efficiency, we reparameterize SMD and derive
an upper bound of the negative log-likelihood for optimization. All in all, this provides a new
backward denoising paradigm to the diffusion models that improves expressiveness and permits few
backward iterations, yet retains tractability.
Contributions. In summary, our contributions are threefold:

     1. In terms of theory, we find that current diffusion models suffer from an expressive bottle-
        neck. We prove that the models have unbounded errors in both local and global denoising,
        demonstrating that the assumption of bounded score estimation errors made by current
        theoretical guarantees is too strong;
     2. In terms of methodology, we introduce SMD, an expressive backward denoising model.
        Not only does SMD permit the diffusion models to accurately fit Gaussian mixture distri-
        butions, but it is also simple and efficient to implement;
     3. In terms of experiments, we show that SMD significantly improves the generation qual-
        ity of different diffusion models (DDPM (Ho et al., 2020), DDIM (Song et al., 2021a),
        ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), and LDM (Rombach et al., 2022)), especially for few
        backward iterationsвҖ”see Fig. 1 for a preview. Since SMD lets diffusion models achieve
        competitive performances at a smaller number of denoising steps, it can speed up sampling
        and reduce the cost of existing models.


2   BACKGROUND : D ISCRETE - TIME D IFFUSION M ODELS

In this section, we briefly review the mainstream architecture of diffusion models in discrete time
(e.g., DDPM (Ho et al., 2020)). The notations and terminologies introduced below are necessary
preparations for diving into subsequent sections.


                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A diffusion model typically consists of two Markov chains of T steps. One of them is the forward
processвҖ”also known as the diffusion processвҖ”which incrementally adds Gaussian noises to the
real sample x0 P RD , D P N, giving a chain of variables x1:T вҖң rx1 , x2 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , xT s:
                             T
                             Еә                                                  a
           qpx1:T | x0 q вҖң         qpxt | xtВҙ1 q, qpxt | xtВҙ1 q вҖң N pxt ;        1 Вҙ ОІt xtВҙ1 , ОІt Iq,       (1)
                             tвҖң1

where N denotes a Gaussian distribution, I represents an identity matrix, and ОІt , 1 ДҸ t ДҸ T are a
predefined variance schedule. By properly defining the variance schedule, the last variable xT will
approximately follow a normal Gaussian distribution.
The second part of diffusion models is the backward (or reverse) process. Specifically speaking,
the process first draws an initial sample xT from a standard Gaussian ppxT q вҖң N p0, Iq and then
gradually denoises it into a sequence of variables xT Вҙ1:0 вҖң rxT Вҙ1 , xT Вҙ2 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , x0 s:
                                1
                                Еә
         pОё pxT :0 q вҖң ppxT q         pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё pxt , tq, Пғt Iq,      (2)
                                tвҖңT

where Пғt I is a predefined covariance matrix and ВөОё is a learnable module with the parameter Оё to
predict the mean vector. Ideally, the learnable backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q is equal to the
inverse forward probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q at every iteration t P r1, T s such that the backward process
is just a reverse version of the forward process.
Since the exact negative log-likelihood ErВҙ log pОё px0 qs is computationally intractable, common
practices adopt its upper bound L as the loss function
        Ex0 вҖһqpx0 q rВҙ log pОё px0 qs ДҸ E q rDKL rqpxT | x0 q, ppxT qss ` E
                                       looooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooon   q rВҙ log pОё px0 | x1 qs
                                                                             loooooooooooomoooooooooooon
                                                           LT                              L0
                                             Гҝ                                                              (3)
                                        `           E q rDKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qss вҖң L,
                                                    looooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                            1ДғtДҸT
                                                                        LtВҙ1

where DKL denotes the KL divergence. Every term of this loss has an analytic form so that it is
computationally optimizable. Ho et al. (2020) further applied some reparameterization tricks to the
loss L for reducing its variance. As a result, the module ВөОё is reparameterized as
                                            1 Вҙ          ОІt               ВҜ
                             ВөОё pxt , tq вҖң ?     xt Вҙ ?        ПөОё pxt , tq ,                    (4)
                                             Оұt         1ВҙОұ st
                          Еӣt
where Оұt вҖң 1ВҙОІt , Оұ st вҖң t1 вҖң1 Оұt1 , and ПөОё is parameterized by neural networks. Under this popular
scheme, the loss L is finally simplified as
                        T
                        Гҝ                         вҖқ         ?         ?              Дұ
                  LвҖң         Ex0 вҖһqpx0 q,ПөвҖһN p0,Iq }Пө Вҙ ПөОё p Оұ             st Пө, tq}2 ,
                                                              s t x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ                                (5)
                       tвҖң1

where the denoising function ПөОё is tasked to fit Gaussian nosie Пө.

3     T HEORY: DM S S UFFER FROM AN E XPRESSIVE B OTTLENECK
In this section, we first show that the Gaussian denoising paradigm leads to an expressive bottleneck
for diffusion models to fit multimodal data distribution qpx0 q. Then, we properly define two errors
Mt , E that measure the approximation capability of general diffusion models and prove that they
can both be unbounded for current models.

3.1   L IMITED G AUSSIAN D ENOISING

The core of diffusion models is to let the learnable backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q at every
iteration t fit the posterior forward probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q. From Eq. (2), we see that the learnable
probability is configured as a simple Gaussian N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё pxt , tq, Пғt Iq. While this setup is analyt-
ically tractable and computationally efficient, our proposition below shows that its approximation
goal qpxtВҙ1 | xt q might be much more complex.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 3.1 (Non-Gaussian Inverse Probability). For the diffusion process defined in Eq. (1),
                                                                  ЕҷK
suppose that the real data follow a Gaussian mixture: qpx0 q вҖң kвҖң1 wk N px0 ; Вөk , ОЈk q, which
consists of K Gaussian components with mixture weight wk , mean vector Вөk , and covariance matrix
ОЈk , then the posterior forward probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q at every iteration t P r1, T s is another
mixture of Gaussian distributions:
                                                    K
                                                    Гҝ
                              qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң             wk1 N pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q,               (6)
                                                    kвҖң1

where wk1 , Вө1k depend on both variable xt and Вөt .
Remark 3.1. The Gaussian mixture in theory is a universal approximator of smooth probability
densities (Dalal & Hall, 1983; Goodfellow et al., 2016). Therefore, this proposition implies that the
posterior forward probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q can be arbitrarily complex.

Proof. The proof to this proposition is fully provided in Appendix B.

While diffusion models perform well in practice, we can infer from above that the Gaussian de-
noising paradigm pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё pxt , tq, Пғt Iq causes a bottleneck for the backward
probability to fit the potentially multimodal distribution qpxtВҙ1 | xt q. Importantly, this problem is
not rare since real-world data distributions are commonly non-Gaussian and multimodal. For exam-
ple, classes in a typical image dataset are likely to form separate modes, and possibly even multiple
modes per class (e.g. different dog breeds).
  Takeaway: The posterior forward probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q can be arbitrarily complex for the
  Gaussian backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё pxt , tq, Пғt Iq to approximate. We
  call this problem the expressive bottleneck of diffusion models.


3.2   D ENOISING AND A PPROXIMATION E RRORS

To quantify the impact of this expressive bottleneck, we define two error measures in terms of local
and global denoising errors, i.e., the discrepancy between forward process qpx0:T q and backward
process pОё px0:T q.
Derivation of the local denoising error. Considering the form of loss term LtВҙ1 in Eq. (3), we
apply the KL divergence to estimate the approximation error of every learnable backward probability
pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q, t P r1, T s to its reference qpxtВҙ1 | xt q as DKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs. In
Appendix A, we prove that the single-step backward model pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q is optimized towards
qpxtВҙ1 | xt q for training with lossЕҹ L. Since the error depends on variable xt , we normalize it with
density qpxt q into ErDKL rВЁss вҖң xt qpxt qDKL rВЁsdxt . Importantly, we take the infimum of this error
                                          Еҹ
over the parameter space Оҳ as inf ОёPОҳ p xt qpxt qDKL rqpВЁq, pОё pВЁqsdxt q, which means neural networks
are globally optimized. In light of the above derivation, we have the below definition.
Definition 3.1 (Local Denoising Error). For every learnable backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 |
xt q, 1 ДҸ t ДҸ T in a diffusion model, its error of best approximation (i.e., parameter Оё is glob-
ally optimized) to the reference qpxtВҙ1 | xt q is defined as
                             Вҙ                                                        ВҜ
                 Mt вҖң inf Ext вҖһqpxt q rDKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qss
                        ОёPОҳ
                             ВҙЕј                                                                 ВҜ   (7)
                     вҖң inf             qpx   q D KL  rqpx  tВҙ1   | x t q, pОё px tВҙ1 | xt qs
                                      loomoton loooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooon  dx t ,
                        ОёPОҳ   xt
                                   Density Weight       Denoising Error w.r.t. the Input xt

where space Оҳ represents the set of all possible parameters. Note that the inequality Mt Дӣ 0 always
holds because KL divergence is non-negative.

Significance of the global denoising error. Current practices (Ho et al., 2020) expect the backward
process pОё px0:T q to exactly match the forward process qpx0:T q such that their marginals at iteration
0 are equal: qpx0 q вҖң pОё px0 q. For example, Song et al. (2021b) directly configured the backward
process as the reverse-time diffusion equation. Hence, we have the following error definition to
measure the global denoising capability of diffusion models.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3.2 (Global Denoising Error). The discrepancy between learnable backward process
pОё px0:T q and predefined forward process qpx0:T q is estimated as
                                        Вҙ                          ВҜ
                               E вҖң inf DKL rqpx0:T q, pОё px0:T qs ,                     (8)
                                        ОёPОҳ

where again E Дӣ 0 always holds since KL divergence is non-negative.

3.3   L IMITED A PPROXIMATION T HEOREMS

In this part, we prove that the above defined errors are unbounded for current diffusion models.1
Theorem 3.1 (Uniformly Unbounded Denoising Error). For the diffusion process defined in Eq. (1)
and the Gaussian denoising process defined in Eq. (2), there exists a continuous data distribution
qpx0 q (more specifically, Gaussian mixture) such that Mt is uniformly unboundedвҖ”given any real
number N P R, the inequality Mt Д… N holds for every denoising iteration t P r1, T s.


Proof. We provide a complete proof to this theorem in Appendix C.


The above theorem not only implies that current diffusion models fail to fit some multimodal data
distribution qpxt q because of their limited expressiveness in local denoising, but also indicates that
the assumption of bounded score estimation errors (i.e., bounded denoising errors) is too strong.
Consequently, this undermines existing theoretical guarantees (Lee et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2023)
that aim to prove that diffusion models are universal approximates.
   Takeaway: The denoising error Mt of current diffusion models can be arbitrarily large at every
   denoising step t P r1, T s. Thus, the assumption of bounded score estimation errors made by
   existing theoretical guarantees is too strong.


Based on Theorem 3.1 and Proposition 3.1, we finally show that the global denoising error E of
current diffusion models is also unbounded.
Theorem 3.2 (Unbounded Approximation Error). For the forward and backward processes respec-
tively defined in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), given any real number N P R, there exists a continuous data
distribution qpx0 q (specifically, Gaussian mixture) such that E Д… N .


Proof. A complete proof to this theorem is offered in Appendix D.


Since the negative likelihood ErВҙ log pОё px0 qs is computationally feasible, current practices (e.g.,
DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and SGM (Song et al., 2021b)) optimize the diffusion models by matching
the backward process pОё px0:T q with the forward process qpx0:T q. This theorem indicates that this
optimization scheme will fail for some complex data distribution qpx0 q.
Why diffusion models already perform well in practice. The above theorem may bring uneaseвҖ”
how can this be true when diffusion models are considered highly-realistic data generators? The key
lies in the number of denoising steps. As indicated in Eq. (29), the more steps are used, the more
the backward probability, Eq. (2), is centered around a single mode, hence the more the simple
Gaussian assumption holds (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). As a result, we will see in Sec. 5.3 that our
own method, which makes no Gaussian posterior assumption, improves quality especially for few
backward iterations.
   Takeaway: Standard diffusion models (e.g. DDPM) with simple Gaussian denoising poorly
   approximate some multimodal distributions (e.g. Gaussian mixture). This is problematic, as
   these distributions are very common in practice.

    1
      It is also worth noting that these errors already overestimate the performances of diffusion models, since
their definitions involve an infimum operation inf ОёPОҳ .


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4      M ETHOD : S OFT M IXTURE D ENOISING
Our theoretical studies showed how current diffusion models have limited expressiveness to approx-
imate multimodal data distributions. To solve this problem, we propose soft mixture denoising
(SMD), a tractable relaxation of a Gaussian mixture model for modelling the denoising posterior.

4.1      M AIN T HEORY

Our theoretical analysis highlight an expressive bottleneck of current diffusion models due to its
Gaussian denoising assumption. Based on Proposition 3.1, an obvious way to address this problem
is to directly model the backward probability pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q as a Gaussian mixture. For example, we
could model:
                                         K
                                         Гҝ
                pmixture
                 Оё       px tВҙ1 | xt q вҖң   zОёk pxt , tqN pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОёk pxt , tq, ОЈОёk pxt , tqq,     (9)
                                        kвҖң1
             ЕӨK
where Оё вҖң kвҖң1 Оёk , the number of Gaussian components K is a hyperparameter, and where weight
ztk pВЁq, mean ВөkОёk pВЁq, and covariance ОЈkОёk pВЁq are learnable and determine each of the mixture compo-
nents. While the mixture model might be complex enough for backward denoising, it is not practical
for two reasons: 1) it is often intractable to determine the number of components K from observed
data; 2) mixture models are notoriously hard to optimize. Actually, Jin et al. (2016) proved that a
Gaussian mixture model might be optimized into an arbitrarily bad local optimum.
Soft mixture denoising. To efficiently improve the expressiveness of diffusion models, we in-
troduce soft mixture denoising (SMD) pSMD        Оёs
                                                       pxtВҙ1 | xt q, a soft version of the mixture model
pmixture
  Оё      pВЁq, which  avoids specifying     the  number    of mixture components K and permits effective
optimization. Specifically, we define a continuous latent variable zt , as an alternative to mixture
weight ztk , that represents the potential mixture structure of posterior distribution qpxtВҙ1 | xt q.
Under this scheme, we model the learnable backward probability as
                      Еј                                   Еј
         pSMD
           Оё
           s   pВЁq вҖң    pSMD
                         Оёs   px tВҙ1 , z t | x t qdz t вҖң    pSMD
                                                             Оёs  pzt | xt qpSMD
                                                                            Оёs  pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qdzt , (10)

where Оёs denotes the set of all learnable parameters. We model pОёspxtВҙ1 | xt , zt q as a learnable
multivariate Gaussian and expect that different values of the latent variable zt will correspond to
differently parameterized Gaussians:
                                       `                      `      Лҳ                 `      ЛҳЛҳ
             pSMD
               Оёs pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt q вҖң N xtВҙ1 ; ВөОё ЕӨ fП• pzt ,tq xt , t , ОЈОё ЕӨ fП• pzt ,tq xt , t , (11)
where Оё ДӮ Оёs is a set of vanilla learnable parameters and fП• pzt , tq is another collection of parameters
computed from a neural network fП• with learnable parameters П• ДӮ Оё.      s Both Оё and fП• pzt , tq constitute
the parameter set of mean and covariance functions ВөвҖҡ , ОЈвҖҡ for computations, but only Оё and П• will
be optimized. This type of design is similar to the hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2017; Krueger et al.,
2018). For implementation, we follow Eq. (2) to constrain the covariance matrix ОЈвҖҡ to the form Пғt I
and parameterize mean ВөвҖҡ pxt , tq similar to Eq. (4):
                                               1 Вҙ         ОІt                   `      ЛҳВҜ
                   ВөОё ЕӨ fП• pzt ,tq pxt , tq вҖң ?    xt Вҙ ?        ПөОё ЕӨ fП• pzt ,tq xt , t ,             (12)
                                                Оұt        1ВҙОұ st
where ПөвҖҡ is a neural network. For image data, we build it as a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) (i.e.,
Оё) with several extra layers that are computed from fП• pzt , tq.
For the mixture component pОёspzt | xt q, we parameterize it with a neural network such that it
can be an arbitrarily complex distribution and adds great flexibility into the backward probability
pSMD
 Оёs
      pxtВҙ1 | xt q. For implementation, we adopt a mapping gОҫ : pО·, xt , tq ГһГ‘ zt , Оҫ ДӮ Оёs with
    i.i.d.
О· вҖһ N p0, Iq, which converts a standard Gaussian into a non-Gaussian distribution.
Theoretical guarantee. We prove that SMD pSMD     Оёs
                                                       pxtВҙ1 | xt q improves the expressiveness of
diffusion modelsвҖ”resolving the limitations highlighted in Theorems 3.1 and 3.2.
Theorem 4.1 (Expressive Soft Mixture Denoising). For the diffusion process defined in Eq. (1), sup-
pose soft mixture model pSMD
                          Оёs
                               pxtВҙ1 | xt q is applied for backward denoising and data distribution
qpx0 q is a Gaussian mixture, then both Mt вҖң 0, @t P r1, T s and E вҖң 0 hold.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Training                                       Algorithm 2 Sampling
1: repeat                                                    1: xT вҖһ ppxT q вҖң N p0, Iq
2:    x0 вҖһ qpx0 q                                            2: for t вҖң T, . . . , 1 do
3:    t вҖһ Ut1,
           ? T u, Пө вҖһ?N p0, Iq                               3:     Пө вҖһ N p0, Iq if t Д… 1, else Пө вҖң 0
4:    xt вҖң Оұ s t x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ
                          st Пө
                                                             4:      О· вҖһ N p0, Iq
5:     О· вҖһ N p0, Iq
                                                             5:      Latent variable sampling: zt вҖң gОҫ pО·, xt , tq
6:       Latent variable sampling: zt вҖң gОҫ pО·, xt , tq
                                                                                                      ЕӨ
                                           ЕӨ                 6:      Param. for computation: Оёp вҖң Оё fП• pzt , tq
7:       Param. for computation: Оёp вҖң Оё fП• pzt , tq                               Вҙ                          ВҜ
                                     ЕӨ ЕӨ                     7:     xtВҙ1 вҖң ?1Оұ xt Вҙ ?1ВҙОұ  1ВҙОұ
                                                                                             t
                                                                                                 ПөОёp pxt , tq ` Пғt Пө
8:       Param. to optimize: Оёs вҖң Оё П• Оҫ                                         t            s t
                                                             8: end for
 9:      Update Оёs w.r.t. вҲҮОёs}Пө Вҙ Пө p pxt , tq}2
                                    Оё                        9: return x0
10: until converged



Proof. The proof to this theorem is fully provided in Appendix E.

Remark 4.1. The Gaussian mixture is a universal approximator for continuous probability distri-
butions (Dalal & Hall, 1983). Therefore, this theorem implies that our proposed SMD permits the
diffusion models to well approximate arbitrarily complex data distributions.

     Takeaway: Soft mixture denoising (SMD) parameterizes the backward probability as a con-
     tinuously relaxed Gaussian mixture, which potentially permits the diffusion models to well
     approximate any continuous data distribution.


4.2     E FFICIENT O PTIMIZATION AND S AMPLING

While Theorem 4.1 shows that SMDs are highly expressive, it assumes the neural networks are
globally optimized. Plus, the latent variable in SMD introduces more complexity to the computation
and analysis of diffusion models. To fully exploit the potential of SMD, we thus need efficient
optimization and sampling algorithms.
Loss function. The negative log-likelihood for a diffusion model with the backward probability
pSMD
 Оёs
     pxtВҙ1 | xt q of a latent variable model is formally defined as
                                           вҖқ      ВҙЕј                     1
                                                                         Еә                              ВҜДұ
       Eq rВҙ ln pSMD
                 Оёs  px 0 qs вҖң Ex0 вҖһqpx0 q   Вҙ ln               ppxT q         pSMD
                                                                                Оёs  pxtВҙ1 | xt qdx1:T     .    (13)
                                                         x1:T            tвҖңT

Like vanilla diffusion models, this log-likelihood term is also computationally infeasible. In the
following, we derive its upper bound for optimization.
Proposition 4.1 (Upper Bound of Negative Log-likelihood). Suppose the diffusion process is defined
as Eq. (1) and the soft mixture model pSMD
                                       Оёs
                                            pxtВҙ1 | xt q is applied for backward denoising, then an
upper bound of the expected negative log-likelihood Eq rВҙ ln pSMD
                                                               Оёs
                                                                    px0 qs is
                              T
                              Гҝ           вҖқ вҖә                        `?         ?           ЛҳвҖә2 Дұ
             LSMD вҖң C `            EО·,Пө,x0 О“t вҖәПө Вҙ ПөОё ЕӨ fП• pgОҫ pВЁq,tq Оұ s t x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                                     st Пө, t вҖә ,               (14)
                             tвҖң1
                      ?         ?
where gОҫ pВЁq вҖң gОҫ pО·,
                  ЕӨ   ЕӨ Оұ
                        st x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ  st Пө, tq, C is a constant that does not involve any learnable
parameter Оёs вҖң Оё П• Оҫ, x0 вҖһ qpx0 q, О·, Пө are two independent variables drawn from standard
Gaussians, and О“t вҖң ОІt2 {p2Пғt Оұt p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                      st qq.

Proof. The detailed derivation to get the upper bound LSMD is in Appendix F.

Compared with the loss function of vanilla diffusion models, Eq. (5), our upper bound mainly differs
in the hypernetwork fП• to parameterize the denoising function ПөвҖҡ and an expectation operation EО· .


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      DDPM
    DDPM w/ SMD


                                                                                               Training Data


                  10! training steps 5Г—10! training steps 10" training steps   Loss Dynamics

Figure 2: Visualising the expressive bottleneck of standard diffusion models. Experimental
results on synthetic dataset with 7 ЛҶ 7 Gaussians (right), for DDPM with T вҖң 1000. Even though
DDPM has converged, we observe that the modes are not easily distinguishable. On the other hand,
SMD converges much faster and results in distinguishable modes.

Table 1: SMD consistently improves generation quality. FID score of different models across
common image datasets and resolutions. We use T вҖң 1000 for all models.

                           Dataset / Model             DDPM      DDPM w/ SMD     ADM     ADM w/ SMD
                         CIFAR-10 (32 ЛҶ 32)             3.78        3.13         2.98       2.55
                      LSUN-Conference (64 ЛҶ 64)         4.15        3.52         3.85       3.29
                       LSUN-Church (64 ЛҶ 64)            3.65        3.17         3.41       2.98
                       CelebA-HQ (128 ЛҶ 128)            6.78        6.35         6.45       6.02


The former is computed by neural networks and the latter is approximated by Monte Carlo sampling,
which both add minor computational costs.
Training and Inference. The SMD training and sampling procedures are respectively shown in
Algorithms 1 and 2, with blue highlighting differences with vanilla diffusion. For the training pro-
cedure, we follow common practices of (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), and (1) apply
Monte Carlo sampling to handle iterated expectations EО·,Пө,x0 in Eq. (14), and (2) reweigh loss term
}ПөВҙПөвҖҡ pxt , tq}2 by ignoring coefficient О“t . One can also sample more noises (e.g., О·) in one training
step to trade run-time efficiency for approximation accuracy. The source code of this work is pub-
licly available at a personal repository: https://github.com/louisli321/smd, and our lab repository:
https://github.com/vanderschaarlab/smd.


5                 E XPERIMENTS

Let us verify how SMD improves the quality and speed of existing diffusion models. First, we use
a toy example to visualise that existing diffusion models struggle to learn multivariate Gaussians,
whereas SMD does not. Subsequently, we show how SMD significantly improves the FID score
across different types of diffusion models (e.g., DDPM, ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), LDM)
and datasets. Then, we demonstrate how SMD significantly improves performance at low num-
ber of inference steps. This enables reducing the number of inference steps, thereby speeding up
generation and reducing computational costs. Lastly, we show how quality can be improved even
further by sampling more than one О· for loss estimation at training time, which further improves the
performance but causes an extra time cost.

5.1               V ISUALISING THE E XPRESSIVE B OTTLENECK

From Proposition 3.1 and Theorems 3.2, 3.1 it follows that vanilla diffusion models would strug-
gle with learning a Gaussian Mixture model, whereas Theorem 4.1 proves SMD does not. Let us
visualise this difference using a simple toy experiment. In Figure 2 we plot the learnt distribution
of DDPM over the training process, with and without SMD. We observe that DDPM with SMD
converges much faster, and provides a more accurate distribution at time of convergence.


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   SMD I MPROVES I MAGE Q UALITY

We select three of the most common diffusion models and four image datasets to show how our
proposed SMD quantitatively improves diffusion models. Baselines include DDPM Ho et al.
(2020), ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), and Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) (Pinaya et al., 2022).
Datasets include CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), LSUN-Conference, LSUN-Church (Yu et al.,
2015), and CelebA-HQ (Liu et al., 2015). For all models, we set the backward iterations T as 1000
and generate 10000 images for computing FID scores.
In Table 1, we show how the pro- Table 2: SMD improves LDM generation quality. FID
posed SMD significantly improves score of latent diffusion with and without SMD on high-
both DDPM and ADM on all resolution image datasets (T вҖң 1000).
datasets, for a range of resolu-
tions. For example, SDM outper-                    Dataset / Model      LDM LDM w/ SMD
forms DDPM by 15.14% on LSUN-                 LSUN-Church (256 ЛҶ 256)   5.86       5.21
Church and ADM by 16.86%. Sec-                 CelebA-HQ (256 ЛҶ 256)    6.13       5.48
ond, in Table 2 we include results for
high-resolution image datasets, see
Fig. 1 for example images (T вҖң 100). Here we employed LDM as baseline to reduce memory
footprint, where we use a pretrained and frozen VAE. We observe that SMD improves FID scores
significantly. These results strongly indicate how SMD is effective in improving the performance
for different baseline diffusion models.

5.3   SMD I MPROVES I NFERENCE S PEED

Intuitively, for few denoising iterations the distribution qpxtВҙ1 |
xt q is more of a mixture, which leads to the backward probability
pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qвҖ”a simple GaussianвҖ”being a worse approximation.
Based on Theorems 3.2 and 4.1, we anticipate that our models will
be more robust to this effect than vanilla diffusion models.
The solid blue and red curves in Fig. 3 respectively show how the
F1 scores of vanilla LDM and LDM w/ SMD change with respect
to increasing backward iterations. We can see that our proposed
                                                                       Figure 3: SMD reduces
SMD improves the LDM much more at fewer backward iterations
                                                                       the number of sampling
(e.g., T вҖң 200). We also include LDM with DDIM (Song et al.,
                                                                       steps.  Latent DDIM and
2021a), a popular fast sampler. We see that the advantage of SDM
                                                                       DDPM for different iterations
is consistent across samplers.
                                                                       on CelebA-HQ (256 ЛҶ 256).

5.4   S AMPLING M ULTIPLE О·: Q UALITY- COST T RADE - OFF

In Algorithm 1, we only sample one О· at a time for maintaining
high computational efficiency. We can sample multiple О· to estimate the loss better. Figure 4 shows
how the training time of one training step and FID score of DDPM with SMD changes as a function
of the number of О· samples. While the time cost linearly goes up with the increasing sampling times,
FID monotonically decreases (6.5% for 5 samples).

6     F UTURE W ORK
We have proven that there exists an expressive bottleneck in pop-
ular diffusion models. Since multimodal distributions are so com-
mon, this limitation does matter across domains (e.g., tabular, im-
ages, text). Our proposed SMD, as a general method for expressive
backward denoising, solves this problem. Regardless of network
architectures, SMD can be extended to other tasks, including text-     Figure 4: SMD quality is
to-image translation, video generation, and speech synthesis. Be-      further improved by sam-
cause SMD provides better quality for fewer steps, we also hope it     pling multiple О·, see Alg. 1
will become a standard part of diffusion libraries, speeding up both   on LSUN-Conference (64 ЛҶ
training and inference.                                                64) for DDPM w/ SMD.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the anonymous ICLR reviewers for their kind and constructive reviews. Yangming Li also
thanks Accenture for their sponsorship and support.

R EFERENCES
Peter Ahrendt. The multivariate gaussian probability distribution. Technical University of Denmark,
  Tech. Rep, pp. 203, 2005.

Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru Zhang. Sampling is as easy as
   learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In The Eleventh
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=zyLVMgsZ0U_.

SR Dalal and WJ Hall. Approximating priors by mixtures of natural conjugate priors. Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 45(2):278вҖ“286, 1983.

Pieter-Tjerk De Boer, Dirk P Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y Rubinstein. A tutorial on the
  cross-entropy method. Annals of operations research, 134:19вҖ“67, 2005.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8780вҖ“8794. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  49ad23d1ec9fa4bd8d77d02681df5cfa-Paper.pdf.

Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.

David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkpACe1lx.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840вҖ“6851, 2020.

Marco F Huber, Tim Bailey, Hugh Durrant-Whyte, and Uwe D Hanebeck. On entropy approxima-
 tion for gaussian mixture random vectors. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor
 Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems, pp. 181вҖ“188. IEEE, 2008.

Chi Jin, Yuchen Zhang, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Martin J Wainwright, and Michael I Jordan. Local
  maxima in the likelihood of gaussian mixture models: Structural results and algorithmic conse-
  quences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565вҖ“26577,
  2022.

Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=a-xFK8Ymz5J.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.

David Krueger, Chin-Wei Huang, Riashat Islam, Ryan Turner, Alexandre Lacoste, and Aaron
  Courville. Bayesian hypernetworks, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  S1fcY-Z0-.

Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for
  general data distributions. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Score-Based Methods, 2022a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sg19A8mu8sv.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22870вҖ“22882,
  2022b.

Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Diffusion-
  LM improves controllable text generation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=3s9IrEsjLyk.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:5775вҖ“5787, 2022.

Walter HL Pinaya, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Jessica Dafflon, Pedro F Da Costa, Virginia Fernandez,
 Parashkev Nachev, Sebastien Ourselin, and M Jorge Cardoso. Brain imaging generation with la-
 tent diffusion models. In MICCAI Workshop on Deep Generative Models, pp. 117вҖ“126. Springer,
 2022.

Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Francis
  Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1530вҖ“1538, Lille, France,
  07вҖ“09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/rezende15.
  html.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjoМҲrn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684вҖ“10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted InterventionвҖ“
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234вҖ“241. Springer, 2015.

Peter J Rousseeuw and Annick M Leroy. Robust regression and outlier detection. John wiley &
  sons, 2005.

Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. ACM SIGMOBILE mobile
  computing and communications review, 5(1):3вҖ“55, 2001.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256вҖ“2265. PMLR, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=St1giarCHLP.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced score matching: A scalable approach
  to density and score estimation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 574вҖ“584. PMLR,
  2020.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.03365, 2015.
Yufeng Zhang, Wanwei Liu, Zhenbang Chen, Kenli Li, and Ji Wang. On the properties of kullback-
  leibler divergence between gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05485, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    S IGNIFICANCE OF THE L OCAL E RROR Mt

In this part, we show that the backward model pОё pt Вҙ 1 | tq, t P r1, T s is optimized towards the
inverse probability qpt Вҙ 1 | tq in terms of the loss function L as defined in Eq. (3).
Proposition A.1. For a perfectly optimized reverse process tpОё pt Вҙ 1 | tqutPr1,T s (as defined in
Eq. (2)) that minimizes the loss function L (as defined in Eq. (3)), equality pОё ptВҙ1 | tq вҖң qptВҙ1 | tq
holds for every denoising iteration t P r1, T s.

Proof. Following DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and SGM (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020;
Karras et al., 2022), the loss function L can be formulated as
                      вҖқ         pОё px0:T q Дұ
 L вҖң Ex0:T вҖһqpx0:T q Вҙ ln                    вҖң DKL rqpx0:T q, pОё px0:T qs Вҙ Ex0 вҖһqpx0 q rln qpx0 qs. (15)
                              qpx1:T | x0 q
Note that the second expectation term ErВЁs is a constant and the first KL-divergence term DKL rВЁs
reaches its minimum 0 when pОё px0:T q equals qpx0:T q. Therefore, for a perfectly optimized diffusion
model, we have pОё px0:T q вҖң qpx0:T q. Then, for every iteration t P r1, T s, we get
                    Еј                             Еј
   pОё pxtВҙ1 , xt q вҖң pОё px0:T qdx0:tВҙ2 dxt`1:T вҖң qpx0:T qdx0:tВҙ2 dxt`1:T вҖң qpxtВҙ1 , xt q. (16)

Similarly, we also have the following equality:
                      Еј                           Еј
            pОё pxt q вҖң pОё px0:T qdx0:tВҙ1 dxt`1:T вҖң qpx0:T qdx0:tВҙ1 dxt`1:T вҖң qpxt q.                (17)

Based on the above two equations, we finally derive
                                       pОё pxtВҙ1 , xt q   qpxtВҙ1 , xt q
                   pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң                   вҖң               вҖң qpxtВҙ1 | xt q,             (18)
                                           pОё pxt q         qpxt q
which proves the proposition.

The above conclusion indicates that the definition of local denoising error Mt is proper for its use:
quantifying the performance of backward module pОё pt Вҙ 1 | tq.

B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.1

By repeatedly applying basic operations (e.g., chain rule) of probability theory to conditional distri-
bution of backward variable qpxtВҙ1 | xt q, we have
                                                                              Еј
                   qpxt , xtВҙ1 q    qpxt | xtВҙ1 qqpxtВҙ1 q      qpxt | xtВҙ1 q
   qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң               вҖң                          вҖң                     qpxtВҙ1 , x0 qdx0
                      qpxt q                qpxt q                 qpxt q      x0
                                        Еј                                                          . (19)
                     1
                 вҖң        qpxt | xtВҙ1 q     qpxtВҙ1 | x0 qqpx0 qdx0
                   qpxt q                x0
                                               ?
Based on Eq. (1) and qpxt | x0 q вҖң N pxt ; Оұ      st x0 , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                               st qIq, from (Ho et al., 2020), posterior
probability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q can be expressed as
                          ?                    Еј
                   N pxt ; 1 Вҙ ОІt xtВҙ1 , ОІt Iq                a
  qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң                                  N pxtВҙ1 ; Оұ   stВҙ1 x0 , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                                stВҙ1 qIqqpx0 qdx0 . (20)
                             qpxt q             x0

Note that for a multivariate Gaussian, the following holds:
                                  D        1
                                                   Вҙ 1                     ВҜ
           N px; О»Вө, ОЈq вҖң p2ПҖqВҙ 2 |ОЈ|Вҙ 2 exp Вҙ px Вҙ О»ВөqT ОЈВҙ1 px Вҙ О»Вөq
                                                     2
                              1          ЛҮ ОЈ ЛҮВҙ 12   Вҙ 1`   x ЛҳT ` ОЈ ЛҳВҙ1 `    x ЛҳВҜ,
                                    ВҙD                                                              (21)
                          вҖң D p2ПҖq 2 ЛҮ 2 ЛҮ exp Вҙ Вө Вҙ                       ВөВҙ
                                         ЛҮ   ЛҮ
                             О»             О»             2  О»      О» 2        О»
                          вҖң p1{О»qD N pВө; x{О», ОЈ{О»2 q

                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where О» P R` , Вө denotes a vector with dimension D, and ОЈ is a positive semi-definite matrix.
Fromt that, and ОІt вҖң 1 Вҙ Оұt , the following identities follow:

                                                                      xt 1 Вҙ Оұt ВҜ
         $                                                  Вҙ
                            a                          ВҙD
         вҖҷ
         вҖҷ         N px t ;  1 Вҙ  ОІ t xtВҙ1 , ОІt Iq вҖң Оұt
                                                        2
                                                          N  x tВҙ1 ; ?    ,       I
         &                                                             Оұt     Оұt
                                                                                            . (22)
                    a                                       ВҙD
                                                                 Вҙ       xtВҙ1 1 Вҙ Оұ  stВҙ1 ВҜ
         %N pxtВҙ1 ; Оұ                                 ОұtВҙ1 q N x0 ; ?
         вҖҷ
         вҖҷ             stВҙ1 x0 , p1 Вҙ Оұ stВҙ1 qIq вҖң ps        2                  ,        I
                                                                          ОұstВҙ1    Оұ
                                                                                   stВҙ1

Therefore, we can refomulate Eq. (20) as
                       D
               stВҙ1 qВҙ 2 Вҙ
                                               Еј
           pОұt Оұ                   xt 1 Вҙ Оұt ВҜ      Вҙ      xtВҙ1 1 Вҙ ОұstВҙ1 ВҜ
  qpВЁq вҖң                 N xtВҙ1 ; ? ,       I      N x0 ; ?      ,       I qpx0 qdx0 . (23)
               qpxt q               Оұt  Оұt      x0          Оұ
                                                            stВҙ1   Оұ
                                                                   stВҙ1
                                                      ЕҷK
                                              Еҷ 0 q вҖң kвҖң1 wk N px0 ; Вөk , ОЈk q, where K is the
Now, we let qpx0 q be a mixture of Gaussians qpx
number of Gaussian components, wk P r0, 1s, k wk вҖң 1, and vector Вөk and matrix ОЈk respec-
tively denote the mean and covariance of component k.
For the the mixture of Gaussians distribution qpx0 q and by exchanging the operation order of sum-
        ЕҷK                Еҹ
mation kвҖң1 and integral x0 , we have

                                  K вҖқ                D
                                  Гҝ          stВҙ1 qВҙ 2
                                      wk pОұt Оұ       Вҙ       xt 1 Вҙ Оұ t ВҜ
                qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң                    N xtВҙ1 ; ? ,         I
                                kвҖң1
                                          qpxt q              Оұt   Оұt
                               Еј                                                                (24)
                                    Вҙ      xtВҙ1 1 Вҙ ОұstВҙ1 ВҜ Вҙ             ВҜ  Дұ
                             Лҡ     N x0 ; ?      ,       I N x0 ; Вөk , ОЈk dx0 .
                                x0          Оұ
                                            stВҙ1   Оұ
                                                   stВҙ1

A nice property of Gaussian distributions is that the product of two multivariate Gaussians also
follows a Gaussian distribution (Ahrendt, 2005). Formally, we have

                  N px; Вө1 , ОЈ1 qN px; Вө2 , ОЈ2 q вҖң N pВө2 ; Вө1 , ОЈ1 ` ОЈ2 q
                                                                 Вҙ1 Вҙ1 ,                        (25)
                   Лҡ N px; pОЈВҙ1   Вҙ1 Вҙ1
                             1 ` ОЈ2 q   pОЈВҙ1      Вҙ1        Вҙ1
                                          1 Вө1 ` ОЈ2 Вө2 q, pОЈ1 ` ОЈ2 q  q

where Вө1 , Вө2 are vectors
                       Еҹ of the same dimension and ОЈ1 , ОЈ2 are positive-definite matrices. There-
fore, the integral part x0 in Eq. (24) can be computed as
                   Еј      Вҙ      xtВҙ1 1 Вҙ Оұ  stВҙ1 ВҜ Вҙ                ВҜ
                        N x0 ; ?        ,          I N x0 ; Вөk , ОЈk dx0
                     x0           ОұstВҙ1    Оұ
                                           stВҙ1
                         Вҙ      xtВҙ1 1 Вҙ Оұ                ВҜ Еј
                                                                  N px0 ; ВЁ, ВЁqdx0 ,            (26)
                                             stВҙ1
                    вҖң N Вөk ; ?         ,          I ` ОЈk Лҡ
                                  Оұ
                                  stВҙ1    ОұstВҙ1                x0
                                D          a
                    вҖң psОұtВҙ1 qВҙ 2 N pxtВҙ1 ; Оұ stВҙ1 Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                             stВҙ1 qI ` Оұ
                                                                       stВҙ1 ОЈk q Лҡ 1

where the last equation is derived by Eq. (21). With this result, we have
                                      D
                       K вҖқ     Вҙ
                       Гҝ   wk Оұ 2 t
                                           Вҙ ВҜ Вҙ      a                                 ВҜДұ
    qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң                       N ВЁ N xtВҙ1 ; ОұstВҙ1 Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                       stВҙ1 qI ` Оұ
                                                                                 stВҙ1 ОЈk ,      (27)
                       kвҖң1
                             qpxt q

By applying Eq. (25) and Eq. (21), and ОұstВҙ1 Оұt вҖң Оұ
                                                  st , the product of two Gaussian distributions in
the above equality can be reformulated as
             Вҙ       xt 1 Вҙ Оұ t ВҜ         Вҙ        a                                  ВҜ
           N xtВҙ1 ; ? ,           I Лҡ N xtВҙ1 ; Оұ     stВҙ1 Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                    stВҙ1 qI ` Оұ
                                                                              stВҙ1 ОЈk
                      Оұt    Оұt
               D
                   Вҙ ?                                ВҜ
           вҖң Оұt2 N xt ; Оұ st Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                       st qI ` Оұ
                                               s t ОЈk                                       ,   (28)
                                  Вҙ1 xt                               1 Вҙ Оұt
               Вҙ                                         a                                 ВҜ
           Лҡ N xtВҙ1 ; pI ` ОӣВҙ1
                             k q     ? ` pI ` Оӣk qВҙ1 Оұ      stВҙ1 Вөk ,        pI ` ОӣВҙ1
                                                                                    k q
                                                                                        Вҙ1
                                      Оұt                                Оұt

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where matrix Оӣk вҖң pОұt Вҙ Оұ     st q{p1 Вҙ Оұt qI ` Оұ  st {p1 Вҙ Оұt qОЈk . With this result, we have
                   $                      K
                                         Гҝ
                                             wk1 N pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ  qpx tВҙ1  | x t q вҖң
                   вҖҷ
                                         kвҖң1
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ                1      wk           ?
                   вҖҷ
                   &             wk вҖң           N pxt ; Оұ  st Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                        st qI ` Оұ
                                                                                s t ОЈk q
                                         qpxt q                                           ,    (29)
                                                 Вҙ1 Вҙ1 xt
                   вҖҷ                1                                        Вҙ1
                                                                                a
                                 Вө             Оӣ                        Оӣ        Оұ      Вө
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ                k  вҖң pI `    k  q    ?     `   pI `   k q     s tВҙ1 k
                                                           Оұt
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ
                   вҖҷ                     1 Вҙ Оұt
                                 ОЈ1k вҖң           pI ` ОӣВҙ1     Вҙ1
                   вҖҷ
                                                          k q
                   %
                                            Оұt
        ЕҷK
where kвҖң1 wk1 вҖң 1. To conclude, from this equality it follows that posterior probability ppxtВҙ1 |
xt q is also a mixture of Gaussians. Therefore, our proposition holds.

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
Let us rewrite metric Mt as
               ВҙЕј          `
                             Еј
                                                     qpxtВҙ1 | xt q        Лҳ ВҜ
    Mt вҖң inf         qpxt q         qpxtВҙ1 | xt q ln                 dxtВҙ1 dxt
           ОёPОҳ    xt           xtВҙ1                  pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q
               ВҙЕј                                                                         ,                    (30)
                           `                                                         Лҳ ВҜ
         вҖң inf       qpxt q Вҙ HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt qs ` DCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs dxt
           ОёPОҳ       xt

where HrВЁs is information entropy (Shannon, 2001):
                                       Еј
                  HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt qs вҖң Вҙ      qpxtВҙ1 | xt q ln qpxtВҙ1 | xt qdxtВҙ1 ,                              (31)
                                                xtВҙ1

and DCE rВЁs denotes the cross-entropy (De Boer et al., 2005):
                                                Еј
       DCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs вҖң Вҙ        qpxtВҙ1 | xt q ln pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qdxtВҙ1 .                 (32)
                                                         xtВҙ1

Note that the entropy term HrВЁs does not involve parameter Оё and can be regarded as a normalization
term for adjusting the minimum of DKL rВЁs to 0.
Our goal is to analyze error metric Mt defined in Eq. (7). Regarding its decomposition derived
in Eq. (30), we first focus on cross-entropy DCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs. Suppose qpx0 q
follows a Gaussian mixture, then qpxtВҙ1 | xt q is also such a distribution as formulated in Eq. (29).
Therefore, we can expand the above cross entropy DCE as
                Еј
   DCE rВЁs вҖң Вҙ        qpxtВҙ1 | xt q ln pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qdxtВҙ1
                   xtВҙ1
                 Еј         K
                          ВҙГҝ                               ВҜ
           вҖңВҙ                     wk1 N pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q ln pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qdxtВҙ1
                   xtВҙ1     kвҖң1
               K
               Гҝ                                                                                           .   (33)
           вҖң         wk1 DCE rN pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs
               kвҖң1
               K
               Гҝ                                                          K
                                                                          Гҝ
           вҖң         wk1 DKL rN pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs `         wk1 HrN pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k qs
               kвҖң1                                                        kвҖң1

Suppose we set ОЈk вҖң Оҙk I, Оҙk Д… 0, then we have
                           Вҙ 1 ` pОҙ Вҙ 1qs                           ?
                                         ОұtВҙ1 ВҜ?           p1 Вҙ Оұt q Оұ
                 $
                     1             k                                  stВҙ1
                 вҖҷ Вө
                 & k
                 вҖҷ     вҖң                          Оұt xt `                  Вөk
                              1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs
                                          Оұt               1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qsОұt
                           Вҙ 1 ` pОҙ Вҙ 1qs                                     .                                (34)
                 вҖҷ   1             k     ОұtВҙ1 ВҜ
                 %ОЈk вҖң
                 вҖҷ                              p1 Вҙ Оұt qI
                              1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs
                                          Оұt

                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                         ЕҷK       1
With this equation, we can simplify entropy sum              kвҖң1 wk HrВЁs as
      K                                    K                                       K
      Гҝ                                    Гҝ w1  k                    D           Гҝ   wk1
           wk1 HrN pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q вҖң             ln |2ПҖeОЈ1k | вҖң     lnp2ПҖeq `         ln |ОЈ1k |.   (35)
     kвҖң1                                   kвҖң1
                                                 2                    2           kвҖң1
                                                                                      2
Term DKL rВЁs is in fact the KL divergence between two multivariate Gaussians, N pxtВҙ1 ; Вө1k , ОЈ1k q
and N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё pxt , tq, Пғt Iq, which has an analytic form (Zhang et al., 2021):
              1 Вҙ |Пғt I|              1                                       ВҜ
   DKL rВЁs вҖң      ln 1 Вҙ D ` }Вө1k Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq}2 ` TrtpПғt IqВҙ1 ОЈ1k u
              2       |ОЈk |           Пғt
                                                                                            . (36)
      1Вҙ                    1
                                    ВҜ     1     1             2   1 Вҙ Оұt 1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs
                                                                                     ОұtВҙ1
    вҖң    D ln Пғt Вҙ ln |ОЈk | Вҙ D `            }Вө Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq} `                          D
      2                                  2Пғt k                      2Пғt 1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs Оұt
With the above two equalities and the fact that Оұ
                                                stВҙ1 Д… Оұ
                                                       st because Оұt Дғ 1, we reduce term
DCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs as
                                  K
                              1 Гҝ 1 1                     D            1 Вҙ Оұt
                 DCE rВЁs Д…          w }Вө Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq}2 ` lnp2ПҖПғt q `        D.                       (37)
                             2Пғt kвҖң1 k k                  2              2Пғt
Since entropy HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt qs does not involve model parameter Оё, the variation of error metric Mt
                                                     ЕҷK
is from cross-entropy DCE rВЁs, more specifically, sum kвҖң1 . LetвҖҷs focus on how this term contributes
to error metric Mt as formulated in Eq. (7):
          Еј        ГҝK                                K ВҙЕј
                                                     Гҝ                                       ВҜ
                                            2
   ICE вҖң      qpxq      1    1
                       wk }Вөk Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq} dxt вҖң           wk1 qpxq}Вө1k Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq}2 dxt . (38)
            xt      kвҖң1                                      kвҖң1   xt

Considering that Eq. (29) and ОЈk has been set as Оҙk I, we have
           ГҝK ВҙЕј           Вҙ ?                              ВҜвҖә                 вҖә2    ВҜ
   ICE вҖң             wk N xt ; Оұ st Вөk , p1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qsОұt qI вҖәВө1k Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tqвҖә dxt
                                                             вҖә                 вҖә
             kвҖң1     xt
                                                                                   .                   (39)
             Еј         K
                      ВҙГҝ    вҖәВҙ p1 Вҙ Оұ q?ОұstВҙ1 ВҜ     Вҙ             Вҙ ВҜ?      ВҜвҖә2 ВҜ
                                     t
               N pВЁq     wk вҖә                   Вөk Вҙ ВөОё pxt , tq Вҙ ВЁ   Оұt xt вҖә dxt
                            вҖә                                                вҖә
          вҖң
            xt       kвҖң1
                               1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs
                                           Оұt
     ЕҷK
Sum kвҖң1 wk } ВЁ }2 is essentially ? a problem called weighted least squares (Rousseeuw & Leroy,
2005) for model ВөОё pxt , tq Вҙ pВЁq Оұt xt , which achieves a minimum error when the model is
ЕҷK                                           ЕҷK
  kвҖң1 wk pВЁqВөk . For convenience, we suppose   kвҖң1 wk Вөk {p1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qsОұt q вҖң 0 and we have
            Еј               K     вҖәВҙ ВҜ вҖә2 ВҜ                      K                        вҖә2
         Вҙ               ВҜВҙ Гҝ                                   Гҝ      вҖә       Вөk
  ICE Дӣ         N pВЁqdxt       wk вҖә ВЁ Вөk вҖә вҖң p1 Вҙ Оұt q2 Оұ           wk вҖә                  вҖә . (40)
                                  вҖә        вҖә                           вҖә                  вҖә
                                                           stВҙ1
             xt            kвҖң1                                  kвҖң1
                                                                         1 ` pОҙ k Вҙ   Оұ
                                                                                    1qs t

Term HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt qs is in fact the differential entropy of a Gaussian mixture. Considering our
previous setup and its upper bound provided by (Huber et al., 2008), we have
                  K
                 Гҝ       Вҙ            1 Вҙ          ЛҮ 1 ` pОҙ Вҙ 1qs
                                                            k      ОұtВҙ1           ЛҮВҜВҜ
         HrВЁs ДҸ       wk1 Вҙ ln wk1 ` ln p2ПҖeqD ЛҮ                        p1 Вҙ Оұt qIЛҮ
                                                   ЛҮ                              ЛҮ
                 kвҖң1
                                      2               1  ` pОҙ k Вҙ 1qs
                                                                    Оұ t
                                                                                       ,    (41)
                                           K
                 D Вҙ 2ПҖe              ВҜ Гҝ
                                                1      1    D Вҙ         Вҙ1      ВҜВҜ
              Дғ      ln      p1 Вҙ Оұt q Вҙ      wk ln wk ДҸ        ln 2ПҖe      Вҙ 1 ` ln K
                  2       Оұt              kвҖң1
                                                            2            Оұt
where the second ineqaulity holds since p1 ` xq{p1 ` xyq Дғ 1{y, @x P R` , y P p0, 1q and
                                                                ЕҷK
the last inequality is obtained by regarding term Вҙ kвҖң1 as the entropy of discrete variables
rw11 , w21 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , wK
                      1
                        s. Therefore, its contribution to error metric Mt is
                          Еј
                                                                   D Вҙ 2ПҖe            ВҜ
                 IEnt вҖң       qpxt qpВҙHrqpxtВҙ1 | xt qsqdxt Дӣ Вҙ ln            p1 Вҙ Оұt q Вҙ ln K. (42)
                           xt                                      2      Оұt
Combining this inequality with Eq. (37) and Eq. (40), we have
                         K
       p1 Вҙ Оұt q2 Оұ
                  stВҙ1 Гҝ       вҖә       Вөk       вҖә2           DВҙ     Пғt Оұt   1 Вҙ Оұt    ВҜ
 Mt Д…                       wk вҖә                вҖә Вҙ ln K `      ln                 Вҙ 1 . (43)
                               вҖә                вҖә
                                                                          `
             2Пғt        kвҖң1
                                             Оұt
                                 1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs                2    1 Вҙ Оұt     Пғt


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                ЕҷK
with constraint kвҖң1 wk Вөk {p1 ` pОҙk Вҙ 1qs      Оұt q вҖң 0. Since wk Д… 0, 1 ДҸ k ДҸ K, there exists a group
of non-zero vectors rВө1 , Вө2 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , ВөK s satisfying this linear equation, corresponds to a Gaussian
mixture ppx0 q. With this result, we can always find another group of solution rО»Вө1 , О»Вө2 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , О»ВөK s
for О» P R, which corresponds to a new mixture of Gaussians. By increasing the value of О», the first
term of this inequality can be arbitrarily and uniformly large in terms of iteration t.

D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2
Due to the first-order markov property of the forward and backward processes and the fact qpxT q вҖң
pОё pxT q вҖң N p0, Iq, T Г‘ 8, we first have
                                                                    Еӣ1
                                    вҖқ    qpx0:T q Дұ     вҖқ    qpxT q tвҖңT qpxtВҙ1 | xt q Дұ
          DKL rВЁs вҖң Ex0:T вҖһqpx0:T q ln              вҖң Eq ln         Еӣ1
                                         pОё px0:T q         pОё pxT q tвҖңT pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q
                   T                          T
                                                                                            , (44)
                 вҖқГҝ      qpxtВҙ1 | xt q Дұ Гҝ          вҖқ                                     Дұ
          вҖң Eq        ln                  вҖң      Ext DKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs
                  tвҖң1
                         pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q     tвҖң1
where the last equality holds because of the following derivation:
                                              Еј
                      вҖқ    qpxtВҙ1 | xt q Дұ                        qpxtВҙ1 | xt q
                  Eq ln                     вҖң       qpx0:T q ln                   dx0:T
                           pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q     x0:T              p Оё pxtВҙ1 | xt q
                      Еј              Еј
                                   Вҙ                       qpxtВҙ1 | xt q          ВҜ
                                                                                                    (45)
                   вҖң         qpxt q       qpxtВҙ1 | xt q ln                 dxtВҙ1 dxt
                        xtВҙ1          xt                   pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt q
                                 вҖқ                                      Дұ
                   вҖң Ext вҖһqpxt q DKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs .
Based on Theorem 3.1, then we can infer that there is a continuous data distribution qpx0 q such that
the inequality Mt Д… pN ` 1q{T holds for t P r1, T s. For this distribution, we have
                   T
                   Гҝ     Вҙ   вҖқ                                     ДұВҜ Гҝ   T
         DKL rВЁs Дӣ   inf Ext DKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pОё pxtВҙ1 | xt qs вҖң           Mt Д… N ` 1.       (46)
                    tвҖң1                                                       tвҖң1
Finally, we get E вҖң infpDKL rВЁsq Дӣ N ` 1 Д… N for the data distribution qpx0 q.

E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1
We split the proof into two parts: one for Mt , t P r1, T s and the other for E.
                                                                        Еҹ
Zero local denoising errors. For convenience, we denote integral xt qpxt qDKL rВЁsdxt in the def-
inition of error measure Mt as Mt pОёq.   s Immediately, we have Mt вҖң inf s s Mt pОёq.
                                                                                 ОёPОҳ
                                                                                       s With this
equality, it suffices to prove two assertions: Mt pОёq Дӣ 0, @Оё P Оҳ and DОё P Оҳ : Mt pОёq вҖң 0.
                                                   s         s            s   s      s
The first assertion is trivially true since KL divergence DKL is always non-negative. For the second
assertion, we introduce two lemmas: 1) The assertion is true for the mixture model pmixture
                                                                                      Оё      pxtВҙ1 |
                                                                      SMD
xt q; 2) Any mixture model can be represented by its soft version pОёs pxtВҙ1 | xt q. If we can prove
the two lemma, it is sufficient to say that the second assertion also holds for SMD.
We prove the first lemma by construction. According to Proposition 3.1, the inverse forward prob-
ability qpxtВҙ1 | xt q is also a Gaussian mixture as formulated in Eq. (29). By selecting a proper
number K, the mixture model pmixture Оё      pxtВҙ1 | xt q defined in Eq. (9) will be of the same distribu-
tion family as its reference qpxtВҙ1 | xt q, which only differ in the configuration
                                                                            ЕӨ        of different mixture
components. Based on Eq. (29), we can specifically set parameter Оё вҖң 1ДҸkДҸK Оёk as
                    $                            ?
                    вҖҷ   zОёk pxt , tq 9 wk N pxt ; Оұst Вөk , p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                st qI ` Оұ
                                                                        st ОЈk q
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ                                 x t                 a
                       ВөОёk pxt , tq вҖң pI ` ОӣВҙ1    Вҙ1
                                                     ? ` pI ` Оӣk qВҙ1 Оұ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ                         k q                           stВҙ1 Вөk
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    &                                  Оұt
                                       1 Вҙ Оұt                                        ,               (47)
                    вҖҷ  ОЈОёk pxt , tq вҖң         pI ` ОӣВҙ1k q
                                                          Вҙ1
                                          Оұt
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ
                    вҖҷ                  Оұ t ВҙОұst        Оұ
                                                       st
                               Оӣk вҖң             I`           ОЈk
                    вҖҷ
                    %
                                        1 Вҙ Оұt      1 Вҙ Оұt

                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


such that the backward probability pmixture
                                     Оё       pxtВҙ1 | xt q is the same as its reference qpxtВҙ1 | xt q
and thus DKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt q, pmixture
                              Оё       px tВҙ1 | xt qs by definition is 0. In this sense, we also have
Mt pОёq вҖң 0, which exactly proves the first lemma.
We also prove the second lemma by construction. Given any mixture model pmixture       Оё       pxtВҙ1 | xt q as
                                                 L
defined in Eq. (9), we divide the space R (where L is the vector dimension of variable zt ) into K
disjoint subsets tZt,1 , Zt,2 , ВЁ ВЁ ВЁ , Zt,K u such that:
               Еј
                         pSMD
                          Оёs      pzt | xt qdzt вҖң zОёk pxt , tq, Оёk вҖң fП• pzt , tq, @zt P Zt,k ,           (48)
                  zt PZt,k

where k P t1, ..., Ku. The first equality can be true for any continuous density pSMD      Оёs
                                                                                                   and the second
one can be implemented by a simple step function. By setting Оё вҖң H, we have
                        Еј
     SMD
   pОёs pxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң       pSMD
                              Оёs   pzt | xt qN pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОё,fП• pzt ,tq pxt , tq, ОЈОё,fП• pzt ,tq pxt , tqqdzt
                             zt
               K ВҙЕј
               Гҝ                                                                            ВҜ Лҳ
                                                  `
           вҖң                      pSMD
                                   Оёs  pzt | xt qN xtВҙ1 ; ВөfП• pВЁq pxt , tq, ОЈfП• pВЁq pxt , tq dzt
               kвҖң1    zt PZt,k
               K Вҙ
               Гҝ                                               Еј                               ВҜ          ,   (49)
                      `                                  Лҳ
           вҖң         N xtВҙ1 ; ВөОёk pxt , tq, ОЈОёk pxt , tq                  pSMD
                                                                           Оёs  pzt | xt qdzt
               kвҖң1                                             zt PZt,k
               K Вҙ
               Гҝ                                                   ВҜ
           вҖң      N pxtВҙ1 ; ВөОёk pxt , tq, ОЈОёk pxt , tqqzОёk pxt , tq вҖң pmixture
                                                                       Оё       pxtВҙ1 | xt q
               kвҖң1

which actually proves the second lemma.

Zero global denoising error. We can see from above that there is always a properly parameterized
backward probability pSMDОёs
                              for any Gaussian mixture qpx0 q such that qpxtВҙ1 | xt q вҖң pSMD
                                                                                         Оёs
                                                                                             pxtВҙ1 |
xt q, @t P r1, T s. Considering qpxT q вҖң pSMD
                                          Оёs
                                              px T q, we have

          pSMD
           Оёs  pxT Вҙ1 , xT q вҖң pSM
                                Оёs
                                   D
                                     pxT qpSMD
                                           Оёs  pxT Вҙ1 | xT q вҖң qpxT qqpВЁq вҖң qpxT Вҙ1 , xT q.                   (50)
Immediately, we can get qpxT Вҙ1 q вҖң pSMD
                                     Оёs
                                           pxT Вҙ1 q since
                           Еј                             Еј
         pSMD
          Оёs   px T Вҙ1 q вҖң    p SMD
                                Оёs  px  T Вҙ1 , x T qxT вҖң                  qpxT Вҙ1 , xT qxT вҖң qpxT Вҙ1 q.       (51)
                                   xT                               xT

With the above results, we can further prove that pSMD  Оёs
                                                            pxT Вҙ2 , xT Вҙ1 , xT q вҖң qpxT Вҙ2 , xT Вҙ1 , xT q
and pSMD
      Оёs
           pxT Вҙ2 q вҖң   qpx T Вҙ2 q. By iterating this process for the subscript t from T to 1, we will
finally have pОёspx0:T q вҖң qpx0:T q such that E вҖң 0.

F    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1
While we have introduced a new family of backward probability pSMD       Оёs
                                                                              pxtВҙ1 | xt q in Eq. (10),
                     ЕҷT
upper bound L вҖң tвҖң0 Lt defined in Eq. (3) is still valid for deriving the loss function. To avoid
confusion, we add a superscript SMD to new loss terms. An immediate conclusion is that LSMD    T    вҖң0
because ppxt q by definition is a standard Gaussian and qpxT | x0 q also well approximates this
distribution for large T . Therefore, the focus of this proof is on terms of KL divergence LSMD
                                                                                              tВҙ1 , 1 Дғ
t ДҸ T and negative log-likelihood LSMD 0    .
Based on the fact that qpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q has a closed-form solution:
                                 qpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q вҖң N pxtВҙ1 ; Вө
                                                                r t pxt , x0 q, ОІrt Iq,                       (52)
where mean Вө
           r t pxt , x0 q and variance ОІrt are respectively defined as
                               ?                ?
                                 Оұ
                                 stВҙ1 ОІt          Оұt p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                          stВҙ1 q            1ВҙОұstВҙ1
             Вө
             r t pxt , x0 q вҖң            x0 `                    xt , ОІrt вҖң         ОІt ,                      (53)
                                1ВҙОұ st               1ВҙОұ st                  1ВҙОұst

                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we expand term LSMD
                tВҙ1 вҖң Eq rDKL pqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q || pОёs
                                                               SMD
                                                                     pxtВҙ1 | xt qqs as
                                        вҖқЕј                             qpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q        Дұ
     LSMD
      tВҙ1   вҖң Ex0 ,xt вҖһqpx0 qqpxt |x0 q        qpx tВҙ1 | x t , x0 q ln                    dx tВҙ1
                                          xtВҙ1                         pSMD  pxtВҙ1 | xt q
                вҖқ                            Дұ         вҖқ                Оёs
                                                                                                  Дұ.                               (54)
                                                                               SMD
            вҖң Eq Вҙ HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q ` DCE qpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pОёs pxtВҙ1 | xt qs
Considering our new definition of backward probability pSMD             Оёs
                                                                                 pxtВҙ1 | xt q in Eq. (10) and applying
JensenвҖҷs inequality, we can infer
                                       вҖқ Еј                                                                       Дұ
     DCE rВЁs вҖң ВҙExtВҙ1 вҖһqpxtВҙ1 |xt ,x0 q ln       pSMD
                                                   Оёs      pzt | xt qpSMD     Оёs     pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qdzt
                                             zt
                                       вҖқ                                                                        Дұ
                                                                            SMD
             вҖң ВҙExtВҙ1 вҖһqpxtВҙ1 |xt ,x0 q ln Ezt вҖһpSMD         pzt |xt q rp   Оё
                                                                            s       px tВҙ1  | x  t , z t qdz t s
                                                      Оёs
                                       вҖқ                                                                        Дұ
                                                                           SMD
             ДҸ ВҙExtВҙ1 вҖһqpxtВҙ1 |xt ,x0 q Ezt вҖһpSMD       pzt |xt q rln   p  Оёs      px tВҙ1  |  x   ,
                                                                                                t t z   qdz t s     . (55)
                                                Оёs
                                   вҖқ Еј                                                                             Дұ
             вҖң Ezt вҖһpSMD
                      Оё   pzt |xt q Вҙ       qpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q ln pSMD           Оёs     pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qdxtВҙ1
                                                   xtВҙ1
                                        вҖқ                                                       Дұ
                                                                      SMD
                  вҖң Ezt вҖһpSMD pzt |xt q  D CE rqpxtВҙ1 | x t , x 0 q, pОёs  px tВҙ1 | x t , z t qs
                          s   Оё

Combining the above two equations, we have
            вҖқ                                                                                     Дұ
 LSMD
  tВҙ1 ДҸ Eq Вҙ HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 qs ` Ezt rDCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pОёs
                                                                           SMD
                                                                               pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qss
               вҖқ                                                                               Дұ
       вҖң Eq,zt Вҙ HrqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 qs ` DCE rqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pSMD  Оёs   pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qs    . (56)
             вҖқ                                                                           Дұ
       вҖң Ezt Ex0 ,xt вҖһqpx0 qqpxt |x0 q rDKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pSMD
                                                                  Оёs  pxtВҙ1 | xt , zt qss
Considering zt вҖң gПҶ pО·, xt , tq and applying the law of the unconscious statistician (LO-
TUS) (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), we can simplify the above inequality as
                          вҖң                                                               вҖ°
         LSMD                                            SMD
          tВҙ1 ДҸ EО·вҖһN p0,Iq Eq rDKL rqpxtВҙ1 | xt , x0 q, pОёs  pxtВҙ1 | xt , gОҫ pО·, xt , tqss . (57)
The inner term of expectation EО·вҖһN p0,Iq rВЁs is essentially the same as the old definition of LSMDt   in
Eq. (3), except that term pОёspВЁq is additionally conditional on zt . Hence, we follow the procedure of
DDPM Ho et al. (2020) to reduce it. The result is given without proving:
      $
      &LSMD ДҸ C ` E
                                 вҖқ        ОІt2                       ?         ?               Дұ
                                                                                   st Пө, tq}2
      вҖҷ
           tВҙ1       t    О·,Пө,x0                    }Пө Вҙ ПөОё,fП• pВЁq p Оұs t x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ
                                   2Пғt Оұt p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                               st q                                             ,   (58)
      % f pВЁq вҖң f pg pО·, ?Оұ
      вҖҷ                                 ?
              П•           П•    s x ` 1ВҙОұ
                               Оҫ          t 0  s Пө, tq, tq    t

where Ct is a constant, О·, Пө вҖһ N p0, Iq, and parameters Оё, П•, Оҫ are learnable.
For the negative log-likelihood LSMD0     вҖң Eq rВҙ ln pSMD
                                                       Оёs
                                                           px0 | x1 qs, we expand it as
                                        вҖқ     ВҙЕј                                                  ВҜДұ
      LSMD
        0    вҖң Ex0 ,x1 вҖһqpx0 qqpx1 |x0 q Вҙ ln       pSMD
                                                     Оё
                                                     s    pz 1 | x 1 qp SMD
                                                                        Оё
                                                                        s   px0 | x 1 , z 1 qdz 1   .                              (59)
                                                               z1
By applying JensenвҖҷs inequality, we have
                                 вҖқ Еј                                                                            Дұ
            LSMD
             0     ДҸ  Ex 0 ,x  1
                                    Вҙ          p SMD
                                                 Оёs       pz  1   | x 1 q ln pSMD
                                                                              Оёs     px 0 | x  1 , z 1 qdz    1
                                         z1
                                 вҖқ                                                              Дұ
                   вҖң Ex0 ,x1 Ez1 вҖһpSMD               pz  1 |x 1 q rВҙ  ln  pОёspx0 | x1 , z1 qs                                 ,      (60)
                                             Оёs
                                                              вҖқ           вҖқ 1                                              ДұДұ
                   вҖң C1 ` Ez1 вҖһpSMD              pz 1 |x  1 q   Ex0 ,x1          }x0 Вҙ ВөОё,fП• pz1 ,tq px1 , 1q}2
                                         Оё
                                         s
                                                                            2Пғ1
                                                                                                                 ЕӨ ЕӨ
where C1 is a constant that does not involve with the model parameter Оёs вҖң Оё П• Оҫ. Considering
Eq. (1) and Eq. (12), we can convert this inequality into
                                              вҖқ             вҖқ           ОІ12                                                 ДұДұ
    LSMD
      0    ДҸ C1 ` Ez1 вҖһpSMD        pz1 |x 1 q   E   x 0 ,Пө                           }Пө Вҙ   Пө Оё,f  П• pz 1 ,tq px  1 , 1q} 2
                            Оёs                                2Пғ1 Оұ1 p1 Вҙ Оұ     s1 q
                               вҖқ           ОІ1  2                                        ?                 ?                       Дұ, (61)
                                                                                                                                2
           вҖң C1 ` EО·,Пө,x0                                     }Пө Вҙ ПөОё,fП• pgОҫ pВЁq,tq p Оұ    s 1 x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ             s1 Пө, 1q}
                                 2Пғ1 Оұ1 p1 Вҙ Оұ        s1 q

                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where О·, Пө вҖһ N p0, Iq, and the second equality is also derived by LOTUS.
Finally, by combining Eq. (58) and Eq. (61), we have
                                                        T
                                                        Гҝ
                 Eq rВҙ log pSMD
                            Оёs  px0 qs ДҸ LSMD вҖң               LSMD
                                                               t
                                                        tвҖң0
                                                                                      ,   (62)
                         T
                         Гҝ            вҖқ                   ?         ?              2
                                                                                     Дұ
                 вҖңC`           EО·,Пө,x0 О“t }Пө Вҙ ПөОё,fП• pВЁq p Оұs t x0 ` 1 Вҙ Оұ
                                                                         st Пө, tq}
                         tвҖң1
            ЕҷT                2
where C вҖң    tвҖң1 Ct and О“t вҖң ОІt {p2Пғt Оұt p1 Вҙ Оұ
                                              st qq.

G    G ENERATED S AMPLES
Some images generated by our models (e.g., LDM w/ SMD) are in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (a) Synthesized images of LSUN Church           (b) Synthesized images of LSUN Conference

                    Figure 5: 64 ЛҶ 64 images generated by DDPM w/ SMD.


Figure 6: Generated images on CelebA-HQ 128 ЛҶ 128 (left) and 256 ЛҶ 256 (right). The left samples
are from DDPM w/ SMD and the right ones from LDM w/ SMD.


                                               21
