Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ANIPULATING DROPOUT REVEALS AN OPTIMAL
BALANCE OF EFFICIENCY AND ROBUSTNESS IN BIO -
LOGICAL AND MACHINE VISUAL SYSTEMS

 Jacob S. Prince 1 ∗, Gabriel Fajardo 2 , George A. Alvarez 1 & Talia Konkle 1
 1
   Harvard University, Department of Psychology
 2
   Boston College, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience



                                                A BSTRACT

              According to the efficient coding hypothesis, neural populations encode informa-
              tion optimally when representations are high-dimensional and uncorrelated. How-
              ever, such codes may carry a cost in terms of generalization and robustness. Past
              empirical studies of early visual cortex (V1) in rodents have suggested that this
              tradeoff indeed constrains sensory representations. However, it remains unclear
              whether these insights generalize across the hierarchy of the human visual system,
              and particularly to object representations in high-level occipitotemporal cortex
              (OTC). To gain new empirical clarity, here we develop a family of object recog-
              nition models with parametrically varying dropout proportion (p), which induces
              systematically varying dimensionality of internal responses (while controlling all
              other inductive biases). We find that increasing dropout produces an increasingly
              smooth, low-dimensional representational space. Optimal robustness to lesion-
              ing is observed at around 70% dropout, after which both accuracy and robustness
              decline. Representational comparison to large-scale 7T fMRI data from occipi-
              totemporal cortex in the Natural Scenes Dataset reveals that this optimal degree
              of dropout is also associated with maximal emergent neural predictivity. Finally,
              using new techniques for achieving denoised estimates of the eigenspectrum of hu-
              man fMRI responses, we compare the rate of eigenspectrum decay between model
              and brain feature spaces. We observe that the match between model and brain
              representations is associated with a common balance between efficiency and ro-
              bustness in the representational space. These results suggest that varying dropout
              may reveal an optimal point of balance between the efficiency of high-dimensional
              codes and the robustness of low dimensional codes in hierarchical vision systems.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Biological and artificial visual systems must convert rich high-dimensional input data into a more
compact, meaningful representational format to support downstream tasks. A core tension in this
process relates to the nature of the sensory coding scheme. On one hand, the efficient coding hypoth-
esis posits that visual systems should employ sparse, high-dimensional representations to capture the
statistical regularities of the natural world with minimal redundancy (Barlow, 1959; Olshausen &
Field, 1996; Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001; Olshausen & Field, 2004; Ganguli & Sompolinsky,
2012). Alternatively, distributed coding schemes implement a broader distribution of information
across neurons or computational units, thereby enhancing robustness and generalizability at the ex-
pense of efficiency (Shadlen & Newsome, 1998; Reich et al., 2001; Haxby et al., 2001; Cunningham
& Yu, 2014). It remains unclear how the human visual system navigates this trade-off to function
optimally in naturalistic contexts. To address this gap, here we directly instantiate this theoretical
tension in a family of object recognition neural network models, which enables us to study where
the human visual system falls within the sparse-to-distributed coding continuum.
Sparse coding schemes aim to maximize representational capacity by employing efficient informa-
tion encoding with minimal redundancy (Barlow, 1959). Prior work suggests the benefit of sparse
     ∗
         Corresponding author: jprince@g.harvard.edu


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


codes as a basis feature set in early stages of visual processing (Olshausen & Field, 1997; Vinje
& Gallant, 2000) and for tasks like few-shot learning (Sorscher et al., 2022). While useful for
representing the complexity of sensory inputs with fine-grained detail, such codes may be vulnera-
ble to noise and perturbations, potentially yielding unstable population responses given small input
changes (Stringer et al., 2019). Furthermore, extracting meaningful information from sparse rep-
resentations may impose a significant readout challenge for downstream neurons or computational
units. Precisely because the information is localized, readout depends on knowing “where to look”
within the large, high-dimensional space to extract the relevant signals.
In contrast, distributed coding schemes involve a more expansive set of units in representing a given
stimulus, thereby introducing redundancy into the population code (Reich et al., 2001). Distributed
codes reside in lower-dimensional spaces due to the inherent redundancy among the neurons’ tuning,
which leads to correlated activity that can be captured with fewer unique dimensions (Cunningham
& Yu, 2014). Empirical studies suggest that the visual hierarchy of primate inferotemporal cor-
tex (IT) may pressure toward low-dimensional representations of object information (Lehky et al.,
2014; DiCarlo & Cox, 2007). Others have theorized that lower-dimensional codes offer benefits of
adversarial robustness (Amsaleg et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2022) and improved separability of ob-
ject class manifolds (Cohen et al., 2020; Sorscher et al., 2022). While such coding strategies may
afford these advantages, increased redundancy may eventually begin to impose a representational
cost, constraining the system’s capacity to encode a diverse range of important features.
To study these influences on sensory representation, related work has attempted to quantify the
dimensionality of visual population responses within both biological and artificial systems. For
instance, investigation of large-scale data from mouse primary visual cortex (V1) led to the proposal
that particular dimensionalities, quantified as rates of eigenspectral decay, may reflect an optimal
balance between high- and low-dimensional coding schemes (Stringer et al., 2019). This finding
challenges the longstanding view that V1 implements maximally sparse codes. Instead, it suggests a
more complex framework for understanding visual coding strategies, one that incorporates a balance
between high- and low-dimensional codes. Despite these advances, substantial gaps remain in our
understanding of coding principles across the human visual hierarchy.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) now offer a powerful framework to operationalize and scrutinize
this sparse-to-distributed coding continuum (Figure 1A). Here, we do so by developing a class
of models where a single inductive bias—dropout regularization (Hinton et al., 2012)—is varied
while keeping other inductive biases constant, isolating the impact of dropout on representation
learning. Specifically, we train models with stochastic removal of neurons during each training
iteration, varying the proportion of dropout across models (Figure 1B). This regularization method
is known to limit overfitting and enhance model generalization (Baldi & Sadowski, 2013; Srivastava
et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2023).
The logic here is that, with increasing proportions of dropout, models will be pressured against
assigning high weights to individual connections, since those units might not be consistently avail-
able. Thus, in object recognition models, information should consequently becomes more broadly
distributed across the layer. As a result, increasing dropout p should result in a smoother, lower-
dimensional geometry of the population code. Our study first verifies these representational signa-
tures empirically. Then, we leverage this form of controlled model variation to examine the effect
of dropout on representational capacity, geometry, lesioning robustness, and emergent brain predic-
tivity. We report three novel findings:

     1. We confirm that “controlled model rearing” with increasing dropout p yields models with
        increasingly distributed codes and lower-dimensional eigenspectra.
     2. Varying dropout preserves task performance while systematically altering representational
        geometry, revealing an optimal point of robustness to simulated model “lesions”.
     3. Model-to-brain comparison with high-resolution fMRI data reveals that the most robust
        model also shows the highest degree of emergent brain alignment.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ESULTS
2.1   I NCREASING DROPOUT REDUCES DIMENSIONALITY OF MODEL REPRESENTATIONS

To investigate the relationship between dropout regularization and the dimensionality of learned
representations, we trained a family of models with controlled dropout regularization. The base
encoder model was an AlexNet architecture (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) with dropout implemented at
fully connected layers fc6 and fc7. We trained a family of 10 models, with dropout probabilities (p)
varying from 0 to 0.9, incremented in steps of 0.1 (Figure 1B).
All models were trained on the ImageNet dataset for 1000-way object classification (Deng et al.,
2009), using the standard cross-entropy loss function. Models were trained using stochastic gradient
descent on three Nvidia A100 GPUs with 40 GB RAM. Efficient data-loading was achieved via
the Fast-Forward Computer Vision (FFCV) library (Leclerc et al., 2023). We used a one-cycle
learning rate schedule, linearly ramping from an initial learning rate set to 1 × 10−4 times the
peak learning rate (0.05), which was reached at epoch 15, before linearly descending to 2 × 10−5
over the remainder of training. Image resolution started at 160, then increased to 192 on epoch 71
(implemented as a linear ramp between epochs 65 and 76, rounded to the nearest multiple of 32).
Given that dropout was already implemented as a regularization method, no further weight decay
was applied. All training runs used a batch size of 512 and momentum value of 0.9.


Figure 1: Controlled model rearing with varied dropout p yields variation between sparse
and distributed coding schemes. (A) Schematic depiction of the tension between sparse, high-
dimensional codes and distributed, low-dimensional codes. Images adapted from Stringer et al.,
2019. (B) Overview of controlled model rearing procedure. 10 models were trained with varying
dropout p from 0 to 0.9, in increments of 0.1. (C) Experimental approach from Stringer et al., 2019.
Calcium imaging was used to record the simultaneous population activity of thousands of neurons
in mouse primary visual cortex (V1) in response to natural images. From these brain responses, the
neural eigenspectrum was estimated for early visual cortex. The alpha (rate of spectral decay) was
estimated with a linear fit over the log eigenspectrum. (D) For each of the dropout models, the log
eigenspectrum of layer fc6 activations (measured at inference time, with dropout disabled) is shown
(left plot), with the first 250 dimensions plotted. The corresponding alpha values are shown for each
model (right plot).

First we assessed the dimensionality of learned representations over the set of 10 models. To do so,
we computed the activation matrices over a sample of 1000 images from the ImageNet validation
set focusing on AlexNet layer fc6, which has been previously shown to have a high degree of brain
alignment (Prince et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2020). From these activations, we followed a similar
approach to that of Stringer et al., 2019, which quantifies the decay rate of the log-transformed
eigenspectrum (Figure 1C), as follows. Activation data were standardized to zero-mean and unit-
variance. The PCA-derived eigenspectrum was then sorted in decreasing order, normalized by its


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sum, and truncated to the first 250 components for subsequent analysis. A power-law fit to this
eigenspectrum was computed as:
                                      log(λi ) = α log(i) + β                                 (1)
Optimal parameters were estimated via weighted least squares regression, which aims to emphasize
the importance of the leading principal components by inversely weighting them according to their
rank, thereby ensuring a more robust estimation of the decay rate α in the eigenspectrum:

                                     b = (X⊤ WX)−1 X⊤ Wy                                           (2)

Here, W is a diagonal weight matrix with wi = 1i , y = log(λrange ), and X contains − log(i) and a
constant term. The parameter α, which is the first element of the resulting b, serves as our metric
for the rate of eigenspectrum decay, indicating the effective dimensionality of the feature space.
The resulting eigenspectra for the parameterized set of dropout models are shown in Figure 1D.
These show systematic variation in the resulting shape of the eigenspecta, with corresponding vari-
ation in the estimated alpha parameters. We observed a systematic reduction in dimensionality of
object representations with increasing dropout p. These results confirm that dropout proportion
serves as an effective knob for controlling the dimensionality of the learned representations.

2.2     VARYING DROPOUT ALTERS REPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY WHILE PRESERVING TASK
        PERFORMANCE

Next, we examined the impact of dropout variation on both task performance and on the nature of
the internal representations learned across the layers of these models. Model performance on the
ImageNet dataset, using the top-5 accuracy metric, is shown in Figure 2A. Despite the extensive
range of dropout rates, all models exhibited surprisingly competent performance. Peak accuracy
was observed for models trained with a dropout p of 0.5. (We note that the original AlexNet model
included dropout p=0.5, likely based on a hyperparameter sweep; our results converge with this
setting). However, we also note that all models have performance within a 10% accuracy range.
Thus, all models are capable of effectively learning the task at hand, despite a wide range of dropout
probability.

2.2.1    R EPRESENTATIONAL T RAJECTORY A NALYSIS
We next sought to understand the impact of dropout variation on the internal representations learned
across the layers of these models. To do so, we used Representational Trajectory Analysis (Kall-
mayer et al., 2020, see also Mehrer et al., 2020). This method creates a visualization of the “repre-
sentational trajectory” that different models take from the pixel space to their final representational
format (Figure 1B). In this visualization, model layers with similar representational geometries are
nearby in the plot, and model layers with more different geometries are further away.
To apply this analysis, for each layer L of every model, activations were extracted to image set
I, consisting of 250 sample images from the validation set. This yielded an activation matrix AL
where each row corresponds to the activation pattern elicited by a single image. Next, the Pearson
dissimilarity for this layer was computed to form a representational dissimilarity matrix RDML , a
square matrix that captures the dissimilarity between activation patterns for all image pairs:
                                                 cov(AL (i, :), AL (j, :))
                            RDML (i, j) = 1 −                                                      (3)
                                                 σ(AL (i, :))σ(AL (j, :))

Next, for each RDML , the vectorized lower triangular portions was extracted, and concatenated
to construct the matrix M. Finally, the Pearson dissimilarity between all pairs of rows in M was
computed, yielding a Meta-Dissimilarity Matrix (MDM):

                                                 cov(M(m, :), M(n, :))
                            MDM(m, n) = 1 −                                                        (4)
                                                 σ(M(m, :))σ(M(n, :))

This MDM matrix reflects how dissimilar every model layer’s representation is from every other
model layer, across all models. To visualize the structure in this matrix intuitively, the MDM matrix


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Varying dropout preserves task performance while altering representational geome-
try, revealing an optimal point of robustness to simulated lesioning. (A) Top-5 ImageNet accu-
racy after 100 training epochs, across the dropout models. (B) Representational Trajectory Analysis
(Kallmayer et al., 2020): showing the layer-to-layer representational dissimilarity structure of all 10
models projected into 2D space using multidimensional scaling (MDS), with traces connecting the
input and output stages of each model. (C) Model lesioning procedure. Percent of baseline top-5
ImageNet accuracy is plotted as a function of the proportion of units randomly lesioned in layer fc6.
Error bars reflect the standard deviation accuracy over the 10 iterations. (D) Bar graphs summarize
the observed outcomes for mild (20% layer units), moderate (50% layer units), and severe (80%
layer units) lesions.


was input to 2D multidimensional scaling (MDS), yielding x-y coordinates for each model layer,
which are shown in a 2D scatter plot. Layers from the same model are connected with a line,
visualizing the ‘representational trajectory’ from the input (pixel space) to output (fc8). In this
space, the farther apart two model layers are, the more different their representational geometries.
Inspection of these trajectories in Figure 1B reveals systematic variations in representational ge-
ometries learned across the layers of these models. The largest variation occurs predominantly in
the fully connected layers, where dropout was explicitly applied. Interestingly, representational
differences across these models also extended to the earlier convolutional layers, underscoring the
cascading impact of localized dropout across the hierarchical structure of the network.

2.3   O PTIMAL ROBUSTNESS TO LESIONS IS OBSERVED AT HIGH ( BUT NOT EXTREME ) LEVELS
      OF DROPOUT

We next sought to understand the functional consequences of varying dropout. To do so, we applied
simulated “lesions” to these models, drawing upon neuropsychological paradigms that assess the
impact of damage to object-responsive cortex (Barton et al., 2002; Moro et al., 2008; Kanwisher &
Barton, 2011). Note that dropout regularization occurs during training but not during inference. In
this analysis, we are effectively applying dropout during inference time, as a way of lesioning or
damaging the model. Presumably, the models trained with the most dropout will be the most robust
to lesions during inference.
For this analysis, lesions were applied to layer fc6 in each model during inference (see Appendix
A.3 for a similar analysis of fc7). Randomized groups of units were lesioned by setting their outputs
to zero, where we varied the scope of the lesion between 0 to 95% of layer units, in steps of 10%.
Top-5 ImageNet accuracy was subsequently re-evaluated. This lesioning protocol was performed
iteratively 10 times, each with a different random subset of units targeted. This approach aligns with
prior work examining the robustness of neural networks to selective perturbations (Cheney et al.,
2017; Casper et al., 2021).


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When lesioning the model trained with no dropout, a monotonic decline in performance was ob-
served with increasing lesion sizes, as expected (Figure 2C-D). As the dropout rate increased, so
did robustness, enabling substantial proportions of units in layer fc6 to be lesioned with minimal
decrement in performance. This trend, however, reached an inflection point around p = 0.7, beyond
which the models exhibited brittle behavior under large lesions. These findings validate that dropout
can effectively mitigate the damaging effects of lesions, especially at mid-to-high levels of p. How-
ever, the results show that it is not the case that optimal robustness is observed at the most extreme
levels of dropout. And, it is not the case that this lesion-robust model (p = 0.7) is the same as the
most accurate model where no dropout is applied at inference (p = 0.5).
Intriguingly, this analysis suggests the existence of an ideal dropout level that effectively balances
the merits of both low- and high-dimensional codes within the DNN model (i.e., robustness and
representational capacity). These in silico findings further hint that the human visual system may
navigate a similar trade-off between sparsity and robustness. To address this possibility, we next
examined how these models relate to representations measured in a condition-rich fMRI study of
human object-responsive cortex.

2.4   O PTIMAL ROBUSTNESS IS ASSOCIATED WITH MAXIMAL HUMAN BRAIN ALIGNMENT

The aim of our next analysis was to compare the emergent alignment between late-stage represen-
tational geometries of our dropout models and the representational geometry measured in human
high-level visual cortex. To do so, we leveraged fMRI recordings from the Natural Scenes Dataset
(NSD, Figure 3A, Allen et al., 2022). NSD contains measurements of over 70,000 unique stimuli
from the Microsoft Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset (Lin et al., 2014) at high resolution
(7T field strength, 1.6-s TR, 1.8mm3 voxel size). Here, we focused on the brain responses to the
set of 515 COCO stimuli that all 8 subjects viewed 3 times across scan sessions. All responses were
estimated using a new, publicly available GLM toolbox (GLMsingle; Prince et al., 2022), which im-
plements optimized denoising and regularization procedures to accurately measure changes in brain
activity evoked by experimental stimuli.
We targeted our analysis to object-responsive cortex (“occipitotemporal cortex” in humans–OTC,
which is homologous to “inferotemporal” IT cortex in non-human primates). The sector was defined
following the procedures in Conwell et al., 2022. Specifically, within a broad visual system mask
(“nsdgeneral” ROI), the selected voxels included those in the mid-to-high ventral and lateral ROIs
(“streams” ROIs), supplemented by voxels from 11 category-selective ROIs with a t-contrast statistic
> 1. The 8 NSD subjects yielded an average data dimensionality of 34,195 in their OTC sectors.
Importantly, this sector encompasses high-level object-responsive cortex only, and excludes data
from earlier visual regions (e.g. V1-V4). Thus, the scope of our analysis goes beyond replicating
the work of Stringer et al., 2019, which was limited to area V1 in mice.
To perform model-brain comparison, we used classical Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA;
Kriegeskorte et al., 2008), schematized in Figure 3A-B. First, the brain activations to 515 images
were transformed into a representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM), as in equation (3). Note that
the representational geometry of this brain sector was highly reliable (Conwell et al., 2022), making
this brain region a strong mapping target for our dropout models. The same 515 images were shown
to each model, and activations from the fc6 layer (dimensionality = 4,096 units) were recorded,
and converted into representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) following the same procedure.
Finally, the lower triangular values of the model and brain RDMs were correlated, with Pearson
r values plotted in Figure 3C. Note that this classical RSA procedure differs from more flexible,
and more typical, model-to-brain linking procedures, which allow for feature re-weighting to best
try to warp the model representational geometry to fit the brain geometry. Here, no re-weighting is
allowed, revealing the degree of emergent alignment between model and brain geometries.
The results in Figure 3C show that across the models, all showed some degree of representational
alignment with the brain. However, surprisingly, and in parallel with our earlier findings, layer
fc6 of the model trained with p = 0.7 dropout was not only most robust to lesioning, but also
showed the highest degree of alignment with human brain representations. This finding adds further
plausibility to the hypothesis that dropout manipulation instantiates a brain-relevant tradeoff between
efficiency and robustness. Moreover, the apparent synergy between model robustness and emergent


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Model-brain mapping reveals a link between lesion robustness and brain predictiv-
ity, associated with similar rates of spectral decay. (A) Schematic overview of OTC data from
the Natural Scenes Dataset (Allen et al., 2022). Highly reliable 7T fMRI responses to 515 Microsoft
COCO images are subject to brain-model mapping via classical (unweighted) representational sim-
ilarity analysis (cRSA). (B) Model layer fc6 features are extracted for the 515 test images and com-
pared to brain RDMs using Pearson correlation. (C) Summary of model-brain cRSA prediction
levels for the 8 NSD subjects, by dropout level. (D) Overview of the Generative Modeling of Signal
and Noise approach (cvnlab, 2022). Signal covariance structure is estimated by subtracting empir-
ically measured noise covariance (estimated using trial repetitions) from the full data covariance
structure. Brain region eigenspectra are then computed directly from the signal covariance matrix.
(E) Human OTC eigenspectra for the 8 NSD subjects (left), with alpha values summarized (gray
bars, center) and compared to the dropout models (colored bars, right).


brain alignment raises an intriguing possibility: is this correspondence between neural systems also
reflected in similar rates of eigenspectrum decay?

2.5     E IGENSPECTRUM OF OBJECT- RESPONSIVE CORTEX

To further probe the observed model-brain alignment, we next computed the rate of eigenspectrum
decay of the brain representations, in order to compare to the model eigenspectra. Critically, while
the models are noiseless systems, the brain measures are not. Thus, simply calculating the brain’s
eigenspectrum directly would also reflect the noise structure, which poses a thorny methodological
challenge. For instance, if the noise present in the data were to exhibit a high-dimensional struc-
ture relative to the signal, then it could systematically bias naive eigenspectrum α estimates (e.g.
computed by applying PCA directly to the data) in the downward direction. To address this issue,
we employed a novel technique known as Generative Modeling of Signal and Noise (GSN, cvn-
lab, 2022). This approach leverages available stimulus repetitions to distinguish between signal and
noise covariance structure, thereby yielding a more reliable, “denoised PCA” from which the brain’s
eigenspectra can be estimated.

2.5.1    G ENERATIVE M ODELING OF S IGNAL AND N OISE
For a given ROI, the GSN method estimates multivariate Gaussian distributions characterizing the
signal and the noise under the assumption that observed responses can be characterized as sums
of samples from the signal and noise distributions. This approach is similar in spirit to the cross-
validated principal component analysis (cvPCA) method developed by Stringer et al., 2019, in that
both techniques aim to separate signal-related variance from trial-to-trial noise. However, cvPCA
achieves this by computing the covariance between training and test presentations of an identical


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stimulus ensemble, to isolate stimulus-related variance. In contrast, GSN utilizes stimulus repeti-
tions to model both the signal and noise explicitly, which aims to provide a more comprehensive
description of the empirical data. As such, GSN provides a principled, unbiased method for extract-
ing eigenspectra from noisy data.
To briefly summarize the approach: GSN assumes that for each condition, trial-to-trial variability
(noise) adheres to a zero-mean multivariate Gaussian distribution, a property shared across condi-
tions. Signal variability across conditions is also modeled as a multivariate Gaussian whose param-
eters are expected to vary from the noise distribution. The model can be summarized as:
                                        D ∼ X1 + X2 ,
                                       X1 ∼ N (µsignal , Σsignal ),                              (5)
                                       X2 ∼ N (0, Σnoise ).

Here, D denotes the observed multivariate response for a given trial, X1 and X2 represent the
multivariate responses due to signal and noise, respectively. Parameters µsignal and Σsignal specify the
mean and covariance of the signal Gaussian, whereas Σnoise is the covariance of the noise Gaussian.
This modeling framework is generative, as it directly characterizes the data-generating processes.
The crux of the GSN approach lies in parameter estimation for both signal and noise distributions,
to be fully described and validated in a forthcoming manuscript. Here we provide a brief, non-
exhaustive overview of the GSN algorithm, which capitalizes on the property that the sum of samples
from two Gaussian distributions is also Gaussian-distributed. First, to estimate the noise covariance,
we start with a data matrix X (n fMRI voxels ×c conditions ×t trials). To estimate the noise
structure, we calculate the covariance of voxel responses over stimulus repetitions separately for
each condition, and then average the covariance across conditions:
                                                   c
                                                1X
                                      Σ̂noise =       cov(Xj )                                     (6)
                                                c j=1
Next, we estimate the data covariance of voxel responses after averaging over stimulus repetitions:
                                          Σ̂data[n] = cov(X̄)                                        (7)

Finally, to infer the signal covariance, we subtract the estimated noise covariance from the estimated
data covariance (Figure 3D). Due to averaging across t trials, the variance of the noise is reduced
by a factor of t in the trial-averaged data:
                                                               Σ̂noise
                                      Σ̂signal = Σ̂data[n] −                                         (8)
                                                                  t
The GSN procedure next implements a check for whether the estimated covariance matrices are
valid and if not, computes the nearest (Frobenius matrix norm) symmetric positive semi-definite
matrix to a given square matrix (Higham, 1988; see cvnlab, 2022).
Once the signal covariance structure, Σsignal , was estimated for OTC data from each NSD subject,
we directly computed its eigenspectrum using matrix decomposition. Figure 3E shows the eigen-
spectrum of object-responsive cortex seperately for each of the 8 participants. As was previously
observed in mouse V1 (Stringer et al., 2019), we see a characteristic linear fall-off on the log-log plot
of the eigenvalues. The α decay was computed for each participant following the same procedure
applied to the dropout models’ eigenspectra, with a mean α = 1.13 across participants (standard
deviation α = 0.05).
For comparison to the dropout models, we related these estimated α values to those arising from
model layer fc6 across the model family (Figure 3E, see also Appendix sec. A.2). This analysis
revealed that the model trained with p = 0.7 dropout, which was most robust to lesions and brain
predictive, also demonstrated a rate of eigenspectrum decay (α value) that most closely matched
that of human OTC. This observation adds a further layer of plausibility to the hypothesis that the
advantages of dropout in model robustness and efficiency are not just computationally useful but also
neurobiologically relevant. One implication of these results is that the brain’s representation may
not be overly dependent on single units or specific read-out connections. Further, the close match
in α values suggests that the alignment between model and brain representations may be driven by
similar constraints on efficiency and robustness within their respective feature spaces.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3   L IMITATIONS
Here we focused on dropout regularization as a way to operationalize a set of representations that
vary along the sparse-to-distributed axis. However, it is possible that the percentage of dropout may
reflect a pressure to be more-or-less distributed (rather than pushing towards sparsity directly). Alter-
native regularization techniques such as L1 and L2 penalties on the weights could also be explored.
It is an open empirical question whether these regularization techniques have distinct consequences
on the geometry of the representations, and their emergent robustness and brain correspondence.
Additionally, here we focused on the dimensionality and structure of the representation of block 6
of an AlexNet architecture, and object-responsive cortex within the human visual system. Given the
correspondences in the emergent robustness, alignment, and eigenspectra, it will be informative to
understand whether these spectral signatures of the representational space predict emergent brain
alignment across other model architectures, and across other stages of the visual hierarchy (Canatar
et al., 2023; Conwell et al., 2022; Elmoznino & Bonner, 2022; Sorscher et al., 2022, Appendix A.4).

4   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have instantiated the theoretical tension between sparse and distributed coding
schemes with controlled regularization over a set of deep neural network (DNN) models trained on
object recognition. According to the efficient coding hypothesis, sparse, high-dimensional represen-
tations offer optimal information encoding at the expense of robustness (Olshausen & Field, 2004).
Conversely, more distributed (lower-dimensional) coding schemes provide enhanced robustness by
introducing representational redundancy, at some cost to information capacity (Stringer et al., 2019;
Kong et al., 2022). Our approach involved “controlled rearing” of a set of models with varying
dropout proportion (p) during training. Three novel findings emerged: (1) dropout variation system-
atically altered the dimensionality of model representations, operationalizing a continuum of more
sparse to more distributed codes; (2) varying dropout influenced the learned representational ge-
ometries of these models, while generally preserving task performance, revealing an optimal point
of robustness during simulated lesions at inference; and, (3) the model with optimal robustness to
lesions was also associated with maximal emergent brain alignment, and comparable rates of spec-
tral decay. Overall, these results suggest that varying dropout reveals an optimal point of balance
between the efficiency of high-dimensional codes and the robustness of low dimensional codes in
biological and artificial vision systems.
It is an open question what the parallel is between dropout regularization during model training and
underlying neurobiological mechanisms. On one hand, dropout has been likened to synaptic failures,
and variable neurotransmitter release probabilities in neural systems (Shadlen & Newsome, 1998;
McKee et al., 2021). This is a rather direct mechanistic parallel (though, if so, this factor should
be operating both at training and inference). However, another possibility is that the brain arrives
at this representational format and dimensionality though completely different mechanisms, e.g. by
interfacing with associative memory systems, which could pressure both for redundancy to aid gen-
eralization, and, for sufficient sparsity to avoid memory “collisions” during readout (Olshausen &
Field, 2004; Palm, 2013). On this account, dropout mechanisms in models may have no relationship
to the underlying biological operations, and still help promote brain-like formats by proxy, through
their regularization of the learning process. Understanding how and why neurobiological systems
may implement such forms of regularization is an important area for further investigation.
Broadly, the current work expands a growing body of research on the spectral properties of repre-
sentations in artificial and biological visual systems. For instance, Canatar et al., 2023 have recently
proposed a method for analytically relating the brain predictivity of a DNN model to its spectral
characteristics, and to the orientation of its eigenvectors. In related work, Khosla et al., 2023 have
introduced a framework for identifying “privileged axes” in brain and DNN representations, sug-
gesting that such axes function to promote increased sparsity and efficiency of the neural code. And,
Sorscher et al., 2022 have identified striking mismatches between the geometry and dimensionality
of manifolds in the primate visual pathway and of trained DNNs, in the context of few-shot learn-
ing paradigms. Collectively, these studies reflect necessary progress beyond the binary debate of
sparse versus distributed codes, and toward more nuanced theories of information coding in sensory
systems, which can be tested empirically through controlled “rearing” of neural network models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Emily J Allen, Ghislain St-Yves, Yihan Wu, Jesse L Breedlove, Jacob S Prince, Logan T Dowdle,
  Matthias Nau, Brad Caron, Franco Pestilli, Ian Charest, et al. A massive 7t fmri dataset to bridge
  cognitive neuroscience and artificial intelligence. Nature neuroscience, 25(1):116–126, 2022.
Laurent Amsaleg, James Bailey, Amélie Barbe, Sarah M Erfani, Teddy Furon, Michael E Houle,
  Miloš Radovanović, and Xuan Vinh Nguyen. High intrinsic dimensionality facilitates adversarial
  attack: Theoretical evidence. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 16:854–
  865, 2020.
Pierre Baldi and Peter J Sadowski. Understanding dropout. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 26, 2013.
Pinglei Bao, Liang She, Mason McGill, and Doris Y Tsao. A map of object space in primate
  inferotemporal cortex. Nature, 583(7814):103–108, 2020.
Horace B Barlow. Sensory mechanisms, the reduction of redundancy, and intelligence. The mecha-
  nisation of thought processes, 10:535–539, 1959.
Jason JS Barton, Daniel Z Press, Julian P Keenan, and Margaret O’Connor. Lesions of the fusiform
  face area impair perception of facial configuration in prosopagnosia. Neurology, 58(1):71–78,
  2002.
Abdulkadir Canatar, Jenelle Feather, Albert Wakhloo, and SueYeon Chung. A spectral theory of
  neural prediction and alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12821, 2023.
Stephen Casper, Xavier Boix, Vanessa D’Amario, Ling Guo, Martin Schrimpf, Kasper Vinken, and
  Gabriel Kreiman. Frivolous units: Wider networks are not really that wide. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6921–6929, 2021.
Nicholas Cheney, Martin Schrimpf, and Gabriel Kreiman. On the robustness of convolutional neural
  networks to internal architecture and weight perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08245,
  2017.
Uri Cohen, SueYeon Chung, Daniel D Lee, and Haim Sompolinsky. Separability and geometry of
  object manifolds in deep neural networks. Nature communications, 11(1):746, 2020.
Colin Conwell, Jacob S Prince, Kendrick N Kay, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. What can
  1.8 billion regressions tell us about the pressures shaping high-level visual representation in brains
  and machines? BioRxiv, pp. 2022–03, 2022.
John P Cunningham and Byron M Yu. Dimensionality reduction for large-scale neural recordings.
  Nature neuroscience, 17(11):1500–1509, 2014.
cvnlab. GSN: Generative modeling of signal and noise. https://github.com/cvnlab/GSN,
  2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
James J DiCarlo and David D Cox. Untangling invariant object recognition. Trends in cognitive
  sciences, 11(8):333–341, 2007.
Eric Elmoznino and Michael F Bonner. High-performing neural network models of visual cortex
  benefit from high latent dimensionality. bioRxiv, pp. 2022–07, 2022.
Surya Ganguli and Haim Sompolinsky. Compressed sensing, sparsity, and dimensionality in neu-
  ronal information processing and data analysis. Annual review of neuroscience, 35:485–508,
  2012.
James V Haxby, M Ida Gobbini, Maura L Furey, Alumit Ishai, Jennifer L Schouten, and Pietro
  Pietrini. Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal
  cortex. Science, 293(5539):2425–2430, 2001.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nicholas J Higham. Computing a nearest symmetric positive semidefinite matrix. Linear algebra
  and its applications, 103:103–118, 1988.
Geoffrey E Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan R Salakhutdi-
  nov. Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1207.0580, 2012.
Aylin Kallmayer, Jacob Prince, and Talia Konkle. Comparing representations that support object,
  scene, and face recognition using representational trajectory analysis. Journal of Vision, 20(11):
  861–861, 2020.
Nancy Kanwisher and Jason JS Barton. The functional architecture of the face system: Integrating
  evidence from fmri and patient studies. The Oxford handbook of face perception, pp. 111–129,
  2011.
Meenakshi Khosla, Josh McDermott, and Nancy Kanwisher. Privileged representational axes in
 biological and artificial neural networks. In 2023 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neu-
 roscience. Cognitive Computational Neuroscience, 2023. doi: 10.32470/ccn.2023.1664-0. URL
 https://doi.org/10.32470/ccn.2023.1664-0.
Nathan CL Kong, Eshed Margalit, Justin L Gardner, and Anthony M Norcia. Increasing neural
  network robustness improves match to macaque v1 eigenspectrum, spatial frequency preference
  and predictivity. PLOS Computational Biology, 18(1):e1009739, 2022.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, pp. 4, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1097–1105,
  2012.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. FFCV: Accelerating training by removing data bottlenecks. In Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. https://github.com/libffcv/ffcv/.
Sidney R Lehky, Roozbeh Kiani, Hossein Esteky, and Keiji Tanaka. Dimensionality of object rep-
  resentations in monkey inferotemporal cortex. Neural computation, 26(10):2135–2162, 2014.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Zhuang Liu, Zhiqiu Xu, Joseph Jin, Zhiqiang Shen, and Trevor Darrell. Dropout reduces underfit-
  ting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01500, 2023.
Kevin L McKee, Ian C Crandell, Rishidev Chaudhuri, and Randall C O’Reilly. Locally learned
  synaptic dropout for complete bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09780, 2021.
Johannes Mehrer, Courtney J Spoerer, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, and Tim C Kietzmann. Individual
  differences among deep neural network models. Nature communications, 11(1):5725, 2020.
Valentina Moro, Cosimo Urgesi, Simone Pernigo, Paola Lanteri, Mariella Pazzaglia, and Salva-
  tore Maria Aglioti. The neural basis of body form and body action agnosia. Neuron, 60(2):
  235–246, 2008.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by
  learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature, 381(6583):607–609, 1996.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy
  employed by v1? Vision Research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Current opinion in neuro-
  biology, 14(4):481–487, 2004.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Günther Palm. Neural associative memories and sparse coding. Neural Networks, 37:165–171,
  2013.
Jacob S Prince, Ian Charest, Jan W Kurzawski, John A Pyles, Michael J Tarr, and Kendrick N Kay.
  Improving the accuracy of single-trial fmri response estimates using glmsingle. Elife, 11:e77599,
  2022.
Jacob S Prince, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. A contrastive coding account of category
  selectivity in the ventral visual stream. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–08, 2023.
Daniel S Reich, Ferenc Mechler, and Jonathan D Victor. Independent and redundant information in
  nearby cortical neurons. Science, 294(5551):2566–2568, 2001.
Michael N Shadlen and William T Newsome. The variable discharge of cortical neurons: impli-
 cations for connectivity, computation, and information coding. Journal of neuroscience, 18(10):
 3870–3896, 1998.
Eero P Simoncelli and Bruno A Olshausen. Natural image statistics and neural representation.
  Annual review of neuroscience, 24(1):1193–1216, 2001.
Ben Sorscher, Surya Ganguli, and Haim Sompolinsky. Neural representational geometry under-
  lies few-shot concept learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(43):
  e2200800119, 2022.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Matteo Carandini, and Kenneth D Harris.
  High-dimensional geometry of population responses in visual cortex. Nature, 571(7765):361–
  365, 2019.
William E Vinje and Jack L Gallant. Sparse coding and decorrelation in primary visual cortex during
 natural vision. Science, 287(5456):1273–1276, 2000.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members of Harvard Vision Lab for helpful conversations throughout this project and
for feedback on the manuscript. This work was funded by: Natural Science Foundation CAREER
Grant #1942438 (TK); National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship (JSP).


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    Q UANTIFYING ACTIVATION S PARSITY

We examine both the lifetime and population sparsity of layer fc6 activations across the dropout
models. Lifetime sparsity refers to the sparsity observed in a single neuron’s activity over multiple
inputs. The lifetime sparsity for a unit u over a dataset of images I is calculated as follows:
                                                        1 X
                               Lifetime Sparsityu =            χ{xu,i =0}                         (9)
                                                       |I|
                                                            i∈I

where |I| represents the number of images, xu,i denotes the activation of unit u for image i, and
χ{xu,i =0} is the indicator function that is 1 if the unit is inactive (the activation is less than or equal
to 0), and 0 otherwise.
Population sparsity describes the proportion of inactive neurons across the layer’s response pattern
for a single input. The population sparsity for an image i over the set of units U is given by:
                                                       1 X
                             Population Sparsityi =           χ{xu,i =0}                        (10)
                                                      |U |
                                                             u∈U

where |U | is the total number of units, and xu,i is defined as before.
These metrics are shown in Figure 4, revealing that both lifetime and population sparsity decrease as
dropout p increases from 0 to 0.9. These results are consistent with the observation that the effective
dimensionality of layer activations tends to decreases as dropout p increases.


Figure 4: Analysis of sparsity. Activation sparsity levels in fc6 are reported for both lifetime and
population sparsity metrics, plotted for models with increasing dropout along the x-axis. Each dot
is an images, from the set of 1000 probe images (1 from each category).


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   E IGENSPECTRA COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT PROBE IMAGE SETS

In the main text, human OTC eigenspectra were assessed with 515 COCO images from the Natural
Scenes Dataset, while the model eigenspectra was assessed with a sample of the validation set of
ImageNet (in-distribution). Here we also assessed whether the model eigenspectra would be depen-
dent on the choice of probe set. We directly compare fc6 eigenspectra computed over the ImageNet
validation stimuli with those computed over the 515 COCO stimuli from the fMRI analysis. The
results are shown in Figure 5, and show very similar outcomes across these two image datasets
(average difference between α across layers = 0.02).


Figure 5: Comparing ImageNet and COCO probe stimuli. Layer fc6 eigenspectra and corre-
sponding alpha estimates are plotted for model responses to a probe set of 1000 ImageNet valida-
tion stimuli (left) and a probe set of the 515 Microsoft COCO stimuli that were used for the fMRI
analyses (right).


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   A NALYSES OF L AYER FC 7

A parallel set of post-hoc were analyses conducted on layer fc7, are shown in Figure 6. We find the
model with p = 0.7 dropout again had the highest emergent brain alignment.
However, we note that this layer was generally less strongly correlated with the brain sector than
layer fc6. Further, layer fc7 also showed less convergence across other signatures. For example, the
eigenspectra of the fc7 layer of this model was generally steeper, meaning that the fc7 layer of a
model with less drop-out best matched the slope of OTC eigenspectra (p = 0.3). Further, lesions
to layer fc7 at inferences did not show a u-shape curve, and instead showed more robustness with
increasing dropout proportion.


Figure 6: Analysis of Layer fc7. (A) fc7 eigenspectra are plotted with corresponding alpha esti-
mates over the same probe set of 1000 ImageNet validation stimuli used for previous analyses. (B)
Lesioning outcomes. Percent of each model’s baseline top-5 ImageNet accuracy is expressed as a
function of proportion fc7 units randomly lesioned at inference. (C) RSA correlations for layer fc7
are shown, with dots reflecting the 8 NSD subjects. (D) As a point of reference, RSA correlations
for layer fc6 are shown.

There are several implications of these results. First, the features in fc7 are less well aligned to the
OTC brain sector data than fc6. Second, these results also demonstrate that a simple measure of
effective dimensionality (the slope of the eigenspectrum) is not itself a sufficient metric to predict
emergent brain alignment. Further, it seems that lesions closer to the output stage show a more direct
relationship between dropout proportion during training and lesioning during inference. Together
these results highlight that eigenspectra slope, lesion robustness, and emergent brain alignment do
not necessarily all hang together across all layers, providing room for future work to gain a deeper
theoretical understanding of the relationship among these constructs (Canatar et al., 2023).


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   R EPLICATING ANALYSES USING H UMAN V1 DATA

We perform initial analyses to extend our paradigm from occipitotemporal cortex (OTC) to human
V1. Specifically, we analyze data from the ventral aspect of V1 across the 8 NSD subjects (mean
dimensionality = 2,650). Data processing and model-brain comparison occur in the same manner as
described for comparisons with the OTC sector.
First, layer-wise analyses reveal that the ’maxpool1’ stage of the dropout models is consistently the
most predictive of human V1 activity (Figure 7A). Notably, the overall alignment of these models
with V1 is lower compared to the observed fc6-OTC prediction levels. We also observe that varying
amounts of dropout applied at the fc6 and fc7 layers does not significantly alter the representational
characteristics in ’maxpool1’, as shown in both representational trajectory analysis (Figure 2B)
and in the effective dimensionality and emergent brain alignment assessments (Figures 7B and 7C,
respectively).
These findings suggest that manipulating dropout at earlier stages in the network, possibly within
the first block, might be required in order to extend the current paradigm to study human V1 repre-
sentations. Our initial findings indicate that V1 representations may be of lower dimensionality than
those in the OTC (Figure 7D), providing a starting point for further investigation into the eigenspec-
tra across different areas of the human visual system.


Figure 7: Analysis of human V1 data. (A) RSA correlations are summarized over the 8 NSD
subjects for layers conv1 through conv3. Lines reflect the mean over subjects, with shaded regions
reflecting the SEM. The same 515 test stimuli are used as in the primary analyses. (B) Complete
RSA correlations for layer maxpool1 are shown, with dots reflecting the 8 subjects. (C) Model layer
maxpool1 eigenspectra are plotted in log-log space, with alpha values reflecting the slope of the
linear fit to the log eigenspectrum. Eigenspectra are computed over a probe set of 1000 ImageNet
validation stimuli. (D) Human V1 eigenspectra estimated using the GSN technique. All analysis
procedures are identical to those previously reported for OTC.



                                                 16
