Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L OTA -B ENCH : B ENCHMARKING L ANGUAGE - ORIEN -
TED TASK P LANNERS FOR E MBODIED AGENTS

 Jae-Woo Choi1∗ , Youngwoo Yoon1∗ , Hyobin Ong1,2 , Jaehong Kim1 , Minsu Jang1,2
 1
   Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
 2
   University of Science and Technology
 {jwchoi0717,youngwoo,ohnghb,jhkim504,minsu}@etri.re.kr



                                                 A BSTRACT

              Large language models (LLMs) have recently received considerable attention as
              alternative solutions for task planning. However, comparing the performance of
              language-oriented task planners becomes difficult, and there exists a dearth of de-
              tailed exploration regarding the effects of various factors such as pre-trained model
              selection and prompt construction. To address this, we propose a benchmark sys-
              tem for automatically quantifying performance of task planning for home-service
              embodied agents. Task planners are tested on two pairs of datasets and simula-
              tors: 1) ALFRED and AI2-THOR, 2) an extension of Watch-And-Help and Vir-
              tualHome. Using the proposed benchmark system, we perform extensive experi-
              ments with LLMs and prompts, and explore several enhancements of the baseline
              planner. We expect that the proposed benchmark tool would accelerate the devel-
              opment of language-oriented task planners.


1        I NTRODUCTION

The ability of embodied agents to comprehend natural language instructions and perform the desired
tasks has been a long-standing goal in the field of AI and robotics. When the agent has a sufficiently
diverse skill set, decomposing high-level tasks into sequences of executable skills becomes particu-
larly important. Conventional approaches have addressed this challenge through symbolic planning
in predefined domains (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971; Garrett et al., 2020) or through learning-based task
and motion planning (Silver et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). Recently, large language
models (LLMs) have emerged as a promising alternative. These models, pre-trained on extensive
corpora, seem to have semantic knowledge about the world (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). This knowledge can be effectively leveraged for
high-level task planning through in-context learning without any additional training (Huang et al.,
2022; Singh et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023a; Ahn et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023).
However, the evaluation frameworks for LLM-based task planning remain underdeveloped. Most
existing studies rely on human evaluation, which is not only time-consuming but also expensive.
These evaluations often occur in custom environments, which also makes them difficult to repro-
duce. Although some research (Huang et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023a) has utilized simulators for
automated evaluation, these efforts are typically confined to simple tabletop manipulation tasks. Fur-
thermore, there is a noticeable absence of in-depth investigation into various influential factors, such
as the type and size of pre-trained model, the number and select strategy of in-context examples, the
capability for replanning based on natural language feedback, and the impact of fine-tuning.
To address the limitations, we introduce LoTa-Bench, a benchmark for language-oriented task plan-
ning for embodied agents. Our system aims to automatically quantify planning performance, en-
abling easier, fair, and reproducible comparison between systems. The framework consists of a
baseline task planner, a dataset, and a simulator, as illustrated in Figure 1. The baseline task plan-
ner capitalizes on the in-context learning ability of LLMs. It constructs a prompt using a prefix,
in-context examples (comprising pairs of natural language instructions and corresponding skill se-
quences to accomplish the instruction), and a user-provided natural language instruction. With this
     *
         Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Prompt
    Prefix
                                                                 LLM-based Task Planner                       Simulator                  AI2-THOR
             Robot: Hi there, I’m a robot operating in a
             home.
             Robot: You can ask me to do various tasks                  Pre-trained LLM                        NL to API
             and I’ll tell you the sequence of actions I                                           Next
             would do to accomplish your task.                                                     Step                      API Call
 In-context Human: Put a spoon in the sink.
  examples Robot: 1. find a spoon, 2. pick up the spoon,                                                     Simulator
             3. find a sink, 4. put down the spoon, 5. done.           Prompt        Skill Set              Environment
             …
 Instruction Human: Move a book from a desk to a sofa.                                                                                  VirtualHome
  Planning Robot: 1. find a book, 2. pick up the book, 3.
                                                                Input Query           Skill Set           Initialization   Evaluation
   results   find a sofa, 4. put down the book, 5. done.
                                                                                    Construction
                          Skill Set
 close the bathroom cabinet, close the dishwasher, …                                          Initial
 find a bar soap, find a coffee table, find a cutlery fork, …      NL Instruction                               Goal Condition
                                                                                           Environment
 pick up the apple, pick up the book, pick up the mug, …
 switch on the computer, switch on the tv, …                                                 Dataset

Figure 1: Overall benchmarking configuration for LLM-based task planners. NL stands for Natural
Language. We used two setups: 1) ALFRED dataset with AI2-THOR simulator and 2) WAH-NL
dataset with VirtualHome simulator. Exemplary prompt and skill set are presented on the left side.


prompt, the LLM calculates the probabilities of all executable skills to complete a task. The skill
with the highest probability is selected and appended to the prompt for the next step in an autore-
gressive manner. In the proposed benchmark suite, we evaluate the planner on two dataset-simulator
pairs: 1) ALFRED dataset (Shridhar et al., 2020) with AI2-THOR simulator (Kolve et al., 2017),
and 2) our extension of Watch-And-Help (WAH) dataset (Puig et al., 2021), WAH-NL, paired with
VirtualHome simulator (Puig et al., 2018). Each dataset sample furnishes the planner with both a
natural language instruction and an environment context. The simulator executes the planned ac-
tions, and the performance of task planning is automatically assessed by comparing the final state of
the simulator with predefined goal conditions.
In addition to the introduction of the benchmark suite, we provide extensive experimental results
to further understand LLM-based task planning. Our baseline experiments explore the influence
of various pre-trained models and their sizes. Given the critical impact of in-context examples
on the performance of LLM-based task planners, we investigate the effect of number of examples
and selection strategies. Additionally, we probe into other influential factors such as replanning
according to the failure of a previous step and the effectiveness of model fine-tuning in the task
planning domain.
Our contribution is fourfold: 1) first proposal of a benchmark suite that enables automatic evaluation
of LLM-based task planners for home-service agents, 2) extensive experiments of a baseline task
planner, 3) exploring possible extensions of the baseline planner and its validation with the proposed
benchmark, and 4) public release of benchmark code and extended dataset (WAH-NL); they are
available at https://github.com/lbaa2022/LLMTaskPlanning.


2       R ELATED W ORK

LLMs have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities through zero-shot or few-shot
prompting (Brown et al., 2020), leading to a transformative impact on task planning. Traditional
task planning methods predominantly focused on searching within predefined domains (Fikes &
Nilsson, 1971; Garrett et al., 2020; Hoffmann, 2001) or learning trajectories (Silver et al., 2023;
Shah et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Ichter et al., 2022; Nair & Finn, 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2019). However, thanks to LLMs, new language-oriented task planning methods have
emerged. Huang et al. (2022) proposed a method where an LLM directly generates task plans via
prompt engineering, with each generated step translated into an executable action using another
language model. SayCan (Ahn et al., 2023) employed an LLM to score all predifined admissi-
ble actions, concurrently considering skill affordance through learned vision-based value functions.
LLMs have also been adopted to generate executable robot codes using program-style inputs such as
function descriptions (Liang et al., 2023a; Singh et al., 2023; Zelikman et al., 2023). Moreover, inte-
grating context into LLM-based task planners has been shown to enhance planning efficacy (Huang
et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).
Although numerous LLM-based task planners have emerged, standardized automatic performance
evaluation methods are still scarce. Real robot experiments typically require time-intensive human


                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


evaluations. In these setups, human raters determine the success or failure of planning (Ahn et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). When using simulators and datasets for evaluations,
each task requires the goal condition and the natural language instruction. If a dataset lacks goal con-
ditions, such as ActivityPrograms (Puig et al., 2018), human evaluation remains necessary (Huang
et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2023). Similarly, datasets without natural language instruction, like
Watch-And-Help (Puig et al., 2021), or simulators not offering high-level APIs, such as Behavior-
1k (Li et al., 2023), cannot support language-oriented task planning. Only a few studies, akin to our
benchmark suite, have incorporated automated evaluations. For instance, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023)
utilized the ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) text-based game and the ALFRED dataset (Shridhar
et al., 2020). ProgPrompt (Singh et al., 2023) engaged with the VirtualHome simulator and a cus-
tomized dataset. Nevertheless, these assessments were conducted in restricted settings, hindering
insights into comprehensive potential of LLM-based task planners.

3   BASELINE LLM- BASED TASK P LANNER
Problem Statement. In our proposed framework, a task planner receives a natural language in-
struction i from the user, e.g., “bring an apple and a cupcake and put them on the coffee table.” The
planner also has access to a predefined skill set S, where each skill s∈S represents an atomic action
the agent can perform, such as “pick up the apple,” “find a wine glass,” or “open the fridge.” We
assume that these skills are coupled with corresponding language-conditioned low-level controllers
(Jang et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023). The objective of the task planner is to select the skill st at
time step t by maximizing the likelihood of completing the given instruction i as follows:
                                   st = arg max p(s|i, s0 , · · · , st−1 ),                             (1)
                                            s∈S

where s0 , · · · , st−1 are previously executed skills and s0 = ∅. Exemplary step sequences for the
instruction we mentioned above could be (1. find an apple, 2. pick up the apple, 3. find a coffee
table, 4. put down the apple, 5. find a cupcake, 6. pick up the cupcake, 7. find a coffee table, 8. put
down the apple, 9. done).
Baseline Task Planner. Our baseline task planner leverages the in-context learning capabilities
of large language models (LLMs), resonating with recent research (Huang et al., 2022; Liang et al.,
2023a; Ahn et al., 2023). To estimate the probability expressed in Equation 1, we construct a prompt
P , which consists of a prefix, in-context examples, the instruction i, and a history of previously ex-
ecuted skills. For a skill s, described by ns subword tokens s = (w1s , · · · , wns s ), the LLM computes
the conditional probability as follows:
                                                            ns
                                                            Y
               p(s|i, s1 , · · · , st−1 ) = pLLM (s|P ) =         pLLM (wns |P, w0s , · · · , wn−1
                                                                                               s
                                                                                                   ),   (2)
                                                            n=1

where pLLM is the pre-trained LLM and w0s = ∅. Instead of iterating every skill to find the best next
skill to perform (Equation 1), which requires extensive computation, we employ a greedy search
strategy, but with constraints on the next token selection to match with one of the skills using Guid-
ance tool (Microsoft, 2023); see Appendix B for details. Once a skill is selected, it is appended to
the prompt P , and the planner continues to use the updated prompt to select the next skill. This au-
toregressive process continues until either the terminal skill (“done”) is selected or the skill sequence
reaches a predefined maximum length.

4   B ENCHMARK S ETUP
To rigorously evaluate LLM-based task planners, we introduce a comprehensive evaluation frame-
work, described in Figure 1. The framework integrates three key components: a task planner, a
dataset, and a simulator. The baseline task planner elaborated in Section 3 is employed for compar-
ative benchmarking. Then we offer two distinct dataset-simulator pairings: 1) the ALFRED dataset
(Shridhar et al., 2020) built on the AI2-THOR simulator (Kolve et al., 2017), and 2) an extended
version of the Watch-And-Help (WAH) dataset (Puig et al., 2021), named WAH-NL, incorporated
with the VirtualHome simulator (Puig et al., 2018). Further details of the dataset and the simulator
are described in the following subsections.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   DATASET

Our benchmark employs two datasets, the ALFRED dataset (Shridhar et al., 2020) and our extension
of the WAH dataset (Puig et al., 2021). Both datasets include sets of a natural language (NL)
instruction, an initial environment state, and a goal condition for home environments. The NL
instructions are user-provided and serve as inputs to the task planner of an autonomous agent. The
initial environment states, containing object locations and states, are used for initialization of the
simulator and for skill set construction in the task planning. The goal condition specifies the criteria
for task completion. Planning performance is assessed by comparing the final state of the simulator
with this goal condition after the execution of the last skill generated by the task planner.
ALFRED. It is a benchmark dataset for embodied AI agents that plan and execute primitive actions
to perform household tasks, such as heating a mug cup, placing a salt shaker in a drawer, or putting
vegetables in the fridge. This dataset was built on the AI2-THOR simulation environment. There are
7 task types of Pick & Place, Stack & Place, Pick Two & Place, Clean & Place, Heat & Place, Cool
& Place, and Examine in Light. Among them, we excluded Pick Two & Place type in the evaluation
because of missing capability of object instance recognition, which is required to accomplish this
task type, in the LLM-based task planner.
WAH-NL. The original WAH dataset focuses on the challenges of AI agents assisting humans in
household tasks. It consists of a Watch stage where agents observe human demonstrations to infer
goals, and a Help stage where agents assist human in achieving those goals with minimal time steps.
The dataset includes 5 task types of Setup a dinner table, Put groceries, Prepare a meal, Wash dishes,
and Read a book. The goal condition of each task consists of multiple subgoals. For example, the
goal condition of Put groceries task can be “INSIDE(cupcake, fridge): 2” and “INSIDE(apple,
fridge): 1”, where the numeric values indicate the number of objects.
Our extended version, WAH-NL, introduced two significant modifications on the Help stage of the
original WAH dataset. First, we adjust the goal conditions, originally designed for human-AI collab-
orations, to suit autonomous agents. Additionally, we set the number of objects for all subgoals to 1,
for similar reasons as with the ALFRED dataset (the lack of object instance recognition capability
in our LLM-based task planner). Second, since the original dataset lacks NL instructions, which is
must-needed element for language-oriented task planners, we collected them via the Prolific crowd-
sourcing platform. The final dataset includes 416 instructions for the train set and 195 for the test
set. More details about WAH-NL are described in Appendix E.

4.2   S IMULATOR

The simulator serves as an interactive environment that enacts the skills generated by the task plan-
ner. We first define a skill set for the task planner by combining available actions with optional
parameters like target objects or receptacles. The skill set includes, for example, “find an apple,”
“turn on the faucet,” “open the fridge”, and “put down the pillow.” Then, we simulated language-
conditioned low-level controllers by mapping the skills to executable agent action APIs of the sim-
ulators.
Our approach primarily employs two types of skills: object navigation (ObjNav) and object inter-
action. We opted for ObjNav over low-level move actions (such as move forward and rotate) as
ObjNav is well studied and would be considered as a unit capability of home-service agents (Duan
et al., 2022). We assume that the agent is fully aware of object locations in the scene (practically, it
can be accomplished by scene exploration with object map building). Object interaction skills are
executable only when the interacting object is close to the agent. For example, “pick up the plate” is
successful when the distance between the plate and agent is less than a predefined distance. We had
some other assumptions for the object interaction skill. For the “put down” skill, the agent always
put a holding object on a receptacle last visited. If there are multiple objects with the same class, the
object closest to the agent is selected. The agent can hold one object in AI2-THOR and two objects
in VirtualHome.
AI2-THOR. There are seven interaction actions–“pick up,” “open,” “close,” “turn on,” “turn off,”
“slice,” and “put down”–and one navigation action “find.” Among all combinations of action and
optional parameters such as target objects or receptacles, we used 214 skills that were used at least
once in the ground-truth trajectories in the train set.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a) ALFRED                                        (b) WAH-NL
Figure 2: Baseline results on (a) ALFRED and (b) WAH-NL. We report task success rates (%) on the
ALFRED dataset and average subgoal success rate (%) on the WAH-NL datset for language models
in different model classes and sizes (number of parameters). Base language models are represented
as solid lines. Fine-tuned models (by either instruction or chat data) were shown in a dashed line
with a triangle maker.


VirtualHome. This simulator supports five interaction actions – “pick up,” “open,” “close,” “switch
on,” and “put down” – and one navigation action “find.” In VirtualHome, due to the extensive total
number of skills, we constructed a skill set by considering all possible combinations of actions and
optional parameters for each environment. On average, we utilized 351.89 skills.


5     BASE E XPERIMENTS

We conducted experiments to measure the performance of the baseline LLM-based task planners
by using the proposed benchmark. We tested various settings including LLMs in different model
classes and sizes and the impact of the number of in-context examples.

5.1   E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

Test Setup. We used the ALFRED and WAH-NL datasets, as introduced in Section 4.1. The
ALFRED dataset consists of three sets: train, valid-seen, and valid-unseen. The valid-seen was used
to evaluate planning performance; the train set was only used to take examples to construct prompts.
We used a small set of valid-seen, which has 208 samples (30% of the valid-seen set), to accelerate
the evaluation of various configurations (see Appendix C for the results with the full set). The
WAH-NL dataset comprises a train set and a test set with 250 and 100 samples, respectively. The
train set was used to construct in-context examples, and the test set was used to evaluate planning
performance.
The prompt comprises a prefix, describing the role of a home-service embodied agents, and a number
of in-context examples, which adhere to the template defined in SayCan (Ahn et al., 2023). Each
example is a pair of an input query (task instructions) and the corresponding output step sequences
to accomplish the task. See Appendix F for a complete prompt sample. The in-context examples
were randomly selected from the train sets, and we tried to use the same number of examples per
task type. The default setup is to include six examples in ALFRED and five examples in WAH-NL
(one example per task type).
Evaluation Metrics. We measured planning performance using the task success rates for ALFRED.
Task success was determined based on whether the final state after executing the step sequence
generated by the task planner satisfies the expected goal condition. For WAH-NL, we measured
the average subgoal success rate. Each WAH-NL task has multiple subgoals. We calculate the
individual subgoal success rate as the ratio of successfully completed subgoals to the total number
of subgoals for each task. The average subgoal success rate across a test set is reported.

5.2   B ENCHMARK R ESULTS OF BASELINE TASK P LANNER

We evaluated the planning performance of the baseline planner described in Section 3. Figure
2 shows the results on ALFRED and WAH-NL for different pre-trained LLMs: GPT (Brown


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2020), GPT-Neo series (Black et al., 2021; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021; Black et al.,
2022), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022), MPT (Team, 2023b;a), LLaMA 1 (Touvron et al., 2023a), and
LLaMA 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) (see Appendix A for the list). A few fine-tuned models on instruc-
tions or chat data were also tested.
Overall, task success rates increased with the size of the language model, but this was not always the
case. For example, GPT-J 6B model performed better than GPT-NeoX 20B and OPT 2.7B was better
than OPT 6.7B in the WAH-NL experiment. Such results, that a smaller model performs better than
a larger model, were also observed in HELM evaluation (Liang et al., 2023b), especially in reasoning
tasks. GPT-3 (text-davinci-003) showed the best success rate of 21.36% on ALFRED and the best
subgoal success rate of 40.82% on WAH-NL. LLaMA 2 and MPT performed well considering their
model sizes. Instruction- and chat-tuned models (dashed lines in Figure 2) did not perform better
than their base models. We also tested on GPT-4, the state-of-the-art LLM. As OpenAI provides
only chat-style APIs for GPT-4 unlike other base models such as GPT-3, we were unable to directly
compare GPT-4 in the same configuration. We modified experimental configurations and assessed
GPT-4’s performance. GPT-4 performed well in ALFRED, showing a 40.38% success rate, a 19%
improvement over GPT-3. However, in WAH-NL, GPT-4 showed a lower success rate of 34.17%
compared to GPT-3. More details in Appendix D.
We conducted a further analysis of the task types. For ALFRED, we found that the small model
such as GPT-J 6B succeeded only for simple Pick & Place tasks and failed in complex tasks such as
heating and cooling tasks, which require longer steps than simple tasks. The largest model, GPT-3
175B, succeeded similarly in both simple and complex tasks (20-30% success rates), except for the
task type Stack & Place where the agent needs to stack multiple objects in order. Additional results
are shown in Table 7 in Appendix. For WAH-NL, all task types have a similar level of complexity,
generally requiring the finding and placement of multiple objects. This resulted in a more balanced
performance across task types when compared to ALFRED. Using our GPT-3 175B model, Put
Fridge tasks yielded the highest average subgoal success rate at 54.50%, while Prepare Snack tasks
registered the lowest average subgoal success rate of 25.00%. See Figure 4 for the success samples
(more results in Appendix H).
We also examined the detailed reasons for the
                                                      Failure category                    # Failures
failure cases of the ALFRED results using GPT-
3 model, which showed the highest performance. Action planning failure                    46 (28.4%)
Out of 162 failure cases, the reasons were catego- Object selection failure               51 (31.5%)
rized into six classes: 1) Action planning failures, Absence of visual grounding          21 (13.0%)
such as performing ‘Pick’ instead of ‘Slice’ when Lack of physical understanding 15 (9.3%)
a tomato needs to be sliced. 2) Object selection Misunderstanding inst.                   10 (6.2%)
failures, like grabbing a pan instead of a pot. 3) Ambiguous/incorrect inst.              19 (11.7%)
Absence of visual grounding, for instance, trying
to grab an object inside a closed drawer, 4) Lack of Table 1: The number of failure cases of the
physical understanding, such as failing to put down ALFRED results using GPT-3.
an object on the already occupied table. 5) Misunderstanding user instructions, failing to distinguish
between a desk lamp and a floor lamp when the user specified ‘Lamp’. 6) Ambiguous or incorrect
user instructions, like confusing ‘Glass’ for ‘Cup’ in an instruction. The results are presented in
Table 1. Most failures (about 60%) stemmed from high-level planning (classes 1 and 2). Challenges
in visual and physical grounding (classes 3 and 4) highlight the importance of integrating context in
planning, as discussed in Section 7. Furthermore, the role of clarity in user instructions (classes 5
and 6) opens up a new research direction for interactive clarification of an ambiguous tasks.
We have investigated the impact of the number of exam-
ples in prompt with LLaMA 2 13B model that supports a
longer context length of 4096. The success rate mostly in-
creased when there are 0 to 30 examples on ALFRED and
0 to 15 examples on WAH-NL (see Figure 3). It was not
able to test more than 15 examples on WAH-NL because
of the maximum token limitation. Note that the pool of
examples was fixed, which means that, for example, 6
and 12 examples share the same 6 examples. An addi-          Figure 3: (Subgoal) success rates for
tional experiment was performed to see whether different     the different number of examples for in-
sets of examples matter for the same number of examples.     context learning.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a) ALFRED: success example for Cool & Place task.


                         (b) WAH-NL: success example for Wash dishes task.


Figure 4: Planning results. Success cases of (a) the ALFRED task and (b) the WAH-NL task when
GPT-3 175B model was used. The input instructions, inferred steps, and scene images after each
step execution are presented in each figure. The scene images show agent’s point of view on AL-
FRED and third person’s point of view on WAH-NL. Additional results, including failure cases, are
provided in Appendix H.


                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We selected different sets of 12 examples that were randomly drawn from the example pool of the
training set. The performance on ALFRED varied from a minimum of 9.62 to a maximum of 17.79
(with an average of 13.61 and a standard deviation of 3.22) for the LLaMA 2 13B model.
Additionally, we tested on both full sets of valid-seen and valid-unseen splits of ALFRED using
LLaMA 2 13B model. Valid-unseen set contains scenes not present in the train set. The success rate
on valid-unseen was similar (17.70%) to the one on valid-seen (17.82%) as two sets are different in
visual scenes, not in task types.

6     VALIDATING E XTENSIONS OF THE TASK P LANNER
The primary merit of the proposed benchmark is that it allows faster and easier validation of new task
planners. To demonstrate this, we explore some extensions (or improvements) of the base planner
and validate them.

6.1   I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLE S ELECTION

We explored three strategies for selecting in-context examples from the train set containing both
input queries and their associated planning examples. The first strategy, named Random Sampling,
is the same as that used in the baseline task planner. It involves random sampling of N examples
for each unique task type, leading to a collection of N ×M examples across different task types,
where M is the number of distinct task types. In the second strategy, termed Task-Specific Sam-
pling, we select examples from the subset of the train set that share the same task type as the input
instruction (with the assumption that the task type is known). Lastly, Semantic Similarity Sampling
employs Sentence BERT (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019), to compute the similarity scores between
the input instruction and all instructions in the train set. The examples with the highest similarity
scores are selected as in-context examples. This strategy not only aims to select the most relevant
planning examples, but also offers potential utility in real-world scenarios where task types may not
be explicitly provided.
To measure the effectiveness of these in-context example
selection methods, we conducted experiments on WAH-
NL using LLaMA 1 models. For all strategies, we set the
number of in-context examples to five. The results are
summarized in Figure 5. Across all model sizes, Seman-
tic Similarity Sampling showed superior performance,
followed by Task-Specific Sampling, and lastly Random
Sampling. Importantly, Semantic Similarity Sampling led
to significant performance gains; notably, the LLaMA 1
65B model achieved a subgoal success rate of 43.25%,
                                                              Figure 5: Subgoal success rate for
surpassing the best performance of 40.82% achieved by
                                                              different in-context example selection
our baseline using GPT-3 175B. These experiments con-
                                                              strategies. The dashed line represents
firm that the in-context example selecting strategy has a
                                                              the best performance of our baseline
significant impact on the performance of LLM-based task
                                                              planner using GPT-3 175B.
planners. We found similar results with other LLM mod-
els like GPT-Neo and LLaMA 2.

6.2   F EEDBACK AND R EPLANNING

The baseline planner selects the skill for the next step independent of the success or failure of previ-
ous action. However, adjusting the plan in response to the failure of the action is necessary for task
planning in the wild. Using the ALFRED and AI2-THOR configuration, we investigated whether
our LLM-based task planner can reflect feedback from action failure and replan appropriately. We
added natural-language (NL) feedback at the end of each inferred step only when the step is failed.
NL feedback is constructed based on error messages from the AI2THOR simulator and environment
states. For instance, when the pick up action failed because the target object is inside of a container,
“(this action failed: [Object] is not visible because it is in [Container])” is appended after the
step failed in the prompt, and the next step is inferred afterward (see more information of feedback
message in Appendix F). We assumed that the agent is fully aware of the location of objects. Exam-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ples demonstrating feedback and replanning were added to the prompt for in-context learning. We
manually crafted 3 replanning examples and added them after the baseline prompt of 18 examples.
The task instructions for the replanning examples were selected from the existing 18 examples to
minimize the addition of task information (Listing 3 in Appendix F shows the additional in-context
examples for replanning). LLaMA 2 model was used in this experiment.
Table 2 shows that replanning is helpful to
improve the overall planning perofrmance                            Success Rate(%)
when a large model, LLaMA 2 70B, is used.                    LLaMA 2 13B LLaMA 2 70B
A smller model, LLaMA 2 13B, did not show
improvements; this might be due to limited      Baseline     21.15 (44/208) 21.63 (45/208)
capability of the smaller model to understand   Replanning 17.79 (37/208) 24.04 (50/208)
complex concepts of task planning and re- Table 2: Results with and without replanning. Suc-
planning only with a few examples. The cess rates on ALFRED are reported.
qualitative results showing how the planner
succeeded by replanning steps are shown in Figure 12 in Appendix F.

6.3   F INE - TUNING ON T RAIN S ET

We conducted experiments to investigate the potential to
improve planner performance through fine-tuning. We fine-
tuned LLaMA 1 models using LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) on
the ALFRED train set and evaluated their performance in
the same ALFRED domain both for valid-seen and valid-
unseen tasks. For the evaluation of the fine-tuned planners,
we used zero in-context examples as the planner had been
explicitly trained. As depicted in Figure 6, fine-tuning sig-
nificantly improved performance, especially for larger mod-
els, e.g. LLaMA 1 30B, which showed a performance jump Figure 6: Success rates of fine-tuned
from 13.66% to 60.08%. However, the planner, fine-tuned planners on ALFRED.
on ALFRED, performed significantly worse than the base-
line planners in the WAH-NL domain (32.22% → 10.38%), suggesting that procedural knowledge
trained in a task domain does not transfer well to different task domains. See Appendix G for fine-
tuning details and results. Appendix G also presents WAH-NL fine-tuning results. Notably, the
limited number of WAH-NL train set led to marginal performance improvements. Specifically, the
LLaMA 1 13B and 30B models showed increases of 5.77 and 1.56 percent points, respectively.

7     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATION

The impressive generalizability and performance of the large language model (LLM) has facilitated
its versatile deployment across multiple domains. Task planning for embodied agents is one such
application, and after the pioneering work proposed to use LLM for this application by Ahn et al.
(2023) and Huang et al. (2022), we believe that diverse research efforts will continue in this direc-
tion. However, there was few way to automatically evaluate planners. In this paper, we proposed a
quantitative evaluation benchmark for LLM-based task planning research to catalyze the rapid ad-
vancement of this field. The results of the base experiments and extensions of in-context example
selection, replanning, and fine-tuning would be helpful to future studies. We hope that our proposed
benchmark framework will serve as a starting point for the development of various extended models
for language-oriented task planners.
The present work has the following limitations. First, we decoupled high-level plans and low-level
actions to focus on high-level planning. An extension is needed to support an end-to-end system that
considers both high-level planning and low-level actions. Visual understanding (egocentric views)
is also necessary for low-level actions. Second, as is common in many simulator-based studies,
there exists a domain gap between simulation and the real world. For example, ALFRED poses an
unrealistic assumption that an object is always cleaned when it was once put into water in a sink
basin. Furthermore, although AI2THOR and VirtualHome support multiple scenes and objects, they
still lack diversity to reflect real-world environments. Future work will be to extend the proposed
benchmark to support a wider range of systems and to reduce domain gaps.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the source code of the benchmark suite and the configurations to reproduce the exper-
imental results. WAH-NL dataset that we extended from the original WAH dataset to have task
instructions is also available. See https://github.com/lbaa2022/LLMTaskPlanning
for the source code and WAH-NL dataset.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2022-0-00951, Development
of Uncertainty-Aware Agents Learning by Asking Questions).

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Proceedings of
 The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023.
Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large Scale Au-
  toregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow, March 2021. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.5297715.
Sidney Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Ho-
  race He, Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Michael Pieler, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Shiv-
  anshu Purohit, Laria Reynolds, Jonathan Tow, Ben Wang, and Samuel Weinbach. Gpt-neox-20b:
  An open-source autoregressive language model. In Proceedings of BigScience Episode #5 –
  Workshop on Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models, pp. 95–136, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
  Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
  nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deek-
  sha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl
  Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael S Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag R Sanketi,
  Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent
  Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan H Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and
  Brianna Zitkovich. RT-1: Robotics Transformer for Real-World Control at Scale. In Proceedings
  of Robotics: Science and Systems, Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Boyuan Chen, Fei Xia, Brian Ichter, Kanishka Rao, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Michael S Ryoo,
  Austin Stone, and Daniel Kappler. Open-vocabulary queryable scene representations for real
  world planning. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
  11509–11522. IEEE, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):1–113, 2023.
Jiafei Duan, Samson Yu, Hui Li Tan, Hongyuan Zhu, and Cheston Tan. A survey of embodied
   ai: From simulators to research tasks. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational
   Intelligence, 6(2):230–244, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TETCI.2022.3141105.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging
  planning and reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. Strips: A new approach to the application of theorem proving
  to problem solving. Artificial intelligence, 2(3-4):189–208, 1971.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating
  symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 30, pp. 440–448,
  2020.
Jörg Hoffmann. Ff: The fast-forward planning system. AI magazine, 22(3):57–57, 2001.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-
 shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Proceedings of the 39th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and brian ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learn-
 ing, pp. 1769–1782. PMLR, 2023.
Brian Ichter, Pierre Sermanet, and Corey Lynch. Broadly-exploring, local-policy trees for long-
  horizon task planning. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 59–69.
  PMLR, 2022.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for
  visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, Mona Anvari, Minjune
  Hwang, Manasi Sharma, Arman Aydin, Dhruva Bansal, Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan
  Lou, Caleb R Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei Xia, Silvio
  Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior-1k: A benchmark for
  embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Proceedings of The 6th
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 80–93. PMLR, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, Jacob Andreas, Igor Mordatch, Antonio Torralba, and Yuke
  Zhu. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 31199–31212, 2022.

Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023a.

Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan,
  Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Alexander Cosgrove, Christopher D Manning, Christopher Re,
  Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew Arad Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda
  Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue WANG, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng,
  Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar Khattab,
  Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Andrew Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya
  Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang,
  Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023b.

Bill Yuchen Lin, Chengsong Huang, Qian Liu, Wenda Gu, Sam Sommerer, and Xiang Ren. On
  grounded planning for embodied tasks with language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13192–13200, 2023.

Microsoft. Guidance. https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance, 2023.

Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

OpenAI. GPT API. https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference, 2023.
  [Online; accessed 19-September-2023].

Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Tor-
  ralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.

Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019.

Dhruv Shah, Alexander T Toshev, Sergey Levine, and brian ichter. Value function spaces: Skill-
  centric state abstractions for long-horizon reasoning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.

Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020.

Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Tom Silver, Ashay Athalye, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling.
  Learning neuro-symbolic skills for bilevel planning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 701–
  714. PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
MosaicML NLP Team. Introducing mpt-30b: Raising the bar for open-source foundation models,
 2023a. URL www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-30b. Accessed: 2023-06-22.
MosaicML NLP Team. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open-source, commercially usable
 llms, 2023b. URL www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-7b. Accessed: 2023-05-05.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Vin-
  cent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Pranesh
  Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi,
  Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
  Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee,
  Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fen-
  ton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian
  Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, October 2020.
Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, Tom
  Mitchell, and Shrimai Prabhumoye. Plan, eliminate, and track–language models are good teachers
  for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02412, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Danfei Xu, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, Silvio Savarese, and Li F Fei-Fei.
  Regression planning networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D Goodman, and Nick Haber. Parsel: A unified
  natural language framework for algorithmic reasoning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Table 3 lists the language models used in the experiments.

Table 3: List of language models used in the experiments. Model names are either from OpenAI
API or HuggingFace model hub.

        Class           Model name                           Model size    Remark
                        ada                                  350M
                        babbage                              1.3B
        OpenAI GPT
                        curie                                6.7B
                        text-davinci-003                     175B
                        EleutherAI/gpt-neo-125m              125M
                        EleutherAI/gpt-neo-1.3B              1.3B
        GPT Neo         EleutherAI/gpt-neo-2.7B              2.7B
                        EleutherAI/gpt-j-6b                  6B
                        EleutherAI/gpt-neox-20b              20B
                        facebook/opt-125m                    125M
                        facebook/opt-1.3b                    1.3B
                        facebook/opt-2.7b                    2.7B
                        facebook/opt-6.7b                    6.7B
        OPT             facebook/opt-13b                     13B
                        facebook/opt-30b                     30B
                        facebook/opt-66b                     66B
                        facebook/opt-iml-max-1.3b            1.3B          Instruction-tuned
                        facebook/opt-iml-max-30b             30B           Instruction-tuned
                        mosaicml/mpt-7b                      7B
                        mosaicml/mpt-30b                     30B
        MPT
                        mosaicml/mpt-7b-instruct             7B            Instruction-tuned
                        mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct            30B           Instruction-tuned
                        huggyllama/llama-7b                  7B
                        huggyllama/llama-13b                 13B
        LLaMA 1
                        huggyllama/llama-30b                 30B
                        huggyllama/llama-65b                 65B
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf             7B
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-hf            13B
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-hf            70B
        LLaMA 2
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf        7B            Chat-tuned
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf       13B           Chat-tuned
                        meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf       70B           Chat-tuned



B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF THE BASELINE P LANNER

The implementation of SayCan’s scoring LM (Ahn et al., 2023) calculates each skill probability by
summing token log probabilities for each skill, so the calculation time increases proportionally to
the number of skills. Unlike SayCan’s implementation, we employed Guidance (Microsoft, 2023)
that supports the selection of one skill among candidates from a single generation pass by penalizing
tokens that did not appear in any skill candidates, which considerably reduces the total time needed
for the experiments. Guidance also avoids tokenization artifacts, by so-called “token healing.” We
compared two implementation methods by their success rates and processing time. When we use
GPT-Neo 6B on WAH-NL, the SayCan’s implementation yielded a subgoal success rate of 21.65%
and took 1649.2 minutes. Our implementation using Guidance achieved a success rate of 24.80%
and took 87.4 minutes which is about 19x speedup.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We used HuggingFace’s Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) and OpenAI’s GPT API (OpenAI,
2023) for the experiments, along with Guidance library (Microsoft, 2023). Most of the models were
run on a single NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU, while we used two A100 GPUs and three RTX 6000
GPUs for inference of larger models, such as OPT 66B and LLaMA 2 70B, with model parallelism.

C    E VALUATION WITH THE FULL SET OF ALFRED
The 30% subset we used in the main experiment with ALFRED might have some biases in the
selection of subsets, although we randomly selected the samples. Thus, we report the results with
the full set of ALFRED for validation. Note that GPT models were not included in this experiment
as the lagacy GPT base models were deprecated.
Figure 7 shows the results with the full set and subset, and we found that the general trends are
similar between two sets.


Figure 7: Baseline results on ALFRED with the full set and subset. We report task success rates (%)
for language models in different model classes and sizes (number of parameters). The bold lines are
for the full set. The thin lines represent the subset results. Fine-tuned models (by either instruction
or chat data) were shown in a dashed line with a triangle maker.


D    GPT-4 E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
GPT-4 API has three agent roles of “system,” “user,” and “assistant.” We modified the original
prompt (Listing 1) to fit these roles as follows. It worked like a prompt that gives the context of a
problem and the role of the robot agent. The number of examples provided for in-context learning
was the same. Examples, robot skills, and task query in square brackets [] were replaced with actual
texts according to the test sample and environment.
<System Role> You are a robot operating in a home. A human user can ask you to do various
tasks and you are supposed to tell the sequence of actions you would do to accomplish your task.
<User Role> Examples of human instructions and possible your (robot) answers: [The same
in-context-learning examples are provided]
Now please answer the sequence of actions for the input instruction. You should use one of actions
of this list: [List of robot skills provided] List the actions with comma separator.
Input user instruction: [Task query]
An assistant (robot) agent generates action sequences for the given user instruction. Due to the
unavailability of Guidance’s token selection mechanism Microsoft (2023) for GPT-4, we provided
an admissible action list in the prompt to circumvent the issue.
GPT-4 generated the answer for the given user instruction, and we extracted each step from the
answer text. There was no additional post-processing tailored to GPT-4 (steps not in the provided
list of the skills would not be executed correctly).
We tested GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-Turbo (see the table below for the results). GPT-3.5-Turbo showed
lower success rates for both ALFRED and WAH-NL compared to GPT-3. GPT-4 performed well in


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ALFRED, showing a success rate of 40.38% and an improvement of 19% over GPT-3. However, in
WAH-NL, GPT-4 showed a lower success rate of 34.17% compared to GPT-3.

        Table 4: Success rates of GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 for ALFRED and WAH-NL datasets.

                         Model                        ALFRED       WAH-NL
                         GPT-3 (text-davinci-003)     21.36%        40.82%
                         GPT-4                        40.38%        34.17%
                         GPT-3.5-Turbo                10.58%        28.82%


Despite the limitations of the current setup, GPT-4’s performance notably surpassed that of GPT-
3 in ALFRED. This observation leads us to anticipate that the incorporation of Guidance’s token
selection mechanism Microsoft (2023) for GPT-4 could yield more impressive planning capabilities.


E    M ORE D ETAILS ON WAH-NL

WAH-NL comprises 5 task types: Setup a dinner table, Put groceries, Prepare a meal, Wash dishes,
and Prepare snacks. These tasks are adapted from the orignal WAH dataset. In WAH, the Wash
dishes task was deemed successful when dishes were placed in the dishwasher. We enhanced this
by adding a subgoal, “SWITCHON(dishwasher): 1,” ensuring the dishwasher is activated. The
Read a book task in WAH, which implies a human reading a book while enjoying snacks, has been
transformed into Prepare snacks task. This transformation involved the removal of two inappropriate
subgoals, “HOLD(human, book): 1” and “SIT(human, sofa): 1.” Moreover, the number of objects
for all subgoals was set to 1 since our LLM-based task planner does not consider object instance
recognition. Table 5 shows samples for these 5 task types.
We collected NL instructions for both the train and test sets, comprising 250 and 100 samples respec-
tively, using the Prolific crowdsourcing platform. Crowdworkers were provided with 10 different
goal conditions and asked to generate the corresponding user instructions. Initially, we collected
1,000 instructions, 712 for train set and 288 for test set. We eliminated erroneous samples that mis-
interpreted the goal conditions, resulting the final dataset of 416 instructions for the train set and
195 for the test set. Every sample in both sets has at least one NL instruction. Examples of the
instructions collected are presented in Table 5.

                Table 5: Task types and samples for each type in the WAH-NL datset.

Task Type             Goal Condition                           Instruction
Setup a dinner ta-    ON(plate, kitchen table): 1,             put the following on the kitchen table
ble                   ON(water glass, kitchen table): 1,       - 1 cutlery fork, 1 wine glass, 1 water
                      ON(wine glass, kitchen table): 1,        glass and one plate
                      ON(cutlery fork, kitchen table): 1
Put groceries         INSIDE(cupcake, fridge): 1,              Please get the apple, the pancake, the
                      INSIDE(pancake, fridge): 1,              pound cake and the cupcake and put
                      INSIDE(pound cake, fridge): 1,           them all in the fridge.
                      INSIDE(apple, fridge): 1
Prepare a meal        ON(pancake, kitchen table): 1,           Robot, please put the pancake and
                      ON(pudding, kitchen table): 1            pudding on the kitchen table.
Wash dishes           INSIDE(plate, dishwasher): 1,            Place one wine glass and one plate in
                      INSIDE(wine glass, dishwasher): 1,       the dishwasher and turn it on.
                      SWITCHON(dishwasher):1
Prepare snacks        ON(juice, coffee table): 1,              Put one cupcake and one apple on the
                      ON(apple, coffee table): 1               coffee table



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    P ROMPT
We list the prompts used in the ALFRED and WAH-NL experiments. We also share the prompt of
the replanning experiment, where replanning examples are added.
Listing 1: Prompt for ALFRED experiments when 18 in-context examples are provided (3 examples
per task type). Subsets of the examples below are used when we use fewer examples, like 6 or 12
examples, in the base experiments.
Robot: Hi there, I’m a robot operating in a home.
Robot: You can ask me to do various tasks and I’ll tell you the sequence of actions I would do to accomplish
    ,→ your task.
Human: Put a spoon in the sink.
Robot: 1. find a ladle, 2. pick up the ladle, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the ladle, 5. done.
Human: Move vase from the entertainment center to the coffee table.
Robot: 1. find a vase, 2. pick up the vase, 3. find a coffee table, 4. put down the vase, 5. done.
Human: Move the newspaper in the living room to the couch.
Robot: 1. find a newspaper, 2. pick up the newspaper, 3. find a sofa, 4. put down the newspaper, 5. done.
Human: Pick up a tennis racket and turn on a lamp.
Robot: 1. find a tennis racket, 2. pick up the tennis racket, 3. find a desk lamp, 4. turn on the desk lamp, 5.
    ,→ done.
Human: Pick up a pillow and turn on a lamp.
Robot: 1. find a pillow, 2. pick up the pillow, 3. find a desk lamp, 4. turn on the desk lamp, 5. done.
Human: Examine a credit card using the light from a floor lamp.
Robot: 1. find a credit card, 2. pick up the credit card, 3. find a floor lamp, 4. turn on the floor lamp, 5. done.
Human: Put a pan with a spoon in it on the table.
Robot: 1. find a spoon, 2. pick up the spoon, 3. find a pot, 4. put down the spoon, 5. pick up the pot, 6. find a
    ,→ dining table, 7. put down the pot, 8. done.
Human: Put a box with remote in it on the green couch.
Robot: 1. find a remote control, 2. pick up the remote control, 3. find a box, 4. put down the remote control, 5.
    ,→ pick up the box, 6. find a sofa, 7. put down the box, 8. done.
Human: Place a box with a cell phone on a chair.
Robot: 1. find a cell phone, 2. pick up the cell phone, 3. find a box, 4. put down the cell phone, 5. pick up the
    ,→ box, 6. find an arm chair, 7. put down the box, 8. done.
Human: Place a cold potato on the table.
Robot: 1. find a potato, 2. pick up the potato, 3. find a fridge, 4. open the fridge, 5. put down the potato, 6.
    ,→ close the fridge, 7. open the fridge, 8. find a potato, 9. pick up the potato, 10. close the fridge, 11.
    ,→ find a counter top, 12. put down the potato, 13. done.
Human: Put the chilled bowl in the microwave.
Robot: 1. find a cabinet, 2. open the cabinet, 3. find a bowl, 4. pick up the bowl, 5. close the cabinet, 6. find a
    ,→ fridge, 7. open the fridge, 8. put down the bowl, 9. close the fridge, 10. open the fridge, 11. find a
    ,→ bowl, 12. pick up the bowl, 13. close the fridge, 14. find a microwave, 15. open the microwave, 16.
    ,→ put down the bowl, 17. close the microwave, 18. done.
Human: Put the chilled sliced cabbage in the trash bin.
Robot: 1. find a knife, 2. pick up the knife, 3. find a lettuce, 4. slice the lettuce, 5. find a fridge, 6. open the
    ,→ fridge, 7. put down the knife, 8. close the fridge, 9. find a lettuce, 10. pick up the lettuce, 11. find a
    ,→ fridge, 12. open the fridge, 13. put down the lettuce, 14. close the fridge, 15. open the fridge, 16. find
    ,→ a lettuce, 17. pick up the lettuce, 18. close the fridge, 19. find a garbage can, 20. put down the
    ,→ lettuce, 21. done.
Human: Place a heated plate on the round table.
Robot: 1. find a plate, 2. pick up the plate, 3. find a microwave, 4. open the microwave, 5. put down the plate,
    ,→ 6. close the microwave, 7. turn on the microwave, 8. turn off the microwave, 9. open the microwave,
    ,→ 10. find a plate, 11. pick up the plate, 12. close the microwave, 13. find a dining table, 14. put down
    ,→ the plate, 15. done.
Human: Place a microwaved potato in the sink.
Robot: 1. find a potato, 2. pick up the potato, 3. find a microwave, 4. open the microwave, 5. put down the
    ,→ potato, 6. close the microwave, 7. turn on the microwave, 8. turn off the microwave, 9. open the
    ,→ microwave, 10. find a potato, 11. pick up the potato, 12. close the microwave, 13. find a sink, 14. put
    ,→ down the potato, 15. done.
Human: Moving a bowl to the shelf.
Robot: 1. find a cabinet, 2. open the cabinet, 3. find a cup, 4. pick up the cup, 5. close the cabinet, 6. find a
    ,→ microwave, 7. open the microwave, 8. put down the cup, 9. close the microwave, 10. turn on the
    ,→ microwave, 11. turn off the microwave, 12. open the microwave, 13. find a cup, 14. pick up the cup,
    ,→ 15. close the microwave, 16. find a shelf, 17. put down the cup, 18. done.
Human: Place a cleaned spatula on a dining table.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robot: 1. find a spatula, 2. pick up the spatula, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the spatula, 5. find a faucet, 6. turn
    ,→ on the faucet, 7. turn off the faucet, 8. find a spatula, 9. pick up the spatula, 10. find a dining table,
    ,→ 11. put down the spatula, 12. done.
Human: Place the rinsed off apple on the brown kitchen table.
Robot: 1. find an apple, 2. pick up the apple, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the apple, 5. find a faucet, 6. turn on
    ,→ the faucet, 7. turn off the faucet, 8. find an apple, 9. pick up the apple, 10. find a dining table, 11. put
    ,→ down the apple, 12. done.
Human: Put a clean spatula on the counter.
Robot: 1. find a spatula, 2. pick up the spatula, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the spatula, 5. find a faucet, 6. turn
    ,→ on the faucet, 7. turn off the faucet, 8. find a spatula, 9. pick up the spatula, 10. find a counter top,
    ,→ 11. put down the spatula, 12. done.


Listing 2: Prompt for WAH-NL experiments when 10 in-context examples are provided (2 examples
per task type). Subsets of the examples below are used when we use fewer examples, like 5, in the
base experiments.
Robot: Hi there, I’m a robot operating in a home.
Robot: You can ask me to do various tasks and I’ll tell you the sequence of actions I would do to accomplish
    ,→ your task.
Human: Please put 1 cutlery fork, 1 water glass and 1 plate in the dishwasher and turn the dishwasher on
Robot: 1. walk to dishwasher, 2. open dishwasher, 3. walk to cutlery fork, 4. grab cutlery fork, 5. walk to
    ,→ dishwasher, 6. put cutlery fork in dishwasher, 7. walk to water glass, 8. grab water glass, 9. walk to
    ,→ dishwasher, 10. put water glass in dishwasher, 11. walk to plate, 12. grab plate, 13. walk to
    ,→ dishwasher, 14. put plate in dishwasher, 15. close dishwasher, 16. switch on dishwasher, 17. done.
Human: store the pancake, the glass of wine, the cupcake and the glass of juice in the fridge
Robot: 1. walk to fridge, 2. open fridge, 3. walk to pancake, 4. grab pancake, 5. walk to fridge, 6. put pancake
    ,→ in fridge, 7. walk to wine, 8. grab wine, 9. walk to fridge, 10. put wine in fridge, 11. walk to cupcake
    ,→ , 12. grab cupcake, 13. walk to fridge, 14. put cupcake in fridge, 15. walk to juice, 16. grab juice, 17.
    ,→ walk to fridge, 18. put juice in fridge, 19. close fridge, 20. done.
Human: Take a pudding, an apple, a cupcake, and the juice and put them on the coffee table.
Robot: 1. walk to pudding, 2. grab pudding, 3. walk to coffee table, 4. put pudding on coffee table, 5. walk to
    ,→ apple, 6. grab apple, 7. walk to coffee table, 8. put apple on coffee table, 9. walk to cupcake, 10.
    ,→ grab cupcake, 11. walk to coffee table, 12. put cupcake on coffee table, 13. walk to juice, 14. grab
    ,→ juice, 15. walk to coffee table, 16. put juice on coffee table, 17. done.
Human: Find 1 coffee pot, 1 cupcake, 1 pudding and put on the kitchen table.
Robot: 1. walk to coffee pot, 2. grab coffee pot, 3. walk to kitchen table, 4. put coffee pot on kitchen table, 5.
    ,→ walk to cupcake, 6. grab cupcake, 7. walk to kitchen table, 8. put cupcake on kitchen table, 9. walk
    ,→ to pudding, 10. grab pudding, 11. walk to kitchen table, 12. put pudding on kitchen table, 13. done.
Human: I need a wine glass, water glass and a plate on the kitchen table
Robot: 1. walk to wine glass, 2. grab wine glass, 3. walk to kitchen table, 4. put wine glass on kitchen table, 5.
    ,→ walk to water glass, 6. grab water glass, 7. walk to kitchen table, 8. put water glass on kitchen table,
    ,→ 9. walk to plate, 10. grab plate, 11. walk to kitchen table, 12. put plate on kitchen table, 13. done.
Human: Add a fork and a plate to the dishwasher and switch it on.
Robot: 1. walk to dishwasher, 2. open dishwasher, 3. walk to cutlery fork, 4. grab cutlery fork, 5. walk to
    ,→ dishwasher, 6. put cutlery fork in dishwasher, 7. walk to plate, 8. grab plate, 9. walk to dishwasher,
    ,→ 10. put plate in dishwasher, 11. close dishwasher, 12. switch on dishwasher, 13. done.
Human: Could you put 1 apple, 1 pancake, 1 cupcake and 1 pudding in the fridge?
Robot: 1. walk to fridge, 2. open fridge, 3. walk to apple, 4. grab apple, 5. walk to fridge, 6. put apple in
    ,→ fridge, 7. walk to pancake, 8. grab pancake, 9. walk to fridge, 10. put pancake in fridge, 11. walk to
    ,→ cupcake, 12. grab cupcake, 13. walk to fridge, 14. put cupcake in fridge, 15. walk to pudding, 16.
    ,→ grab pudding, 17. walk to fridge, 18. put pudding in fridge, 19. close fridge, 20. done.
Human: Serve one wine on the coffe table
Robot: 1. walk to wine, 2. grab wine, 3. walk to coffee table, 4. put wine on coffee table, 5. done.
Human: Collect 1 apple, 1 coffee pot, and 1 juice and place them on the kitchen table
Robot: 1. walk to apple, 2. grab apple, 3. walk to kitchen table, 4. put apple on kitchen table, 5. walk to coffee
    ,→ pot, 6. grab coffee pot, 7. walk to kitchen table, 8. put coffee pot on kitchen table, 9. walk to juice,
    ,→ 10. grab juice, 11. walk to kitchen table, 12. put juice on kitchen table, 13. done.
Human: Put a plate, a fork and a water glass onto the kitchen table.
Robot: 1. walk to plate, 2. grab plate, 3. walk to kitchen table, 4. put plate on kitchen table, 5. walk to cutlery
    ,→ fork, 6. grab cutlery fork, 7. walk to kitchen table, 8. put cutlery fork on kitchen table, 9. walk to
    ,→ water glass, 10. grab water glass, 11. walk to kitchen table, 12. put water glass on kitchen table, 13.
    ,→ done.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Listing 3: Part of the prompt used in the replanning experiment. We used three additional replanning
in-context examples, starting on the line following the prompt for ALFRED. The three in-context
examples for replanning take one example from the prompt for ALFRED and add feedback messages
for three different actions.
Robot: I can replan the action to perform successfully when the action fails with the message this action failed
    ,→ . If I generate the wrong plan, I’ll make sure the command succeeds by replanning.
Human: Place the rinsed off apple on the brown kitchen table.
Robot: 1. find an apple, 2. pick up the apple, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the apple, 5. find a faucet, 6. turn on
    ,→ the faucet, 7. turn off the faucet, 8. find an apple, 9. pick up the apple, 10. find a dining table, 11. put
    ,→ down the apple (this action failed: put down failed), 12. find an apple, 13. pick up the apple, 14. find
    ,→ a dining table, 15. put down the apple, 16. done.
Human: Place the rinsed off apple on the brown kitchen table.
Robot: 1. find an apple, 2. pick up the apple, 3. find a sink, 4. put down the apple, 5. find a faucet, 6. turn on
    ,→ the faucet, 7. turn off the faucet, 8. find an apple, 9. find a dining table, 10. put down the apple (this
    ,→ action failed: Robot is not holding any object), 11. find an apple, 12. pick up the apple, 13. find a
    ,→ dining table, 14. put down the apple 15. done.
Human: Place the rinsed off apple on the brown kitchen table.
Robot: 1. find an apple, 2. pick up the apple (this action failed: Apple is not visible because it is in fridge), 3.
    ,→ find a fridge, 4. open the fridge, 5. find an apple, 6. pick up the apple, 7. find a sink, 8. put down the
    ,→ apple, 9. find a faucet, 10. turn on the faucet, 11. turn off the faucet, 12. find an apple, 13. pick up
    ,→ the apple, 14. find a dining table, 15. put down the apple, 16. done.

In replanning experiment, all actions had failure feedback messages. We describes three of them
used in the prompt. The first feedback message is “(this action failed: put down failed)” when the
put down action was failed because a receptacle was not found properly or because of physics-based
simulation error. The second is the feedback message “(this action failed: Robot is not holding any
object)” from the put down action, which failed to put down because the agent was not holding any
object. Third, there is the feedback message “(this action failed: [Object] is not visible because it
is in [Container])”, which is the feedback message from the pick up action when the object is not
visible because the object is inside a container. The other feedback messages can be found in the
supplementary code.

G      D ETAILS ON F INE - TUNED P LANNERS
We fine-tuned LLaMA 1 models using the ALFRED train set (Shridhar et al., 2020), which contains
17,468 pairs of user instructions and corresponding ground-truth plans. The dataset was formatted
in accordance with the Alpaca instruction-following dataset (Taori et al., 2023) for fine-tuning, but
utilizing a specialized prompt template, we aligned the final input for the fine-tuning process with
the main prompt used in the baseline planner. A sample of this dataset is presented in Listing 4.
               Listing 4: An excerpt from the fine-tuning dataset in the ALFRED domain
{
      ‘‘instruction’’: ‘‘\nRobot: Hi there, I’m a robot operating in a home. \nRobot: You can ask me to do
            ,→ various tasks and I’ll tell you the sequence of actions I would do to accomplish your task. \
            ,→ nHuman: Pick up the alarm clock and turn on the lamp.\nRobot:’’,
      ‘‘input’’: ‘‘’’,
      ‘‘output’’: ‘‘1. find an alarm clock, 2. pick up the alarm clock, 3. find a desk lamp, 4. turn on the desk
            ,→ lamp, 5. done.’’
},
{
      ‘‘instruction’’: ‘‘\nRobot: Hi there, I’m a robot operating in a home. \nRobot: You can ask me to do
            ,→ various tasks and I’ll tell you the sequence of actions I would do to accomplish your task. \
            ,→ nHuman: Carry an alarm clock while turning on a lamp\nRobot:’’,
      ‘‘input’’: ‘‘’’,
      ‘‘output’’: ‘‘1. find an alarm clock, 2. pick up the alarm clock, 3. find a desk lamp, 4. turn on the desk
            ,→ lamp, 5. done.’’
},
...

In the fine-tuning process, we utilized LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), with the hyper-parameters set as
follows: the rank of LoRA modules was set to 16 (reduced to 8 for the 30B model due to GPU


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


memory constraints), the dropout rate was 0.1, and the number of epochs was 5. The benchmark
conditions were consistent with those applied in the baseline planner tests, with the exception that
we omitted in-context examples in the prompt since the fine-tuned planners had already been trained
with 17,468 plan examples. Notably, in our experiment, the fine-tuned planners exhibited diminished
performance when provided with in-context examples (for instance, LLaMA 1 30B showed the
success rate of 44.59% in ALFRED valid-unseen set when there are six examples in the prompt,
which is lower than the result without examples), a phenomenon demanding further exploration for
comprehensive understanding.
Table 6 shows the results from the experiments of benchmarking fine-tuned planners. As shown in
the table, our experiments indicate that the procedural knowledge does not transfer well to different
task domains. Specifically, planners fine-tuned on the ALFRED domain underperformed compared
to baseline few-shot planners in the WAH-NL domain.

Table 6: Planning success rates of planners fine-tuned on ALFRED. δ shows changes in success
rates with and without fine tuning (pp refers percentage points).

                                 ALFRED → ALFRED                           ALFRED → WAH-NL
                        valid-seen tasks         valid-unseen tasks
                      Success(%)      δ(pp)    Success(%)          δ(pp)   Success(%)               δ(pp)
   LLaMA 1 7B               32.21   +26.44            37.39    +31.62                3.70          −24.95
   LLaMA 1 13B              42.79   +30.29            45.05    +32.55                2.28          −21.42
   LLaMA 1 30B              57.69   +44.03            60.08    +46.42               10.38          −21.84

The statistics of successful plans according to task types in ALFRED are shown in Table 7. Fine-
tuned planners produced a more uniform distribution of successful plans across different task types.

Table 7: Number of successful plans by ALFRED task type. LLaMA 1 models were used and we
reports results of the baseline and fine-tuning experiments for ALFRED valid-seen tasks.

  Task Type                                                        Baseline                 Fine-tuned
  (number of samples)       Sample Instruction                7B     13B      30B     7B      13B     30B
  Pick & Place (49)         Move a book from a desk to        3       6        4      19       28      28
                            a sofa.
  Stack & Place (33)        Put a bowl with the watch in      0       0        0      11       10      16
                            it on the shelf.
  Cool & Place (39)         Place a cold potato slice in      4       6        6      15       22      26
                            the sink.
  Clean & Place (35)        Put a clean sponge on a           2       10       8      6        10      17
                            metal rack.
  Heat & Place (34)         Put a heated mug on the           0       1        7      13       10      24
                            small black table, left of the
                            tomato.
  Examine in Light (15)     Turn on the tall lamp in          3       3        3      3        9         9
                            the corner while carrying a
                            white cushion.

We also fine-tuned LLaMa 1 models on the WAH-NL train set. We utilized a single instruction
per task, resulting in 250 pairs of user instructions and corresponding ground-truth plans from a
total of 416 instructions. Consistent with our fine-tuning experiments on the ALFRED dataset, the
same hyper-parameters and conditions were employed. The only difference was the inclusion of
five in-context examples in the test prompt, addressing the limited number of WAH-NL train set
and their impact on performance. Table 8 summarizes the results. While the LLaMA 1 7B model
demonstrated a performance decrease of 7.34 percentage points, the larger LLaMA 1 13B and 30B
models exhibited performance increases of 5.77 and 1.56 percentage points, respectively. These


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


results suggest that fine-tuning can enhance the performance of task planners, particularly in larger-
scale language models, even with a constrained number of training examples.

Table 8: Subgoal success rates of planners fine-tuned on WAH-NL. δ shows changes in success rates
with and without fine tuning (pp refers percentage points).

                                                WAH-NL → WAH-NL
                                                Success(%)        δ(pp)
                             LLaMA 1 7B               21.36      −7.34
                             LLaMA 1 13B              29.47      +5.77
                             LLaMA 1 30B              33.78      +1.56


H    A DDITIONAL PLANNING RESULTS
Success and failure results on the ALFRED dataset (Figure 8 and 9) and on the WAH-NL dataset
(Figure 10 and 11). Figure 12 shows a replanning example described in Section 6.2.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 8: Success cases on ALFRED dataset. Results of the baseline planner with GPT-3 175B.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Figure 9: Failure cases on ALFRED dataset. Results of the baseline planner with GPT-3 175B.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 10: Success cases on WAH-NL dataset. Results of the baseline planner with GPT-3 175B.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 11: Failure cases on WAH-NL dataset. Results of the baseline planner with GPT-3 175B.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Success cases of replanning on the ALFRED dataset using LLaMA 2 70B. (Top) Success
case when replanning in pick up action. (Bottom) Success case when replanning in put down action.



                                               27
