Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ENERAL S TABILITY A NALYSIS FOR Z EROTH -O RDER
O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHMS
 Xinyue Liu1,2 , Hualin Zhang 4 , Bin Gu3,4∗ , Hong Chen1,2∗
 1
   College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
 2
   Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, China
 3
   School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
 4
   Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
 lxy36@webmail.hzau.edu.cn,zhanghualin98@gmail.com,
 jsgubin@gmail.com, chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn


                                                 A BSTRACT

              Zeroth-order optimization algorithms are widely used for black-box optimization
              problems, such as those in machine learning and prompt engineering, where the
              gradients are approximated using function evaluations. Recently, a generalization
              result was provided for zeroth-order stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms
              through stability analysis. However, this result was limited to the vanilla 2-point
              zeroth-order estimate of Gaussian distribution used in SGD algorithms. To address
              these limitations, we propose a general proof framework for stability analysis that
              applies to convex, strongly convex, and non-convex conditions, and yields results
              for popular zeroth-order optimization algorithms, including SGD, GD, and SVRG,
              as well as various zeroth-order estimates, such as 1-point and 2-point with different
              distributions and coordinate estimates. Our general analysis shows that coordinate
              estimation can lead to tighter generalization bounds for SGD, GD, and SVRG
              versions of zeroth-order optimization algorithms, due to the smaller expansion
              brought by coordinate estimates to stability analysis.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization algorithms have gained widespread use in solving black-box opti-
mization problems, particularly in machine learning fields (Chen et al., 2017; Kurakin et al., 2016;
Madry et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2022). In such problems, obtaining the explicit gradient is often either
unattainable or too expensive, and only the function value of the output can be obtained. For instance,
pre-trained language models (PTMs) like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) allow only user-designed task-
specific prompts to query them, and their gradients are usually unavailable. Similarly, in scenarios
where the internal structure and training data of a deep neural network (DNN) are unknown, as in
(Papernot et al., 2017), and only the input and output are accessible, the black-box attack can be
launched to manipulate the model output and cause incorrect predictions. Here, ZO algorithms can
achieve excellent performance, comparable or even better than white-box models where gradients are
known (Sun et al., 2022; Papernot et al., 2017).
In ZO optimization algorithms, the approximation of gradients is achieved by using function values.
The accuracy of these zeroth-order (ZO) gradient estimates is critical for determining the convergence
rate and optimal learning rate settings. Therefore, conducting research to improve the accuracy of ZO
gradient estimates is of utmost importance. There are three main categories of ZO gradient estimates:
1-point (Flaxman et al., 2004), 2-point (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017; Duchi et al., 2015) with different
distributions, and coordinate estimates. As the number of function evaluations increases, the accuracy
of the gradient estimates improves (Duchi et al., 2015). When the number of function evaluations
reaches the problem dimension d, it is preferable to use the deterministic coordinate-wise gradient
     ∗
         Corresponding authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


estimate instead of the 1-point and 2-point gradient estimates with random directions. This estimate
has a significantly lower approximation
                                         error (Kiefer & Wolfowitz, 1952; Berahas et al., 2022; Lian
et al., 2016), of order O dµ2 (where µ is the smoothing parameter).
Multiple ZO algorithms have been proposed to address the core problem of minimizing the loss
function in optimization. Initially, the ZO gradient descent (ZO-GD) algorithm (Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017) was the focus of the ZO optimization algorithm field. Yurii et al. (Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017) proposed the ZO-GD algorithm that employs a 2-point Gaussian random gradient estimator
and established convergence guarantees for it. Subsequently, Saeed et al. (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013)
introduced the ZO-SGD algorithm that uses the same estimator. However, due to the high variance of
                                                                                  p
the ZO stochastic gradients, the convergence rate of ZO-SGD is limited to O          1/T (Ghadimi
& Lan, 2013) for non-convex problems, where T is the total number of iterations. To accelerate
its convergence, some variance reduction strategies commonly used in first-order optimization
algorithms, such as SVRG and SAGA, were introduced into the ZO setting. These strategies have
been shown to be effective in the first-order setting and are also effective in the ZO setting. The
ZO-SVRG (Liu et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019) and ZO-SAGA (Huang et al., 2019) algorithms can
improve the convergence rate to O (1/T ).
As mentioned above, research on ZO algorithms in the optimization field is extensive and com-
prehensive. However, there is only one generalization study that focuses specifically on ZO-SGD
(Nikolakakis et al., 2022). In their study, Konstantinos E. et al. (Nikolakakis et al., 2022) provide
generalization results of ZO-SGD under a two-point Gaussian smoothing estimate and demonstrate
that the algorithm has comparable generalization performance to SGD in non-convex environments
when using diminutive step sizes. While Konstantinos E. et al. (Nikolakakis et al., 2022) presents
surprising results, it does not encompass the diverse range of estimates and optimization algorithms in
the ZO optimization field. In contrast to the limited research on ZO generalization, first-order analysis
has yielded a more diverse body of work, specifically regarding algorithms such as SGD (Hardt
et al., 2016), GD (Hoffer et al., 2017; Charles & Papailiopoulos, 2018), and stage-wise learning
strategy (Yuan et al., 2019). These discussions have inspired us to further explore the generalization
performance of ZO algorithms.
To address the limitations of existing research, this paper focuses on studying the generalization
behavior of a more comprehensive ZO optimization algorithm and provides a more inclusive proof
framework.The contributions of this work are as follows:
       • We propose a more general proof framework for ZO optimization algorithms. Leveraging
         our proof framework, we provide for the first time generalization bounds for different
         ZO algorithms, including ZO-SGD, ZO-GD, and ZO-SVRG with different ZO gradient
         estimates under convexity and non-convexity conditions. To the best of our knowledge, this
         is the first work on generalization analysis for ZO-SVRG.
       • ZO optimization algorithms differ from first-order optimization algorithms in that they
         approximate gradient values using function values. As a result, approximation errors
         introduce new expansions for generalization analysis. Our results show that, ZO algorithms
         that use coordinate estimates lead to tighter generalization bounds for ZO-SGD, ZO-GD
         and ZO-SVRG, and importantly same to the ones of first-order algorithms.


2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   N OTATIONS

Throughout this paper, we let N (0, I) denote the standard normal distribution on Rd . We denote the
ℓ2 -ball in Rd with radius r centered at v by Bd (v, r), and Sd−1 (v, r) denotes the ℓ2 -sphere in Rd
with radius r centered at v. We also use the abbreviations Bd = Bd (0, 1), Sd−1 = Sd−1 (0, 1), and 1
for the all-ones vector.

2.2   P ROBLEM S ETUP

Let D := {zi }ni=1 be the training dataset of size n, where each sample is independently identically
distributed over an unknown distribution D. For a prescribed model w, its performance on a single


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: A list of the generalization error bounds developed here in for zeroth-order optimization
algorithms. (NC, C and SC are the abbreviations of nonconvex, convex, and strongly convex,
respectively. T is the whole iteration number, n is the sample size, C is a constant, beta is the
smoothness constant, and S denotes the stage number of ZO-SVRG. The corresponding details for
SVRG are provided in the appendix. )


 Algorithms             Reference            Gradient Estimator       Problem      Generalization Bound
                                                                                          βC
                                                                      NC             O T βC+1 /n
 SGD                Hardt et al. (2016)                None
                                                                        C              O (log T /n)
                                                                       SC                O (1/n)
                Nikolakakis et al. (2022)           2-point         NC, C, SC            O(T /n)
                         Ours                       2-point         NC, C, SC          O (T /n)c
                                                                                            1−      √
                         Ours                       1-point         NC, C, SC       O T /n d2 LC n
 ZO-SGD
                                                                                          βC
                                                                      NC             O T βC+1 /n
                           Ours                Coordinate-wise          C             O (log T /n)
                                                                       SC                O (1/n)
                                                                      NC               O T βC /n
 GD             Nikolakakis et al. (2022)              None
                                                                        C             O (log T /n)
                                                                       SC                O (1/n)
                Nikolakakis et al. (2022)           2-point           NC               O(T βC /n)
                         Ours                       1-point         NC, C, SC          O T C /n
                                                                      NC               O T βC /n
 ZO-GD                     Ours                Coordinate-wise          C             O (log T /n)
                                                                       SC                O (1/n)
                                                                      NC              O S 3βC /n
 SVRG                      Ours                        None
                                                                        C             O S 2βC /n
                                                                       SC                O (S/n)
                                                    1-point         NC, C, SC          O S 3C /n
                                                    2-point         NC, C, SC         O S 3βC /n
                                                                      NC              O S 3βC /n
 ZO-SVRG                   Ours                Coordinate-wise          C             O S 2βC /n
                                                                       SC                O (S/n)



example z is measured by the loss function f (w, z). In this paper, we are particularly interested in
the generalization performance of a model w on D measured by the following expected risk:
                                      R(w) := Ez∼D [f (w, z)].                                       (1)
Since D is unknown, optimizing R(w) directly is not possible. In practice, we measure the model w
by the empirical risk based on the training dataset D:
                                                       n
                                               1X
                                     RD (w) :=       f (w, zi ).                                     (2)
                                               n i=1
For a (randomized) algorithm A trained on dataset D with output A(D), the generalization error is
defined as the gap between the population risk and empirical risk:
                               ϵgen := ED,A [R(A(D)) − RD (A(D))].                                   (3)
A useful tool for analyzing the generalization error is the stability, which measures the sensitivity of
the algorithm’s output w.r.t. the perturbation of a training dataset. The formal definition of uniform
stability is as follows:
Definition 1 (Uniform Stability). A (randomized) algorithm A has uniform stability ϵ if for all
D, D′ ∈ Z that differ in one sample, we have supz EA [f (A(D), z) − f (A(D′ ), z)] ≤ ϵ.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


An important relationship between the uniform stability and generalization error bound is implied by
the following lemma:
Lemma 1 (Hardt et al. (2016), Theorem 2.2). Let A be ϵ uniform stable, then |ϵgen | ≤ ϵ.

The goal of this paper is to derive uniform stability bounds for a class of zeroth-order (randomized)
algorithms with update rule of the form:

                                       wt+1 = wt − αt Gf (wt ),                                      (4)

where Gf (wt ) depends only on the evaluations of the function values. Denote by ∇f     ˆ (w, z) the
gradient estimation of the true gradient ∇f (wt , z), which will be detailed described in the next
subsection. Then, the update rule Eq.equation 4 covers a wide range of gradient estimation based
zeroth-order (gradient-free) algorithms. For example, zeroth-order gradient descent (ZO-GD) with
Gf (wt , z) = ∇R ˆ D (wt ); zeroth-order stochastic gradient descent (ZO-SGD) with Gf (wt , z) =
 ˆ
∇f (wt , zit ), where zit ∈ D is a randomly sampled example at iteration t; zeroth-order stochastic
variance reduced gradient (ZO-SVRG) with Gf (wt ) = ∇f  ˆ (wt , zi ) − ∇f
                                                                       ˆ (w̃, zi ) + ∇R
                                                                                     ˆ D (w̃), where
                                                                  t             t
w̃ is the final output of ZO-SVRG in the last stage. Now we formally describe the gradient estimations
that are commonly used in the literature of zeroth-order optimization.

2.3   ZO G RADIENT E STIMATION

Random Gradient Estimation. Intuition for zeroth-order gradient estimator follows by the fact
about definition of directional derivative that:

               E[f ′ (w, u)u] = E[< ∇f (w), u > u] = ∇f (w) when           E[uu⊤ ] = I,

where f ′ (w, u) := limµ↓0 f (w+µu)−f
                                  µ
                                      (w)
                                          denotes the directional directive of function f with respect
to a direction vector u at point w.
Lemma 2 (Baydin et al. (2022), Lemma 1 & 2). Let u = [u1 , . . . , ud ]⊤ , and ui , i = 1, . . . , d are
i.i.d random variables satisfying E[ui ] = 0, Var[ui ] = 1, then we have E[uu⊤ ] = I.

Note that, several random distributions satisfy the above condition. For example, the standard
                                                                                           √     multi-

                                                                                                    d
variate normal
          √    distribution:
                             N (0, I), uniform distribution over a ball or a sphere: Unif    d + 2B
and Unif dSd−1 . Based on the fact that E f (w+µu)−f  µ
                                                           (w)
                                                               u = E f (w+µu)
                                                                         µ     u, the averaged 1-point
gradient estimate of f has the following generic form:
                                                   K
                                 ˆ (w) := 1
                                            X
                                 ∇f           f (w + µuk )uk ,                                       (5)
                                         µK
                                                  k=1

where uk , k = 1, . . . , K are i.i.d random vectors satisfying Lemma 2. It is easy to verify that the
1-point gradient estimate suffers from large variance. As a comparison, the averaged 2-point gradient
estimate can significantly reduce the variance:
                             ( PK f (w+µu )−f (w)
                                1                k
                ˆ (w) := K Pk=1                  µ        uk ,       forward difference,
               ∇f               1     K   f (w+µuk )−f (w−µuk )                                     (6)
                               K      k=1           2µ          uk , central difference.

Deterministic Coordinate-Wise Gradient Estimation: When the number of function evaluations
                                                                                   d
reaches the problem dimension d, then instead of using randomized directions{ui }i=1 , one can
employ the deterministic coordinate-wise gradient estimate:
                            (Pd f (w+µe )−f (w)
                                            i
                 ˆ (w) := Pi=1             µ        ei         forward difference,
                ∇f              d   f (w+µei )−f (w−µei )                                   (7)
                                i=1           2µ          ei , central difference.

where ei ∈ Rd denotes the i th elementary basis vector, with 1 at the i-th coordinate and 0 elsewhere.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    A G ENERIC G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS F RAMEWORK OF ZO
     O PTIMIZATION
In this section, we will establish a generic generalization analysis framework for zeroth-order
optimization with update rule of the form Eq.equation 4. By derivation, we conclude that as the
approximate gradient approximates the true gradient, the generalization boundary will also tighten
with this approximation. The smaller the error of between the approximate gradient and the true
gradient is, the better the generalization of the model is.
Let Gt (·) and G′t (·) be update rules of first-order methods under samples D and D′ respectively,
which take the form of
                    Gt (wt ) = wt − αt G(wt , zit ),        G′t (wt ) = wt − αt G(wt , zi′t ),           (8)
where G(wt , zit ) and G(wt , zi′t ) represent the gradient estimation of ∇RD (wt ) and ∇RD′ (wt ) via
first-order oracle. Similarly, let G̃t (·) and G̃′t (·) be the update rules of zeroth-order methods as in
Eq.equation 4, i.e.,
                  G̃t (wt ) = wt − αt Gf (wt , zit ),       G̃′t (wt ) = wt − αt Gf (wt , zi′t ),        (9)
where Gf (wt , zit ) and Gf (wt , zi′t ) denote the gradient estimation via zeroth-order oracle. Hardt et al.
(2016) provided a proof framework for SGD, but this framework does not apply to more complex
algorithms. Therefore, we present two new sequences of update rules.
Definition 2 (Hardt et al. (2016), Definition 2.3). An update rule is σ-bounded if
supw∈Ω ∥G (w) − w∥ ≤ σ, and is η-expansive if supw,v∈Ω ∥G (w) − G (v)∥ ≤ η ∥w − v∥.

With these two properties, we can establish the following lemma to demonstrate how the update
sequence of the model diverges when the training set is perturbed.
Lemma 3 (Growth Recursion). Let {G̃t }Tt=1 and {G̃′t }Tt=1 be two update sequences. Let w0 = w0′
                                             ′
be the starting point, wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) and wt+1 = G̃′t (wt ). Then for any wt , wt′ ∈ Rd and t ≥ 0, we
have
           h                      i  (η + η ′ )∥w − w′ ∥ + α σ ,             if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),
                          ′   ′                t    t     t       t t,1
         E G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt ) ≤
                                         ∥wt − wt ∥ + 2αt σt,2 + αt σt,3 , if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).
                                                 ′



The generalization analysis of zeroth-order optimization is similar to the proof framework pro-
posed in Hardt et al. (2016). Here, η is the expansive factor generated by the first-order algorithms
based on different convexity properties. ηt′ is induced by the approximation error of the zeroth-
order gradient estimation. And different estimation would induce different ηt′ . Particularly, in
the case of coordinate-wise estimation, there won’t introduce a new ηt′ . Thus the shrinkage ef-
fect brought about by η becomes evident under convex and strongly convex conditions. σt,1 is
induced by the approximation error of the zeroth-order gradient estimation, which is an upper
bound of E ∥G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))∥. σt,2 is induced by the fact
that the first-order update rule Gt (·) is σt,2 -bounded at iteration t. Finally, σt,3 is induced by
another approximation error of the zeroth-order gradient             estimation, which is an upper bound of
E G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − G(wt′ , zi′t ) − Gf (wt′ , zi′t ) .
Lemma 4. Consider zeroth-order algorithms with final output wT and wT′ with respect to dataset
D, D′ , respectively. Denote δT := ∥wT − wT′ ∥ and ∀t0 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, define the event Eδt0 :=
{δt0 = 0}, we have
                          T
                          X                        T −t
                                   η + n−1 (1 − η)     αt (1 − n−1 )σt,1 + n−1 (2σt,2 + σt,3 )

        E[δT |Eδt0 ] ≤
                         t=t0 +1


Finally, we can obtain the generalization error through the following lemma:
Lemma 5 (Hardt et al. (2016), Lemma 3.11). Assume that the loss function f (·, z) is L-Lipschitz for
all z. Let D and D′ be two samples of size n that differ in only one sample. Denote by wT and wT′ the
final output of zeroth-order algorithms with respect to dataset D and D′ respectively. Then for every
z and t0 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, we have E|f (wT , z) − f (wT′ , z)| ≤ LE[δT |Eδt0 ] + t0 supw,z f (w, z)/n.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     A PPLICATIONS

In this section, we apply the generic generalization analysis to different zeroth-order algorithms such
as zeroth-order stochastic gradient descent, and zeroth-order stochastic variance reduced gradient.

4.1   ZO-SGD G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

ZO-SGD with 1-Point Gradient Estimation. To begin with, we first define some basic notations
used in zeroth-order stochastic gradient descent with averaged 1-point gradient estimation of the form
Eq.equation 5. At the t-th iteration, we uniformly randomly select a sample index it from [n], and
then update parameter wt by
                                                  ˆ K f (wt , zi ),
                                   wt+1 = wt − αt ∇                                                  (10)
                                                    1           t


where {αt } is a sequence of positive step-size and ∇   ˆ K f (wt , zi ) denotes the 1-point gradient
                                                          1           t
estimation of form equation 5. Under the Lipschitz continuous and smooth condition, ZO-SGD with
1-point gradient estimation has the following generalization bound.
Theorem 1 (Nonconvex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz and β-smooth for all
z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 10 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤ C/t
for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of ZO-SGD with 1-point
gradient estimation is bounded by
                                                              T e1+1/e
                            ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC + CL/c)−1                     c
                                                                  1− d2 LC √
                                                                                .
                                                              n             n



ZO-SGD with 2-Point Gradient Estimation. Then we consider the generalization error bound of
ZO-SGD with 2-point gradient estimation. As formulated in Eq.equation 6, there are two general
forms of 2-point gradient estimation: central difference and forward difference. At the t-th iteration,
we uniformly randomly select a sample index it from [n], and then update parameter wt by:
                                                  ˆK
                                   wt+1 = wt − αt ∇ 2 f (wt , zit ),                                 (11)

where {αt } is a sequence of positive step-size and ∇   ˆ K f (wt , zi ) denotes the 2-point gradient
                                                          2           t
estimator of form equation 6. Under the same conditions as in ZO-SGD with 1-point gradient
estimation, we found that both the forward difference version and central difference version update
rule would derive the same expansive factor and tighter generalization error bound of the same order.
Theorem 2 (Nonconvex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz and β-smooth for all
z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 11 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤ C/t
for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of ZO-SGD with 2-point
                                                       2
gradient estimation is bounded by ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC)−1

                                                         1 + (2 + c)CL2 3T e/2n.

ZO-SGD with Coordinate-Wise Gradient Estimation. Then we consider the generalization errror
bound of ZO-SGD with coordinate-wise gradient estimation. At the t-th iteration, zeroth-order
stochastic gradient with coordinate-wise gradient estimation uniformly randomly select a sample
index it from [n], and then update parameter wt by:
                                                   ˆ d f (wt , zi )
                                    wt+1 = wt − αt ∇                                                 (12)
                                                                 t


                                                    ˆ d f (wt , zi ) denotes the coordinate-wise gradient
where {αt } is a sequence of positive step-size and ∇             t
estimation of form equation 7. We separate the generalization error bound of ZO-SGD with coordinate-
wise gradient estimation into three different cases and get the following theorem.
Theorem 3. Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth and L-Lipschitz for every z. Let T be
the total number of iterates of ZO-SGD with coordinate-wise gradient estimation and for any t ≤ T ,
                                                                                 2       P
                                                                                             T
  • if each f (·, z) is convex, αt ≤ β2 and choose µ ≤ dn
                                                        c
                                                          , then we have ϵgen ≤ 2L +βcL
                                                                                   n         t=1 αt .

                                                                                                 2
                                                                   c
 • if each f (·, z) is γ-strongly convex, αt ≤ 1/β and choose µ ≤ dn , then we have ϵgen ≤ 2L γn
                                                                                              +βcL
                                                                                                   .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 • if the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] for all z, αt ≤ C/t for some (fixed) C > 0, then we have
                                        1
                                   1 + βC                1          βC
                          ϵgen ≤            2CL2 + βCcL βC+1 (eT ) βC+1 .
                                     n
Remark 1. Both 1-point and 2-point gradient estimations lead to a new expansive factor, which
invalidates the contraction property induced by the expansive factor η of first-order update rules
under convex and strongly convex conditions. As a result, the generalization bound under convex and
strongly convex conditions is of the same order as that under non-convex conditions. As a comparison,
coordinate-wise estimate does not generate new expansive factors, and the σt,1 it brings is also
independent of the dimension d.

4.2   ZO-GD G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

ZO-GD with 1-point Gradient Estimation. At the t-th iteration, zeroth-order gradient descent with
1-point gradient estimation updates parameter wt by:
                                                  ˆ 1 RD (wt ),
                                   wt+1 = wt − αt ∇                                              (13)
                                                    K

      ˆ 1 RD (wt ) denotes the 1-point gradient estimator of form equation 5.
where ∇ K
Theorem 4 (Nonconvex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz and β-smooth for
all z ∈ Z. Consider the  update rule Eq.equation 13 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤
C/t β(Γkd + 1) + LAd /µ for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error
of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by ϵgen ≤ min{C + 1, C log(eT )}(2L2 +
β + βL)(eT )C /(nβ).

ZO-GD with 2-point Gradient Estimation. At the t-th iteration, zeroth-order gradient descent with
2-point gradient estimation updates parameter wt by:
                                                  ˆ 2 RD (wt ),
                                   wt+1 = wt − αt ∇                                              (14)
                                                    K

      ˆ 2 RD (wt ) denotes the 2-point gradient estimator of form equation 6.
where ∇ K
Theorem 5 (Nonconvex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz and β-smooth for all z ∈
Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 14 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤ C/ Γkd + 1 t
for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 2-point
gradient estimation is bounded by
                               (2 + c)L2      Cβ    Cβ + 1
                      ϵgen ≤             (eT ) min{        , C log (eT )}.
                                   n                  β

ZO-GD with Coordinate Gradient Estimation. At the t-th iteration, zeroth-order gradient descent
with coordinate-wise gradient estimation updates parameter wt by:
                                                   ˆ d RD (wt ),
                                    wt+1 = wt − αt ∇                                             (15)
      ˆ d RD (wt ) denotes the coordinate-wise gradient estimator of form equation 7.
where ∇
Theorem 6. Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth and L-Lipschitz for every z. Let T be
the total number of iterates of ZO-GD with coordinate-wise gradient estimation and for any t ≤ T ,
                                                                                 2       P
                                                                                             T
  • if each f (·, z) is convex, αt ≤ β2 and choose µ ≤ dn
                                                        c
                                                          , then we have ϵgen ≤ 2L +βcL
                                                                                   n         t=1 αt .

                                                                                             2
 • if each f (·, z) is γ-strongly convex, αt ≤ β1 and choose µ ≤ dn
                                                                  c
                                                                    , then we have ϵgen ≤ 2L γn
                                                                                             +βcL
                                                                                                  .

 • if the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] for all z, αt ≤ C/t for some (fixed) C > 0, then we have

                                 (2 + c)L2      Cβ    Cβ + 1
                        ϵgen ≤             (eT ) min{        , C log (eT )}.
                                     n                  β

                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   ZO-SVRG G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we will analyze the generalization bound of zeroth-order stochastic variance
reduced gradient method. To the best of our knowledge, there are multiple versions of ZO-SVRG. In
the paper, we consider the single-sample version of the ZO-SVRG. Specifically, in the s-th stage, t-th
iteration, ZO-SVRG uniformly randomly selects a sample index ist , and update parameter wts by
                    ˆ (wts , zis ) − ∇f
              vts = ∇f               ˆ (w̃s , zis ) + ∇R
                                                      ˆ D (w̃s ),    s
                                                                    wt+1 = wts − αt vts ,         (16)
                               t                t


where w̃s = wm  s−1
                    is the final iterate of stage s − 1, where m is number of steps of each stage, and
{αt } is a sequence of positive step-size.
ZO-SVRG with 1-point Gradient Estimation. We first consider the generalization error bound
of ZO-SVRG with 1-point gradient estimation. Let ∇f ˆ (ws , zis ), ∇f
                                                                   ˆ (w̃s , zis ) and ∇R
                                                                                      ˆ D (w̃s ) be
                                                          t   t               t
approximated Eq.equation 5, and update parameter wts through Eq. equation 16. Then, we have the
following theorem.
Theorem 7. Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, and L-Lipschitz   for every z. Suppose
that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/ sm(β(Γkd + 1) + LA

                                                                   µ
                                                                     d
                                                                       )   for T steps. After S stages,
                                  2                3C
ZO-SVRG satisfies with ϵgen ≤ (2L + β + βL)S exp C/(Cβn).

ZO-SVRG with 2-point Gradient Estimation. Then we consider the generalization error bound
of ZO-SVRG with 2-point gradient estimation. Let ∇fˆ (ws , zis ), ∇f
                                                                  ˆ (w̃s , zis ) and ∇R
                                                                                     ˆ D (w̃s ) be
                                                         t   t               t
                                                  s
approximated Eq.equation 6, and update parameter wt through Eq. equation 16. Then, we have the
following theorem.
Theorem 8. Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth,
                                                             and L-Lipschitz for every z. Suppose
that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/sm Γkd + 1 for T steps. After S stages, ZO-SVRG
satisfies ϵgen ≤ (2L2 + cL)S 3βC exp Cβ/(βn).

ZO-SVRG with Coordinate-Wise Gradient Estimation. Then we consider the generalization error
bound of ZO-SVRG with coordinate-wise gradient estimation. Let ∇f ˆ (wts , zis ), ∇f
                                                                                  ˆ (w̃s , zis ) and
                                                                             t               t
ˆ       s                                                      s
∇RD (w̃ ) be approximated Eq.equation 7, and update parameter wt through Eq. equation 16. Then,
we have the following theorem.
Theorem 9. Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, and L-Lipschitz for every z. Let T be
he total number of iterates of ZO-SVRG with coordinate-wise gradient estimation and for any t ≤ T ,
                           C
 • Suppose we choose αt ≤ sm  at state S. After S states, ZO-SVRG satisfies uniform stability with
             2        3βC
   ϵgen ≤ (2L + cL)S      exp Cβ/(Cβn).
                                          C
 • if f (·, z) is convex for all z, αt ≤ sm at stage S. After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies uniform
                                       −1                             2βC
   stability with ϵgen ≤ min C + β , c log(eS) (6L2 + 3cL) (eS)           /n.

 • if f (·, z) is γ-strongly convex for all z, αt ≤ β1 .After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies uniform
   stability with ϵgen ≤ (6SL2 + 3cS)/(nγ).
Remark 2. Utilizing full-batch updates with ZO-GD and ZO-SVRG, it’s not possible to adopt the
same step size as in ZO-SGD for first-order updates. Furthermore, under the condition of selecting
a smaller step size, the generalization bound of ZO-GD, O(T βC /n), is looser compared to that of
ZO-SGD , O( Tn ).


5     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we assess the generalization errors associated with optimizing nonconvex loss
functions using ZO-GD, ZO-SGD, and ZO-SVRG. To primary goal is to verify the generalization
errors of different zeroth-order optimization algorithms and different gradient estimators. To achieve
this, we conduct experiments on two nonconvex models: nonconvex logistic regression and a two
layer neural network.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1                                                                                           E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Nonconvex logistic regression: Initially, we examine a logistic regression problem featuring a
nonconvex regularization term. The loss function is formulated as:
                       n                                                   d
                   1X                                                     X     x2i
                          − yi log σ(−aTi x) + (1 − yi ) log σ(aTi x) + λ

           f (x) =                                                                    ,
                   n i=1                                                  i=1
                                                                              1 + x2i
where ai ∈ Rd represents the sample, yi ∈ {0, 1} signifies the label, σ(z) = 1+e1−z , and λ is
assigned a value of 0.5. Neural network: Subsequently, we focus on a binary classification task
using a two-layer neural network with relu activation function and binary cross entropy loss. Dataset:
For both two nonconvex models, we utilize the LIBSVM’s Australian dataset. We separate the dataset
into two parts: 80% for training and 20% for test.

5.2                                                                                           C OMPARISON OF G ENERALIZATION E RRORS ON D IFFERENT ZO ALGORITHMS

In this part, we assess the generalization errors of various zeroth-order optimization algorithms
using identical gradient estimators. Generalization errors are measured by the absolute difference
between training and testing losses. Figure 1 depicts our results, with each subfigure comparing the
performance of ZO-GD, ZO-SGD, and ZO-SVRG under a consistent gradient estimation method.
The figures collectively indicate that generalization errors for all algorithms tend to rise as the number
of iterations increases. Specifically, ZO-GD exhibits the most rapid increase in error, with ZO-SVRG
following. As the algorithms approach convergence, ZO-SGD consistently demonstrates the smallest
generalization error. These empirical findings corroborate our theoretical results presented in Table 1.


                DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                           =2 *'   SRLQW IRUZDUG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =2 *'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                       =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                          =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                                       =2 6*'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                                        =2 6*'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                 =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                    =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO

                                                                                                                                           =2 695*   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                                      =2 695*   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                   =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                      =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO


                                                                                                                                HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                         HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                             HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                        HSRFK


                                                                            (a) 2-point (forward)                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) 2-point (central)                                                                                                                        (c) coordinate (forward)                                                                                                                                                                                              (d) coordinate (central)


 DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                    DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                      =2 *'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                                             =2 *'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                       =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                       =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                                      =2 6*'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                                           =2 6*'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                     =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                     =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO

                                                                                                                                      =2 695*   SRLQW IRUZDUG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =2 695*   SRLQW FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO

                                                                                                                               HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                         HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                             HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                                       HSRFK


                                                                         (e) 2-point (forward)                                                                                                                                                                                   (f) 2-point (central)                                                                                                      (g) coordinate (forward)                                                                                                                                                                                                 (h) coordinate (central)

Figure 1: Comparison of generalization errors of different algorithms. (a)-(d) are results for nonconvex
logistic regression and (e)-(h) are results for neural network

5.3                                                                                           C OMPARISON OF G ENERALIZATION E RRORS ON D IFFERENT ZO G RADIENT E STIMATORS

Due to space limitation, we defer the detailed experimental results and discussions of this part to
Appendix B.

6                                                                                        C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a generalized proof framework for zeroth-order optimization algorithms.
Using this framework, we establish generalization bounds for ZO-SGD, ZO-GD, and ZO-SVRG with
various estimators and convexity conditions. Our findings reveal that employing coordinate estimates
in ZO algorithms outperforms other estimators in terms of generalization performance. Additionally,
we demonstrate that ZO algorithms can achieve comparable generalization performance to first-order
algorithms by leveraging coordinate estimates without reducing the learning rate.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.
62376104 and 12071166), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China
(No. 2662023LXPY005), and HZAU-AGIS Cooperation Fund (No. SZYJY2023010).

R EFERENCES
Atılım Güneş Baydin, Barak A Pearlmutter, Don Syme, Frank Wood, and Philip Torr. Gradients
  without backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08587, 2022.

Albert S Berahas, Liyuan Cao, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Katya Scheinberg. A theoretical and
  empirical comparison of gradient approximations in derivative-free optimization. Foundations of
  Computational Mathematics, 22(2):507–560, 2022.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Zachary Charles and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Stability and generalization of learning algorithms
  that converge to global optima. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 745–754.
  PMLR, 2018.

Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, Yash Sharma, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Zoo: Zeroth order
  optimization based black-box attacks to deep neural networks without training substitute models.
  In Proceedings of the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security, pp. 15–26, 2017.

John C Duchi, Michael I Jordan, Martin J Wainwright, and Andre Wibisono. Optimal rates for
  zero-order convex optimization: The power of two function evaluations. IEEE Transactions on
  Information Theory, 61(5):2788–2806, 2015.

Abraham D Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
  in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. arXiv preprint cs/0408007, 2004.

Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
  programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013.

Moritz Hardt, Ben Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic
 gradient descent. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1225–1234. PMLR, 2016.

Elad Hoffer, Itay Hubara, and Daniel Soudry. Train longer, generalize better: closing the generaliza-
  tion gap in large batch training of neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Feihu Huang, Bin Gu, Zhouyuan Huo, Songcan Chen, and Heng Huang. Faster gradient-free proximal
  stochastic methods for nonconvex nonsmooth optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1503–1510, 2019.

Kaiyi Ji, Zhe Wang, Yi Zhou, and Yingbin Liang. Improved zeroth-order variance reduced algorithms
  and analysis for nonconvex optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  3100–3109. PMLR, 2019.

Jack Kiefer and Jacob Wolfowitz. Stochastic estimation of the maximum of a regression function.
  The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 462–466, 1952.

Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01236, 2016.

Xiangru Lian, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yijun Huang, and Ji Liu. A comprehensive linear
  speedup analysis for asynchronous stochastic parallel optimization from zeroth-order to first-order.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sijia Liu, Bhavya Kailkhura, Pin-Yu Chen, Paishun Ting, Shiyu Chang, and Lisa Amini. Zeroth-
   order stochastic variance reduction for nonconvex optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 17:527–566, 2017.
Konstantinos Nikolakakis, Farzin Haddadpour, Dionysis Kalogerias, and Amin Karbasi. Black-box
  generalization: Stability of zeroth-order learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:31525–31541, 2022.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z Berkay Celik, and Ananthram
  Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
  Asia conference on computer and communications security, pp. 506–519, 2017.
Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Black-box tuning for
  language-model-as-a-service. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20841–20855.
  PMLR, 2022.
Zhuoning Yuan, Yan Yan, Rong Jin, and Tianbao Yang. Stagewise training accelerates convergence
  of testing error over sgd. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      N OTATIONS

The main notations of this paper are summarized in Table 2.


                       Table 2: Summary of main notations involved in this paper.
 Notations              Descriptions
 ZO                     Zeroth-order
 SGD                    Stochastic gradient descent
 GD                     Gradient descent
 SVRG                   Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient
 zit                    the random sample
 D = {z1 , ..., zn }    the dataset
 n                      the numbers of samples
 w, W                   the parameter of training model and model parameter space, respectively
 d                      the dimensions of W, respectively
 f (w)                  the loss function defined as f (w; zit )
 ∇f                     the gradient of f (w; zit ) to the first argument w
 ˆ
 ∇f                     the gradient estimation of the true gradient ∇f
 Gt (·), G′t (·)        the update rules of first-order methods under samples S and S ′ , respectively
 G̃t (·), G̃′ t (·)     the update rules of zeroth-order methods under samples S and S′ , respectively
 µ                      the smoothing parameter
 s                      the stage for SVRG
 S                      the whole number of stages
 m                      the number of steps of each stage
 U                      the random direction vector drawn from a certain distribution D
 K                      the number of direction vector
 R, RD                  the population risk and empirical risk based on training dataset D, respectively
 T                      the whole number of iterative steps
 wt                     the model parameter derived by SGD after t-th update
 αt                     the step size at the t-th update
 α                      the step size
 A, A(D)                the given algorithm and its output model parameter based on training dataset D, respectively
 γ, L, β                the parameters of strong convexity, Lipschitz continuity and smoothness, respectively
 e                      the base of the natural logarithm



B      C OMPARISON OF G ENERALIZATION E RRORS ON D IFFERENT ZO G RADIENT
       E STIMATORS

In this section, we present supplementary experimental settings and evaluate the impact of different
gradient estimators on generalization errors and report the absolute difference between the training
and testing losses in Figure 2.


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For all experiments, we set the maximum number of iterations to be 2000. The batch size of the
stochastic gradient is set to be 50. The initial learning rate is set to 0.01. This rate is systematically
decreased every T iterations by a factor of γ. Both T and γ are optimally determined through a grid
search process where T and γ are chosen from {30, 60, 100, 150, 200, 250} and {0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9},
respectively. The adjustment of the learning rate at regular intervals helps in fine-tuning the learn-
ing process, potentially leading to more effective and efficient convergence of the model. For
2-point gradient estimator, we also conduct a grid search for the parameter K chosen from the set
{2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12}.


                DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                         =2 *'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                           =2 6*'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                     =2 695*   SRLQW IRUZDUG

                                                                                                                         =2 *'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                       =2 6*'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                 =2 695*   SRLQW FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                         =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                           =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                     =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG
                                                                                                                         =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO                                                                                                                           =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO

                                                                                                                           HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                              HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                           HSRFK

                                                                                                       (a) ZO-GD                                                                                                                                                                            (b) ZO-SGD                                                                                                                                                                             (c) ZO-SVRG


    DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                            DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DEV WHVW ORVV   WUDLQ ORVV


                                                                                                                        =2 *'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                        =2 6*'   SRLQW IRUZDUG                                                                                                                                       =2 695*   SRLQW IRUZDUG
                                                                                                                    =2 *'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                    =2 6*'   SRLQW FHQWUDO                                                                                                                                   =2 695*   SRLQW FHQWUDO
                                                                                                                        =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                        =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG                                                                                                                       =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH IRUZDUG

                                                                                                                        =2 *' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO                                                                                                                        =2 6*' FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO                                                                                                                       =2 695* FRRUGLQDWH ZLVH FHQWUDO


                                                                                                                          HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                              HSRFK                                                                                                                                                                           HSRFK

                                                                                                     (d) ZO-GD                                                                                                                                                                              (e) ZO-SGD                                                                                                                                                                             (f) ZO-SVRG

Figure 2: Comparison of generalization errors of different gradient estimators. (a)-(c) are results for
nonconvex logistic regression and (d)-(f) are results for neural network

As illustrated in the figure, the coordinate-wise gradient estimator has smaller generalization errors
than the 2-point gradient estimator. Additionally, both the forward and central difference versions of
these estimators demonstrate comparable generalization errors.

C                                                                        P REPARATION FOR P ROOF

C.1                                                                                 S OME BASIC DEFINITIONS AND LEMMAS

Definition 3 (L-Lipschitz). We say that f is L-Lipschitz if for all points u in the domain of f we
have ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ L. This implies that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |f (u) − f (v)| ≤ L∥u − v∥.
Definition 4 (β-Smooth). A function f : Ω → R is β-smooth if for all for all u, v ∈ Ω we have
                                                                                                                                                                                           ∥∇f (u) − ∇f (v)∥ ≤ β∥u − v∥.
Definition 5 (Convex). A function f : Ω → R is convex if for all u, v ∈ Ω we have
                                                                                                                                                                                           f (u) ≥ f (v) + ⟨∇f (v), u − v⟩.
Definition 6 (γ-Strongly Convex). A function f : Ω → R is γ-strongly convex if for all u, v ∈ Ω we
have
                                                           γ
                          f (u) ≥ f (v) + ⟨∇f (v), u − v⟩ + ∥u − v∥2 .
                                                           2
Lemma 6 (Hardt et al. (2016), Lemma 3.7). Assume that f is β-smooth. Then, the following
properties hold.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. G is (1 + αβ)-expansive.
2. Assume in addition that f is convex. Then, for any α ≤ 2/β, the gradient update G is 1-expansive.

                                                                   2              αβγ
3. Assume in addition that f is γ-strongly convex. Then, for α ≤ β+γ  , G is 1 − β+γ     expansive.


D      T HE A PPROXIMATION E RROR UNDER D IFFERENT ZO G RADIENT
       E STIMATION
From Lemma 1, if we establish the bound for EA [f (A(D), z) − f (A(D′ ), z)], then we determine
the generalized error bound for zeroth-order optimization algorithms. And we apply the lipchitz
condition on f (·, z) to get
                                  E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE∥wT − wT′ ∥,
So, bounding the limit of E [δT ] = E∥wT − wT′ ∥ is the main task of this work. For zeroth-order
optimization, wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) = wt − αt Gf (wt+1 ) then we have


         E∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ∥ = E∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ )∥
      =E∥Gt (wt ) − Gt (wt′ ) + αt [G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))] ∥
      ≤E ∥Gt (wt ) − Gt (wt′ )∥ + αt E ∥G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))∥ .

E ∥G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))∥ constitutes the primary part influenced
by the estimator.

D.1      1- POINT GRADIENT ESTIMATION

The formula for 1-point gradient estimation is as follows:
                                                     K
                                    ˆ (w, z) = 1       f (w + µuk , z)
                                                     X
                                    ∇f                                      uk .
                                               K                   µ
                                                     k=1
                                                         ∗     ⋆      th
By
  applying the Taylor
                      expansion
                                                 Wk , Wk with j  coordinates
                                there exist vectors                                in the intervals

                (j)                (j)              ′(j)   ′(j)     (j)      ′(j)       (j)
   (j) (j)
 w , w + µUk              (j)
                     ∪ w + µUk , w       (j)
                                              , w ,w            + µUk    ∪ w      + µUk , w′(j) ,
such that for any w, w′ ∈ Rd we have
                   ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
    E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
            K
       1 X < f (w, z) − f (w′ , z) , uk >
≤E
       K                µ
           k=1
                K
                                                                                        !
          1 X
+E            ⟨∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z) , uk ⟩ uk − (∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z))
          K
               k=1
           K                                                 K
         1 X  µ                    ∗
                                                        1 X  µ T 2
+E                       uT  2
                          k ∇w f (Wk , z) uk uk + E            uk ∇w f (Wk⋆ , z) uk uk
       K             2                                  K    2
           k=1                                               k=1
         K
     1   X
≤              E ∥uk ∥ E ∥f (w, z) − f (w′ , z)∥
    µK
         k=1
       K                                              K
 1     X h
                2
                  i                               1 X          h
                                                                       3
                                                                         i
+       E ∥uk ∥ E [∥∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z)∥] +          µβE ∥uk ∥
 K                                               K
   k=1                                               k=1
 (
     L
                             ∥w − w ∥ + µβE ∥uk ∥ , if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),
                                     ′
                        2
                                                   3

       E∥u1 ∥ + βE ∥u1 ∥
≤ Lµ
                    ′
                                                          if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).
                                 2

   µ E∥u1 ∥∥w − w ∥ + 2LE ∥u1 ∥       + µβE ∥uk ∥3 ,

                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2    2- POINT GRADIENT ESTIMATION

The formula for central difference is as follows:


                                              K
                               ˆ (w) = 1
                                              X f (w + µuk , z) − f (w − µuk , z)
                               ∇f                                                                  uk
                                       K                                   2µ
                                              k=1


By applying the Taylor  expansion there exist
                                            vectors
                                                                Wk⊛ and Wk⋇ with j th coor-
                                                    Wk∗ , Wk⋆ ,
                                                        (j)                             (j)                 (j)
dinates in the intervals w(j) , w(j) + µuk      ∪ w(j) + µuk , w(j) , w(j) − µuk , w(j) , ∪

                   (j)                    (j)                (j)                 (j)
  w(j) , w(j) − µuk , w′(j) , w′(j) + µuk      ∪ w′(j) + µuk , w′(j) , w′(j) − µuk , w′(j) ∪

                    (j)
  w′(j) , w′(j) − µuk , such that for any w, w′ ∈ Rd we have


                     ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
      E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
                  K
                                                                                                        !
               1 X
      ≤            ∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z) , utk utk − (∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z))
               K
                 k=1
                     K                                                         K
               1 X  µ T 2                       1 X  µ T 2
      + αt            uk ∇w f (Wk∗ , z) uk uk +        uk ∇w f (Wk⋆ , z) uk uk
               K    4                           K    4
                  k=1                                                      k=1
             K                                                         K
           1 X  µ                     ⊛
                                                                     1 X  µ
                             uT  2
                                                                                       uT  2
                                                                                                ⋇
      +                       k ∇w f Wk , z uk uk +                                     k ∇w f Wk , z uk uk
           K             4                                           K             4
               k=1                                                       k=1
           K                                                     K
        1 X                                                  1 X          h
                                                                              3
                                                                                i
              E ∥uk ∥2 E [∥∇f (wt , z) − ∇f (wt′ , z)∥] +             µβE utk

      ≤
        K                                                   K
          k=1                                                   k=1

         βE ∥u1 ∥2 ∥w − w′ ∥ + µβE ∥u1 ∥3 , if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),

      ≤
                                                  if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).

         2LE ∥u1 ∥2 + µβE ∥u1 ∥3 ,

D.3    C OORDINATE -W ISE G RADIENT E STIMATION

The formula for forward difference is as follows:
                                                 d
                                      ˆ (w) =
                                                 X f (w + µei , z) − f (w, z)
                                      ∇f                                                      ei
                                                 i=1
                                                                          µ


By applying the Taylor expansion there exist vectors Wi∗ and Wi† with ith coordinates in the intervals
(w, w + µei ) and (w′ , w′ + µei ), respectively, such that for any w, w′ ∈ Rd we have


                               ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
                E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
                         d
                         X
                ≤∥             ⟨∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z) , ei ⟩ ei − (∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z)) ∥
                         i=1
                      d                                                  d
                      X   µ                  ∗
                                                                         X   µ
                                                                                               †

                +∥                  eT  2
                                     i ∇ f (Wi , z) ei        ei ∥ + ∥                 eT  2
                                                                                        i ∇ f Wi , z ei ei ∥.
                      i=1
                                2                                        i=1
                                                                                   2

      Pd                     ′                                  ′
For    i=1 ⟨∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w , z) , ei ⟩ ei = ∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w , z), we have


                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
             E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
                      d                                           d
                      X   µ               ∗
                                                                 X    µ T 2   †
                 ≤∥           eT ∇ 2
                                     f (W   , z) e i   e i ∥ + ∥       e ∇ f Wi , z ei ei ∥
                      i=1
                             2 i          i
                                                                 i=1
                                                                      2 i
                 ≤ dβµ.

The formula for central difference is as follows:


                                           d
                              ˆ (w) =
                                           X f (w + µei , z) − f (w − µei , z)
                              ∇f                                                 ei
                                           i=1
                                                                µ

By applying the Taylor expansion there exist vectors Wk∗ , Wk⋆ , Wk⊛ and Wk⋇ with j th coordinates in
the intervals (w, w + µei ) ,(w − µei , w), (w′ , w′ + µei ), (w′ − µei , w′ )respectively, such that for
any w, w′ ∈ Rd we have

                            ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
             E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
                      d
                      X
                 ≤∥         ⟨∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z) , ei ⟩ ei − (∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w′ , z)) ∥
                      i=1
                      d                                     d
                      X   µ             ∗
                                                           X    µ T 2
                 +∥            eT  2
                                i ∇ f (Wi , z) ei ei ∥ + ∥        ei ∇ f (Wi⋆ , z) ei ei ∥
                      i=1
                             4                             i=1
                                                                4
                      d                                           d
                      X   µ                                      X    µ T 2
                 +∥              eT  2
                                  i ∇ f   Wi⊛ , z    ei ei ∥ + ∥        ei ∇ f Wi⋇ , z ei ei ∥
                      i=1
                             4                                   i=1
                                                                      4
             .
      Pd                     ′                                  ′
For    i=1 ⟨∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w , z) , ei ⟩ ei = ∇f (w, z) − ∇f (w , z), we have


                            ˆ (w, z)) − (∇f (w′ , z) − ∇f
             E (∇f (w, z) − ∇f                         ˆ (w′ , z))
                      d                                     d
                      X   µ             ∗
                                                           X    µ T 2
                 ≤∥            eT  2
                                i ∇ f (Wi , z) ei ei ∥ + ∥        ei ∇ f (Wi⋆ , z) ei ei ∥
                      i=1
                             4                             i=1
                                                                4
                      d                                    d
                      X   µ             ⊛
                                                          X    µ T 2
                 +∥            eT  2
                                i ∇ f W i , z ei ei ∥ + ∥        ei ∇ f Wi⋇ , z ei ei ∥
                      i=1
                             4                            i=1
                                                               4
                 ≤ dβµ.

Comparing 1-point estimation, 2-point estimation with coordinate-wise estimation, the increment
brought by the last one to the analysis process is dβµ, which can be directly controlled by the smooth
parameter µ and does not bring any associated increment of ∥w−w′ ∥. It brings smaller approximation
errors and does not bring new increments to the expansive factor, so that the generalization bound
will be affected by the convexity of the function.

E     P ROOF OF G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS OF D IFFERENT D ISTRIBUTION

The components about
                h     direction
                       i        vector encompassed within
                                                    h     the approximation error are defined
                                                                                      i       as
                     3                                 1
                                                          PK
follows: Cd ≜ E ∥u∥2 , Ad ≜ E [∥u∥2 ] and ΓdK ≜ E K         k=1 ⟨V, uk ⟩ u k − V  | V  , We can
summarize the information in the following table.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 3: Summary of main distribution involved in this paper.

                                      √                           √
              Parameter        Unif    d + 2Bd               Unif dSd−1               Standard normal
                                      q                          q                        q
                                           d+1                          d−1                    3d−1
              ΓK
               d                            K                            K                      K
                                  d
                                       √                               √                  √
              Ad                 d+1       d+2                             d                   d+3
                                                 3                       3                        3
                                 d
              Cd                d+3 (d + 2)
                                                 2
                                                                       d2                (d + 3) 2



E.1   P ROOF OF U NIFORM D ISTRIBUTION
                                                           √
Lemma 7. Let uk ∈ Rd , k ∈ {1, 2 . . . , K} be i.i.d Unif d + 2Bd distribution. For every random
vector V ∈ Rd independent of all uk , k ∈ {1, 2 . . . , K}, it is true that
                    "     K
                                                         # r
                       1 X                                        d2 + 2d − 1
                  E           ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V | V ≤                           ∥V∥.
                      K                                                 K
                               k=1


Proof. For fixed V ∈ Rd , we have due to independence
                                            2                             2
                                                                         
                      K                                 K
                   1 X                            1     X
               E         ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V  = 2 E        ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V 
                   K                             K
                         k=1                                                   k=1
                                                                        K
                                                                  1     X       h
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                    i
                                                             =                 E ∥⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V∥
                                                                  K2
                                                                        k=1
                                                              1 h                 2
                                                                                    i
                                                             = E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 − V∥ .
                                                              K
Now, again due to independence
          h                   i    h                                           i
                            2                    2
       E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 − V∥ = E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 ∥ − 2 ⟨⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 , V⟩ + ∥V∥2
                                   h                   i
                                              2      2
                                = E (⟨V, u1 ⟩) ∥u1 ∥ − 2E [⟨V, u1 ⟩ ⟨u1 , V⟩] + ∥V∥2
                                      h              i
                                                   2
                                = VT E u1 uT1 ∥u1 ∥ V − 2VT E u1 uT1 V + ∥V∥2


                                      ≤ (d + 2) VT V − 2∥V∥2 + ∥V∥2
                                      = (d + 1)∥V∥2 .

Therefore,
                                                                    2
                                                                       
                                      K                                                    2
                            1 X                                          ≤ (d + 1)∥V∥ .
                         E     ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V
                            K                                                    K
                                     k=1


Thus, if V is random and independent of all uk ’s, it follows that
                                                v 
                                                                                2
             "                            # u                                       
                    K                                        K
                 1                              u  1 X
                   X                            u
           E          ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V V ≤ tE                     ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V | V
                 K                                        K
                   k=1                                                         k=1
                                                             r
                                                                  d+1
                                                         ≤            ∥V∥2
                                                                   K

                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                           r
                                                                d+1
                                                      =             ∥V∥,
                                                                 K

and our claim is proved.
                                                          √
Lemma 8. Let uk ∈ Rd , k ∈ {1, 2 . . . , K} be i.i.d Unif dSd−1 distribution. For every random
vector V ∈ Rd independent of all uk , k ∈ {1, 2 . . . , K}, it is true that
                      "      K
                                                           # r
                          1 X                                        d2 − 1
                    E            ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V | V ≤                      ∥V∥.
                         K                                              K
                                        k=1


Proof. For fixed V ∈ Rd , we have due to independence

                                                   2                              2
                                                                                 
                                K                               K
                        1 X                               1     X
                     E     ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V            =    E   ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V 
                        K                                 K2
                                k=1                                         k=1
                                                                      K
                                                                1     X      h
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                 i
                                                           =                E ∥⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V∥
                                                                K2
                                                                      k=1
                                                            1 h                 2
                                                                                  i
                                                           = E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 − V∥ .
                                                            K
Now, again due to independence
          h                   i    h                                           i
                            2                    2
       E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 − V∥ = E ∥⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 ∥ − 2 ⟨⟨V, u1 ⟩ u1 , V⟩ + ∥V∥2
                                   h                   i
                                              2      2
                                = E (⟨V, u1 ⟩) ∥u1 ∥ − 2E [⟨V, u1 ⟩ ⟨u1 , V⟩] + ∥V∥2
                                      h              i
                                                   2
                                = VT E u1 uT1 ∥u1 ∥ V − 2VT E u1 uT1 V + ∥V∥2


                                          = dVT V − ∥V∥2
                                          = (d − 1)∥V∥2

Therefore,

                                                                  2
                                                                     
                                          K                                             2
                                E
                                   1 X
                                       ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V                 = (d − 1)∥V∥ .
                                   K                                           K
                                         k=1


Thus, if V is random and independent of all uk ’s, it follows that
                                                    v 
                                                                           2
                 "                                # u                          
                          K                               K
                      1                             u  1 X
                          X                         u
             E                  ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V V ≤ tE      ⟨V, uk ⟩ uk − V | V
                      K                                 K
                          k=1                                               k=1
                                                           r
                                                          d−1
                                                      ≤       ∥V∥2
                                                           K
                                                        r
                                                          d−1
                                                      =       ∥V∥,
                                                           K
and our claim is proved.
                                                                   √                 3
Lemma 9. For samples
                     u from the ℓ2 -sphere, it is clear that ∥u∥2 = d and ∥u∥32 = d 2 . When
              d                                           d−1
U ∼ Uniform B , the density p(t) of ∥Z∥2 is given by d · t ; consequently, for any k > −d we
have


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Z 1                   Z 1
                                                                                    d
                           E ∥u∥k2 =           tk p(t)dt = d         td+k−1 dt =

                                                                                       .
                                           0                    0                  d+k
                             √
Thus for Z ∼ Uniform             d + 2Bd we have E ∥Z∥k2 = (d + 2)k/2 d/(d + k).

F      P ROOF OF ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK

Proof of Lemma 3. Let D, D′ be two samples of size n that differ in one sample, and let G̃t (·), G̃′t (·)
be two update rules of zeroth-order algorithms based on samples D, D′ respectively. Under the event
Et := {G̃t (·) ≡ G̃′t (·)}, we have

     δt+1 =E∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ∥ = E∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ )∥
           =E∥Gt (wt ) − Gt (wt′ ) + αt [G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))] ∥
           ≤ ∥Gt (wt ) − Gt (wt′ )∥ + αt E ∥G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))∥
           ≤η∥wt − wt′ ∥ + αt E ∥G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − (G(wt′ , zit ) − Gf (wt′ , zit ))∥
           ≤η∥wt − wt′ ∥ + αt σt,1 .

The Under the event Etc := {G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·)}, we have

      E∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ∥
    =E∥Gt (wt ) − G′t (wt′ ) + αt G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − G(wt′ , zi′t ) − Gf (wt′ , zi′t ) ∥


    ≤ ∥Gt (wt ) − Gt (wt′ )∥ + αt E G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − G(wt′ , zi′t ) − Gf (wt′ , zi′t )


    ≤ min{η, 1}∥wt − wt′ ∥ + 2σt + αt E G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − G(wt′ , zi′t ) − Gf (wt′ , zi′t )


    ≤∥wt − wt′ ∥ + 2σt + αt E G(wt , zit ) − Gf (wt , zit ) − G(wt′ , zi′t ) − Gf (wt′ , zi′t )


    ≤∥wt − wt′ ∥ + 2αt σt,2 + αt σt,3 .


                                                       n                  o         n                   o
Proof of Lemma 4. Consider the events Et ≜              G̃t (·) ≡ G̃′t (·) and Etc ≜ G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·) (see
Eq. (4)). Recall that P (Et ) = 1 − 1/n and P (Etc ) = 1/n for all t ≤ T . For any t0 ≥ 0, we have
           E[δt+1 |Eδt0 ] =P(Et )E[δt+1 |Eδt , Eδt0 ] + P(Etc )E[δt+1 |Eδct , Eδt0 ]
                                 1                        1
                          =(1 − )E[δt+1 |Eδt , Eδt0 ] + E[δt+1 |Eδct , Eδt0 ]
                                 n                        n
                                 1                                     1             1
                          ≤(η + (1 − η))E[δt |Eδt0 ] + αt (1 − )σt,1 + (2σt,2 + σt,3 ) .
                                 n                                     n             n
Then we have
                           T                       T −t
                           X             1                    1       1
               E[δT ] ≤             η+     (1 − η)     αt (1 − )σt,1 + (2σt,2 + σt,3 )
                          t=t0 +1
                                         n                    n       n


G      P ROOF OF G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS OF ZO-SGD

G.1      ZO-SGD WITH 1- POINT G RADIENT E STIMATION

Lemma 10 (Growth Recursion). Assume that for all z, f (·, z) is L-Lipschitz continuous, β-smooth,
                                                        n oT          n oT
and f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1]. Consider the sequences of updates G̃t     and G̃′t       . Let w0 = w0′ be
                                                                          t=1              t=1


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            ′
the starting point, wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) and wt+1    = G̃′t (wt′ ) for any t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Then for any
      ′     d
wt , wt ∈ R and t ≥ 0 the following recursion holds:
                            (                         αt LA
  h                      i      η 1 + αt β  Γ k
                                                + 1  + µ d ∥wt − wt′ ∥ + µβαt Cd , if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),
E G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ≤                   d
                               ∥wt − wt′ ∥ + αtµAd + 2αt L(Γkd + 1) + µβαt Cd ,                if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).

Proof of Lemma 10. The formula for 1-point gradient estimation is as follows:
                                                        K
                                          ˆ (w) = 1       f (w + µuk )
                                                        X
                                          ∇f                                uk .
                                                  K               µ
                                                        k=1

Let S and S ′ be two samples of size n differing in only a single example, and let G̃t (·), G̃′t (·) be the
update rules of the ZO-SGD for each of the sequences S, S ′ respectively.  By applying the Taylor
                                 ∗      ⋆                                               (j)   (j)       (j)
expansion there exist vectors Wk,t  , Wk,t with j th coordinates in the intervals wt , wt + µUk,t ∪

   (j)       (j)   (j)      ′(j)   ′(j)      (j)        ′(j)       (j)    ′(j)
  wt + µUk,t , wt       , wt , wt + µUk,t ∪ wt + µUk,t , wt                      , such that for any wt , wt′ ∈
Rd we have
   h                      i
 E G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ )
                                         ˆ (wt )) − (∇f (wt′ ) − ∇f
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G′ (wt′ )∥ + αt (∇f (wt ) − ∇f                      ˆ (wt′ ))
                                            K
                                         1 X < f (wt ) − f (wt′ ) , utk >
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G′ (wt′ )∥ + αt
                                         K               µ
                                           k=1
             K
                                                                                     !
         1   X
+αt                    ∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ ) , utk    utk − (∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ ))
         K
             k=1
         K                                                   K
       1 X  µ                   ∗
                                     t  t                  1 X  µ T 2            t  t
+αt                    uT  2
                        k ∇w f Wk,t uk uk + αt
                                                                           ⋆
                                                                  uk ∇w f Wk,t  uk uk
       K           2                                       K    2
           k=1                                                 k=1
                                                               1
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G (wt′ )∥ + αt Γkd E [∥∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ )∥] + αt E
                   ′
                                                                                   utk E ∥∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ )∥
  |          {z             }                                              µ
             A                       |                                {z                                      }
                                                                      B
         K
      αt X             h
                                 3
                                     i
  +           µβE          utk
      K
        k=1
      |           {z                 }
                  E
Part A corresponds to the first-order stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which decomposes into η
and σt,2 terms. Part B corresponds to the scaling term introduced by the gradient approximation,
which leads to inflation factor η ′ and bound factor. In contrast to the 2-point estimate, one-point
estimate has an additional term in Part B, which generates different expansive and bound factors. It
should be noted that the term µ appears in the denominator, so its value needs to be carefully chosen
and not too small. Part E corresponds to a fixed value that can be decomposed for both one-point and
two-point estimates, and can only be constrained by β-smoothness, finally addedh to thei bound factor.
                                                                                     3
Under the conditions of L-Lipschitz continuous, β-smooth, f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1], E ∥U ∥ ≤ Cd , we get
η ′ = αt βΓkd + αt LA
                   µ
                      d
                        , σt,1 = µβαt Cd , σt,2 = L, σt,3 = αtµAd + 2αt LΓkd + µβαCd .


Lemma 11. Assume that the loss function f (·, z) is L-Lipschitz and β-smooth for all z ∈ Z. Consider
the ZO-SGD algorithm with final-iterate estimates WT and WT′ , corresponding to the data-sets S, S ′ ,
respectively (that differ in exactly one entry). Then the discrepancy δT ≜ ∥WT − WT′ ∥, under the
event Eδt0 , satisfies the inequality

        E δT | Eδt0


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  T
                                                  X          T
              2L k        αt LAd                            Y
                                                                            k        αj LAd
      ≤         (Γ + 1) +        + µβCd                 αt        1 + βαj (Γd + 1) +
               n d          µn                   t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                                                        µ
                                                      0


                                                      n                  o         n                   o
Proof of Lemma 11. Consider the events Et ≜            G̃t (·) ≡ G̃′t (·) and Etc ≜ G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·) (see
Eq. (4)). Recall that P (Et ) = 1 − 1/n and P (Etc ) = 1/n for all t ≤ T . For any t0 ≥ 0, a direct
application of Lemma 3 gives

  E δt+1 | Eδt0
=P (Et ) E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + P (Etc ) E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0


         1                        1
             E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0

= 1−
         n                         n

                K              1      αt LAd                   2αt L K          αLAd
≤ 1 + βαj (Γd + 1) 1 −             +            E δt | Eδt0 +       (Γd + 1) +         + µβαt Cd .
                               n         µ                      n                 µn
then by solving this recursion we have
                                         XT         T
                   2L K                            Y                             1     αj LAd
                                                          1 + βαj (ΓK

E δT | Eδt0 ≤          (Γd + 1) + µβCd         αt                   d + 1)   1 −     +          .
                    n                   t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                                                 n        µ
                                                  0


Proof of Theorem 1. Recall that η = 1 + βαt for general (nonconvex) losses . Assuming that
αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T , we have

  E δT | Eδt0
                                   XT       T
    2L K                      Ad           Y
                                                           K        αj LAd
≤      (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                 αt       1 + αj β(Γd + 1) +
     n d                      µn t=t +1 j=t+1                          µ
                                    0

                                                                     CLAd
                                      T       T
                                                                           !
                                                      Cβ(ΓK d + 1) +
                                    X
      2L K                     Ad         1 Y                          µ
≤C        (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                         1+
       n d                     µn t=t +1 t j=t+1                j
                                      0

                                                                     CLAd
                                      T       T
                                                                           !
                                                      Cβ(ΓK d + 1) +
                                    X
      2L K                     Ad         1 Y                          µ
≤C        (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                       exp
       n d                     µn t=t +1 t j=t+1               j
                                            0
                                        X  T
          Cβ(ΓK
              d +1)+
                       CLAd       2L K         1 Ad         1
≤C(eT )                 µ            Γd + µβCd +            K +1)+ CLAd
                                   n           t µn
                                        t=t0 +1 (t + 1)
                                                        Cβ(Γd        µ
                                                              CLA
                                                                                        
                    −1                        Cβ(ΓK     d +1)+
                                                                   d
               LAd       2L K         Ad  eT                    µ          K     CLA d
≤ β(ΓKd + 1) +             Γ + µβCd +                                − eCβ(Γd +1)+ µ 
                µ         n d         µn       t0
 |                   {z                  }
                                  D

We define q ≜ Cβ(Γkd + 1) + CA
                             µ and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                               d


                                                                                                 q
                                 t0                                      t0                eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE                                                       q

                                                              δT | Eδt0 ≤   + LD                     −e           ,
                                 n w,z                                    n                t0
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T . Then we give


E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                               q
        (           1
                                                                    )
           (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q         1         q
                                                                  q
≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 − LDe
                    n              n
                                                                                                                  CLA
                 1                                                                         Cβ(Γk          d
    1+               CLAd
                                                                          1                     d +1)+ µ
          Cβ(Γk
              d +1)+                                     A d L   Cβ(Γk +1)+ CLAd +1           k      CLAd
≤                     µ
                               2L2 (Γkd + 1) + µβCd nL +             d       µ
                                                                                    (eT ) Cβ(Γd +1)+ µ +1
                n                                         µ

                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                 CLA
                1                                                                                                  Cβ(Γk          d
    1+              CLAd                      1                                                   1                     d +1)+ µ
         Cβ(Γk
             d +1)+                  Cβ(Γk +1)+
                                                CLAd                            A d L   Cβ(Γ k +1)+ CLAd +1           k      CLAd
≤                    µ
                                 n       d       µ
                                                     +1
                                                           2L2 (Γkd + 1) + CβL + √           d       µ
                                                                                                            (eT ) Cβ(Γd +1)+ µ +1
                  n                                                             µ n
                                                                                                                           CLA
                  −1 !                                                 1                Cβ(Γkd +1)+
                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                    µ
              CL            1                     CLA d      Cβ(Γ k +1)+ CLAd +1           k      CLAd
≤    1 + βC +           1−    c
                                √
                                    Cβ(Γkd + 1) +       +1        d       µ
                                                                                 (eT ) Cβ(Γd +1)+ µ +1
               c       n d2 LC n                   µ
                  −1 !
                        T e1+1/e

              CL
≤    1 + βC +           1−    c
                                √
               c       n d2 LC n


Theorem 10 (convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, β-smooth and convex for
all z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 10 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤ C/t
for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of ZO-SGD with 2-point
gradient estimation is bounded by

                                                           2
                             ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC)−1                 1 + (2 + c)CL2 3T e/2n.



Proof of Theorem 10. Recall that η = 1 for convex losses . Assuming that αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T ,
we have

   E δT | Eδt0
                                   X T         T
     2L K                    Ad               Y
                                                              K    αj LAd
 ≤       (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                 αt        1 + αj βΓd +
      n d                    µn t=t +1 j=t+1                          µ
                                      0

                                                                    CLAd
                                        T        T
                                                                          !
                                                           CβΓKd +
                                     X
       2L K                    Ad           1 Y                       µ
 ≤C        (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                           1+
        n d                    µn t=t +1 t j=t+1                 j
                                        0

                                                                    CLAd
                                        T        T
                                                                          !
                                                           CβΓKd +
                                     X
       2L K                    Ad           1 Y                       µ
 ≤C        (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                         exp
        n d                    µn t=t +1 t j=t+1                 j
                                                    0
                                              X T
                  K   CLAd       2L K                  1
                                                      Ad       1
 ≤C(eT )CβΓd +         µ            (Γd + 1) + µβCd +               CLAd
                                  n                   µn
                                                       t
                                              t=t0 +1 (t + 1)
                                                              CβΓKd  µ
                                                              CLAd
                                                                                     
               −1                                 CβΓK     d +
         LA d       2L                   A d        eT           µ
                                                                         CβΓK
                                                                              +
                                                                                CLAd
 ≤ βΓK
     d +               (ΓK + 1) + µβCd +                            −e     d    µ   
          µ          n d                 µn         t0
  |                    {z                    }
                                       D
                         CAd
We define q ≜ CβΓK  d + µ and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                q
                                 t0                             t0               eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE δT | Eδt0 ≤                     − eq ,

                                                                     + LD
                                 n w,z                            n              t0
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T . Then we give


E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                               q
        (           1
                                                                )
           (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q        1      q
                                                              q
≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) (eT )
                                              q+1    q+1 − LDe
                    n              n
                                                                                                           CLAd
              1                                                                                      CβΓK
    1+          CLAd
                                                                                  1                     d +   µ
         CβΓK
            d +                                       Ad L                 CβΓK +
                                                                                  CLAd
                                                                                       +1              K  CLAd
≤                µ
                             2L2 (ΓK
                                   d + 1) + µβCd nL +
                                                                              d     µ
                                                                                            (eT )   CβΓ +
                                                                                                       d    µ
                                                                                                                +1

              n                                        µ
                                                                                                                     CLA
              1                                                                                     CβΓK      d
    1+          CLAd                1                                                1                 d + µ
         CβΓK
            d +              CβΓK +
                                    CLAd                             A d L   CβΓ K + CLAd +1          K  CLAd
≤                µ
                         n      d     µ
                                         +1
                                                 2L2 (ΓK
                                                       d + 1) + CβL + √
                                                                                 d     µ
                                                                                             (eT ) CβΓd + µ +1
              n                                                      µ n

                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                         CLA
                  −1 !                                      1              CβΓK
                                                                              d +
                                                                                     d
                                                                                  µ
              CL            1              CLAd      CβΓK + CLAd +1          K  CLAd
≤    1 + βC +           1−    c
                                √
                                    CβΓK
                                       d +      +1      d     µ
                                                                    (eT ) CβΓd + µ +1
               c       n d2 LC n            µ
                  −1 !
                        T e1+1/e

              CL
≤    1 + βC +           1−    c
                                √
               c       n d2 LC n


Theorem 11 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, β-smooth and
γ-strongly convex for all z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 10 with T the total number
of iterates, αt ≤ C/t for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of
ZO-SGD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by

                                                             2
                              ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC)−1                  1 + (2 + c)CL2 3T e/2n.



Proof of Theorem 11. Recall that η = 1 − αβ+γt βγ
                                                    for γ-strongly convex losses . Assuming that
αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T , we have

   E δT | Eδt0
                                    X T         T
     2L K                      Ad              Y                        γ       αj LAd
 ≤       (Γd + 1) + µβCd +                αt           1 + αj β(ΓKd −       ) +
      n                        µn t=t +1 j=t+1                        β+γ          µ
                                      0

                                                                      CLAd
                                        T         T
                                                                            !
                                                             CβΓK d +
                                      X
       2L K                      Ad         1 Y                         µ
 ≤C        (Γd + 1) + µβCd +                             1+
        n                        µn t=t +1 t j=t+1                  j
                                        0

                                                                      CLAd
                                        T         T
                                                                            !
                                                             CβΓK d +
                                      X
       2L K                      Ad         1 Y                         µ
 ≤C        (Γ + 1) + µβCd +                            exp
        n d                      µn t=t +1 t j=t+1                  j
                                                        0
                                              X T
                  K   CLAd       2L K               Ad 1       1
 ≤C(eT )CβΓd +         µ           (Γ + 1) + µβCd +
                                  n d               µn t
                                              t=t0 +1 (t + 1)
                                                              CβΓKd
                                                                    CLAd
                                                                     µ
                                                              CLAd
                                                                                   
               −1                                 CβΓK     d +
         LA d       2L                   A d        eT           µ         K  CLAd
 ≤ βΓK
     d +               (ΓK + 1) + µβCd +                            − eCβΓd + µ 
          µ          n d                 µn         t0
  |                    {z                    }
                                     D
                    CAd
We define q ≜ CβΓK
                 d + µ and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                                              q
                                            t0                              t0                          eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤                                                                                 − eq ,

                                               sup f (w, z) + LE δT | Eδt0 ≤   + LD
                                            n w,z                            n                          t0
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T . Then we give


E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                               q
        (           1
                                                                    )
           (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q         1         q
                                                                  q
≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 − LDe
                    n              n
                                                                                                             CLAd
              1                                                                                        CβΓK
    1+          CLAd
                                                                                    1                     d +   µ
         CβΓK
            d +                                        Ad L                  CβΓK +
                                                                                    CLAd
                                                                                         +1              K  CLAd
≤                µ
                              2L2 (ΓK
                                    d + 1) + µβCd nL +
                                                                                d     µ
                                                                                              (eT )   CβΓ +
                                                                                                         d    µ
                                                                                                                  +1

              n                                         µ
                                                                                                                               CLA
              1                                                                                CβΓK       d
    1+          CLAd                1                                            1                d +   µ
         CβΓK
            d +  µ           CβΓK +
                                    CLAd
                                         +1         2  K             Ad L CβΓK +
                                                                                 CLAd
                                                                                      +1      CβΓK +
                                                                                                     CLAd
                                                                                                          +1
≤                        n      d     µ           2L (Γd + 1) + CβL + √      d     µ
                                                                                         (eT ) d      µ
              n                                                      µ n
                                                                                                                      CLAd
                              −1 !                                                           1                  CβΓK
                                                                                                                   d +
                                                                                                                         µ
              CL                             1                     CLAd               CβΓK +
                                                                                             CLAd
                                                                                                  +1              K  CLAd
≤    1 + βC +                                   c
                                         1− d2 LC √
                                                            CβΓK
                                                               d +      +1               d     µ
                                                                                                       (eT )   CβΓ +
                                                                                                                  d    µ
                                                                                                                           +1

               c                     n              n               µ


                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         −1 !
                                     T e1+1/e

               CL
≤     1 + βC +                              c
                                     1− d2 LC √
                c                n              n


G.2    ZO-SGD WITH 2- POINT G RADIENT E STIMATION
                                                                                   n oT
Lemma 12 (2-point ZO-SGD Growth Recursion). Consider the sequences of updates G̃t
                                                                                          t=1
   n oT
      ′                ′                                              ′       ′   ′
and G̃t    . Let w0 = w0 be the starting point, wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) and wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) for any
            t=1
t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Then for any wt , wt′ ∈ Rd and t ≥ 0 the following recursion holds
     h                          i   η + α βΓk   ∥w − w′ ∥ + µβα C ,                if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),
                                           1   t         t               t d
   E G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ≤                     d            t
                                       ∥wt − wt ∥ + 2αt L Γd + 1 + µβαt Cd , if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).
                                                ′             k



Proof of Lemma 12. The formula for central difference is as follows:
                                              K
                          ˆ (w) = 1
                                              X f (w + µuk ) − f (w − µuk )
                          ∇f                                                     uk
                                  K                             2µ
                                              k=1

Let S and S ′ be two samples of size n differing in only a single example, and let G̃t (·), G̃′t (·) be
the update rules of the ZO-SGD for each of the sequences S, S ′ respectively. By applying the
                                        ∗
Taylor expansion there exist vectors Wk,t    , Wk,t⋆
                                                      , W ⊛ and Wk,t
                                                                  ⋇
                                                                     with j th coordinates in the inter-
                                                         k,t
         (j)    (j)     (j)       (j)    (j)     (j)       (j)    (j)    (j)        (j)  (j)       (j)
vals wt , wt + µUk,t ∪ wt + µUk,t , wt                 , wt − µUk,t , wt , ∪ wt , wt − µUk,t ,

    ′(j)   ′(j)     (j)       ′(j)    (j)     ′(j)       ′(j)    (j)   ′(j)       ′(j)  ′(j)       (j)
  wt , wt + µUk,t ∪ wt + µUk,t , wt                  , wt − µUk,t , wt        ∪ wt , wt − µUk,t ,
such that for any wt , wt′ ∈ Rd we have
  h                        i
E G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ )
                                         ˆ (wt )) − (∇f (w′ ) − ∇f
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G′ (wt′ )∥ + αt (∇f (wt ) − ∇f                     ˆ (w′ ))
                                                          t         t
                                            K
                                                                                                            !
                                       1 X
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G (wt′ )∥ + αt
                  ′
                                           ∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ , ) , utk utk − (∇f (wt ) − ∇f (wt′ ))
                                       K
                                           k=1
            K                                                  K
        1   X     µ T 2      ∗
                                   t  t      1 X  µ T 2      ⋆
                                                                   t  t
+ αt                uk ∇w f Wk,t  uk uk + αt        uk ∇w f Wk,t  uk uk
        K         4                          K    4
            k=1                                            k=1
            K                                                  K
        1   X     µ T 2
                             ⊛
                                              1 X  µ T 2   ⋇   t   t
+ αt                uk ∇w f Wk,t utk utk + αt       u ∇ f Wk,t uk uk
        K         4                           K    4 k w
            k=1                                                k=1
                                                                              K
                                                                          αt X       h
                                                                                         3
                                                                                           i
≤ ∥G (wt ) − G′ (wt′ )∥ + αt Γkd E [∥∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt′ , zit )∥] +        µβE utk
  |        {z         } |                     {z                      } K
                                                                             k=1
           A                                   B                          |       {z       }
                                                                                       E



Part A corresponds to the first-order stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which decomposes into η and
σt,2 terms. Part B corresponds to the scaling term introduced by the gradient approximation, which
leads to a new inflation factor η ′ and a new bound. Part E corresponds to the irreducible term caused
by the difference between the estimated gradient h and ithe true gradient, denoted as σt,1 . Under the
                                                           3
conditions of L-Lipschitz and β-smooth and E ∥utk ∥             ≤ Cd , we get η ′ = αt βΓkd , σt,1 = µβαt Cd ,
σt,2 = L, σt,3 = 2αt LΓkd + µβαCd . Thus the expansive and bound are the same as the forward
difference results from the previous work, thus their generalization bounds are also identical.



                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 13. Assume that the loss function f (·, z) is L Lipschitz and β-smooth for all z ∈ Z. Consider
the ZO-SGD algorithm with final-iterate estimates WT and WT′ , corresponding to the data-sets S, S ′ ,
respectively (that differ in exactly one entry). Then the discrepancy δT ≜ ∥WT − WT′ ∥, under the
event Eδt0 , satisfies the inequality
                                                         T
                                                         X                 T
                                2L k                                       Y
                                                                                  1 + βαj (Γkd + 1)

          E δT | Eδt0 ≤           (Γ + 1) + µβCd                     αt
                                 n d                       t=t0 +1        j=t+1

                                                   n                  o         n                   o
Proof of Lemma 13. Consider the events Et ≜         G̃t (·) ≡ G̃′t (·) and Etc ≜ G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·) (see
Eq. (4)). Recall that P (Et ) = 1 − 1/n and P (Etc ) = 1/n for all t ≤ T . For any t0 ≥ 0, a direct
application of Lemma 3 gives
E δt+1 | Eδt0 = P (Et ) E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + P (Etc ) E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0


                         1                        1
                              E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0

                = 1−
                         n                        n

                                   1                                     2αt L k
                ≤ η + αt βΓkd +       1 − η − αt βΓkd E δt | Eδt0 +

                                                                              (Γd + 1) + µβαt Cd .
                                   n                                        η
then by solving this recursion we have
                                             XT         T
                        2L k                           Y                           1
                                                             1 + βαj (Γkd + 1) 1 −

     E δT | Eδt0 ≤         (Γd + 1) + µβCd         αt
                         n                  t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                                                   n
                                                       0


Proof of Theorem 2. Recall that η = 1 + βαt for general (nonconvex) losses . Assuming that
αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T , we have
                                           XT         T
                     2L k                            Y
                                                          1 + αj β(Γkd + 1)

   E δT | Eδt0 ≤         (Γd + 1) + µβCd         αt
                      n                   t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                   0

                                                T        T
                                                                  Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                               X
                          2L k                       1 Y
                 ≤C          (Γd + 1) + µβCd                   1+
                           n                  t=t +1
                                                     t j=t+1          j
                                                       0

                                                T        T
                                                                   Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                               X
                          2L k                       1 Y
                 ≤C          (Γd + 1) + µβCd                 exp
                           n                  t=t +1
                                                     t j=t+1           j
                                                       0
                                                                       XT
                            Cβ(Γk
                                d +1)
                                            2L k                            1        1
                 ≤ C(eT )                      Γd + 1 + µβCd                              k +1)
                                             n                              t
                                                                      t=t +1 (t + 1)
                                                                                     Cβ(Γ d
                                                                            0
                                                                                   Cβ(Γkd +1)                    !
                                  −1       2L k                              eT                      Cβ(Γk
                 ≤ β(Γkd + 1)                                                                            d +1)

                                                Γd + 1 + µβCd                                   −e
                                            n                                t0
                  |                          {z               }
                                             D

We define q ≜ Cβ(Γkd + 1) and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                   q
                                 t0                               t0                eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE δT | Eδt0 ≤                        − eq ,

                                                                        + LD
                                 n w,z                              n               t0
                                                             Γk
                                                              d +1
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T and µ ≤ nβC

                                                                 d
                                                                   Then we gives

             E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                                            q
                     (           1
                                                                                 )
                        (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q         1         q
                                                                               q
             ≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 − LDe
                                 n              n


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      Cβ (Γd +1)                k
               1 + Cβ Γ1k +1                              1
                     ( d )
                                (2 + c)CL2 Γkd + 1 Cβ(Γd +1)+1 (eT ) Cβ(Γd +1)+1
                                                         k                k
             ≤
                    n
                              2                   3T e
             ≤ 1 + (βC)−1        1 + (2 + c)CL2        .
                                                   2n


Theorem 12 (convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, β-smooth and convex for
all z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 11 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤ C/t
for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of ZO-SGD with 2-point
gradient estimation is bounded by
                                             2
                        ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC)−1      1 + (2 + c)CL2 3T e/2n.



Proof of Theorem 12. Recall that η = 1 for convex losses. Assuming that αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T ,
we have
                                              X T         T
                       2L k                               Y
                                                              1 + αj βΓkd

      E δT | Eδt0 ≤       (Γd + 1) + µβCd            αt
                        n                     t=t +1    j=t+10

                                                   T        T
                                                                     Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                                  X
                               2L k                     1 Y
                    ≤C           (Γ + 1) + µβCd                   1+
                                n d              t=t +1
                                                        t j=t+1          j
                                                                 0

                                                   T        T
                                                                      Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                                  X
                               2L k                     1 Y
                    ≤C           (Γ + 1) + µβCd                 exp
                                n d              t=t +1
                                                        t j=t+1           j
                                                                 0
                                                         X  T
                                 Cβ(Γk
                                     d +1)
                                                 2L k            1        1
                    ≤ C(eT )                        Γd + 1 + µβCd             k +1)
                                                  n              t
                                                          t=t0 +1 (t + 1)
                                                                          Cβ(Γd

                                                         Cβ(Γkd +1)                !
                             −1   2L                   eT                     k
                    ≤ βΓkd           Γkd + 1 + µβCd                  − eCβ(Γd +1)

                                   n                   t0
                      |              {z             }
                                             D


We define q ≜ CβΓkd and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                                              q
                                 t0                                              t0                     eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE                                                                    q

                                                                      δT | Eδt0 ≤   + LD                          −e           ,
                                 n w,z                                            n                     t0
                                                          Γk
                                                           d +1
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T and µ ≤ nβC

                                                              d
                                                                Then we gives

            E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                                           q
                    (           1
                                                                            )
                       (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q        1      q
                                                                          q
            ≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) (eT )
                                                          q+1    q+1 − LDe
                                n              n
                 1 + Cβ(Γ1k +1)                                     Cβ(Γk1+1)+1            Cβ(Γkd +1)
                                                  2
             ≤             d
                                      (2 + c)CL       Γkd + 1           d         (eT )   Cβ(Γk +1)+1
                                                                                              d
                       n
                                  2                        3T e
             ≤ 1 + (βC)−1             1 + (2 + c)CL2            .
                                                            2n


Theorem 13 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, β-smooth and
γ-strongly convex for all z ∈ Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 11 with T the total number
of iterates, αt ≤ C/t for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of
ZO-SGD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                             2
                        ϵgen ≤ 1 + (βC)−1      1 + (2 + c)CL2 3T e/2n.



                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 13. Recall that η = 1 − αβ+γ
                                           t βγ
                                                 for γ-strongly convex losses . Assuming that
αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T , we have
                                             X  T         T
                         2L k                            Y
                                                                          K     γ
      E δT | Eδt0 ≤         (Γ + 1) + µβCd           αt         1 + αj β(Γd −       )
                          n d                 t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                                               β+γ
                                                              0

                                                    T        T
                                                                      Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                                   X
                                2L k                     1 Y
                     ≤C           (Γ + 1) + µβCd                   1+
                                 n d              t=t +1
                                                         t j=t+1          j
                                                                  0

                                                    T        T
                                                                       Cβ(Γkd + 1)
                                                   X
                                2L k                     1 Y
                     ≤C           (Γ + 1) + µβCd                 exp
                                 n d              t=t +1
                                                         t j=t+1           j
                                                                  0
                                                       X  T
                                  Cβ(Γk
                                      d +1)
                                                  2L k         1        1
                     ≤ C(eT )                        Γd + 1 + µβCd          k +1)
                                                   n           t
                                                        t=t0 +1 (t + 1)
                                                                        Cβ(Γd

                                                       Cβ(Γkd +1)                 !
                          k −1
                                 2L k                eT                Cβ(Γk  +1)
                     ≤ βΓd          Γd + 1 + µβCd                  −e       d
                                  n                  t0
                       |            {z            }
                                              D

We define q ≜ CβΓkd and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                                               q
                                  t0                                              t0                     eT
  E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE                                                                    q

                                                                       δT | Eδt0 ≤   + LD                          −e           ,
                                  n w,z                                            n                     t0
                                                          Γk
                                                           d +1
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T and µ ≤ nβC

                                                              d
                                                                Then we gives
              E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                                             q
                      (           1
                                                                              )
                         (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q        1      q
                                                                            q
              ≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) (eT )
                                                            q+1    q+1 − LDe
                                  n              n
                  1 + Cβ(Γ1k +1)                                     Cβ(Γk1+1)+1            Cβ(Γkd +1)
                                                   2
              ≤             d
                                       (2 + c)CL       Γkd + 1           d         (eT )   Cβ(Γk +1)+1
                                                                                               d
                        n
                                   2                        3T e
              ≤ 1 + (βC)−1             1 + (2 + c)CL2            .
                                                             2n


G.3 ZO-SGD WITH COORDINATE - WISE G RADIENT E STIMATION
                                           n oT    n oT
Lemma 14. Consider the sequences of updates G̃t and G̃′t . Let w0 = w0′ be the starting
                                                                  t=1              t=1
                              ′
point, wt+1 = G̃t (wt ) and wt+1  = G̃′t (wt′ ) for any t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Then for any wt , wt′ ∈ Rd and
t ≥ 0 the following recursion holds
           h                      i  η ∥w − w′ ∥ + α µβd,                       if G̃t (·) = G̃′t (·),
                                                t            t
         E G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ≤                  t
                                          ∥wt − wt ∥ + 2αt L + αt µβd, if G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·).
                                                    ′



Proof of Theorem 3 (Convex). The formula for coordinate-wise estimator is as follows:
                         
                         Pd f (wt +µei ,zit )−f (wt ,zit ) e ,      forward difference,
                                                             i
          wt+1 = wt − αt Pi=1 f (w +µe ,z µ )−f (w −µe ,z )
                          d         t    i it     t       i it
                                                                ei , central difference.
                              i=1              2µ


Let S and S ′ be two samples of size n differing in only a single example, and let G̃t (·), G̃′t (·) be the
update rules of the ZO-SGD for each of the sequences S, S ′ respectively. By applying the Taylor
                                   ∗         †
expansion there exist vectors Wi,t    and Wi,t  with ith coordinates in the intervals (wt , wt + µei ) and
(wt , wt + µei ), respectively, such that for any wt , wt′ ∈ Rd we have
  ′    ′



                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     ∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃′t (wt′ ) ∥ = ∥G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ ) ∥
                          d
                          X
      = ∥wt − wt′ − αt           ⟨∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt′ , zit ) , ei ⟩ ei
                           i=1
            d                                       d
            X       µ T 2     ∗
                                                   X    µ T 2   †
     − αt             ei ∇ f Wi,t , zit ei ei + αt        ei ∇ f Wi,t , zit ei ei ∥
            i=1
                    2                              i=1
                                                        2
     = ∥wt − αt ∇f (wt , zit ) − (wt′ − αt ∇f (wt′ , zit ))
           d                                                 d
          X    µ T 2                                        X    µ T 2
     − αt        e ∇ f (w, zit )            ei ei + α t           e ∇ f (w, zit )              ei ei
          i=1
                2 i w              w=Wi,t ∗
                                                            i=1
                                                                 2 i w                w=Wi,t †


             d
                                                                                             !
            X
                                        ′                                          ′
     − αt      ⟨∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt , zit ) , ei ⟩ ei − (∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt , zit )) ∥
              i=1
                                      d
                                      X   µ
      = ∥G (wt ) − G (wt′ ) − αt                  eT  2
                                                   i ∇w f (w, zit )            e i ei
                                      i=1
                                              2                       w=Wi,t ∗


            d
            X       µ T 2
     + αt            e ∇ f (w, zit )        ei ei ∥.
            i=1
                    2 i w               †
                                     w=Wi,t

    Pd
For i=1 ⟨∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt′ , zit ) , ei ⟩ ei = ∇f (wt , zit ) − ∇f (wt′ , zit ). This is the key, why
ZO-SGD using coordinate-wise estimator is non-expansive. The last display and the triangle inequal-
ity give                  h                           i
                         E G̃t (wt ) − G̃t (wt′ )
                                                                  d
                                                                  X µβ        h
                                                                                     3
                                                                                       i
                              ≤ ∥G (wt ) − G (wt′ )∥ + 2αt                   E ∥ei ∥
                                                                  i=1
                                                                         2
                          ≤ ∥G (wt ) − G (wt′ )∥ + αt µβd.
Above all, coordinate-wise estimator
Let S and S ′ be two samples of size n differing in only a single example. Consider the gradient
updates G1 , . . . , GT and G′1 , . . . , G′T induced by running ZO-SGD on sample S and S ′ , respectively.
Let wT and wT′ denote the corresponding outputs of ZO-SGD. We now fix an example z ∈ Z and
apply the Lipschitz condition on f (·; z) to get
                                     E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ] ,
where δT = ∥wT − wT′ ∥. Observe that at step t, with probability 1 − 1/n, the example selected
by SGD is the same in both S and S ′ . In this case we have that Gt = G′t and we can use the
1-expansivity of the update rule Gt which uses the fact that the objective function is convex and that
αt ≤ 2/β. With probability 1/n the selected example is different in which case we use that both Gt
and G′t are αt L-bounded as a consequence of Lemma 12. Hence, we have

                               1                 1         2αt L βαt                 2αt L + αt β
          E [δt+1 ] ≤ 1 −             E [δt ] + E [δt ] +         +      = E [δt ] +
                               n                 n           n       n                    n
Unraveling the recursion gives
                                                                   T
                                                        2L + β X
                                            E [δT ] ≤              αt
                                                          n    t=1
Plugging this back into equation, we obtain
                                                                                 T
                                                                  2L2 + Lβ X
                             E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤                    αt
                                                                      n    t=1


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 3 (Strongly Convex). Let S and S ′ be two samples of size n differing in only a
single example. Consider the gradient updates G1 , . . . , GT and G′1 , . . . , G′T induced by running
ZO-SGD on sample S and S ′ , respectively. Let wT and wT′ denote the corresponding outputs of
ZO-SGD. We now fix an example z ∈ Z and apply the Lipschitz condition on f (·; z) to get
                                 E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ]
If α ≤ 1/β : since 2αβγ
                    β+γ ≥ αγ and αγ ≤ 1, Gf,α is (1 − αγ)-expansive. With probability 1/n the
selected example is different in which case we use that both Gt and G′t are αL-bounded

                         1            1          2αL µα                          2αL + αβ
       E [δt+1 ] ≤ 1 −       E [δt ] + E [δt ] +     +       = (1 − αγ)E [δt ] +          .
                         n            n           n      n                          n
Unraveling the recursion gives
                                                  T
                                      2αL + αβ X           t  2L + β
                            E [δT ] ≤              (1 − αγ) ≤        .
                                         n     t=0
                                                                nγ
Plugging this back into equation, we obtain
                                                                    2L2 + βL
                               E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤                .
                                                                       nγ


Lemma 15. Assume that the loss function f (·, z) is L Lipschitz and β-smooth for all z ∈ Z. Consider
the ZO-SGD algorithm with final-iterate estimates WT and WT′ , corresponding to the data-sets S, S ′ ,
respectively (that differ in exactly one entry). Then the discrepancy δT ≜ ∥WT − WT′ ∥, under the
event Eδt0 , satisfies the inequality
                                                       T
                                                       X                  T
                                           2L                             Y
                     E δT | Eδt0 ≤            + µβ                  αt           (1 + βαj )
                                            n           t=t0 +1          j=t+1

                                                  n                  o         n                   o
Proof of Lemma 15. Consider the events Et ≜        G̃t (·) ≡ G̃′t (·) and Etc ≜ G̃t (·) ̸= G̃′t (·) (see
Eq. (4)). Recall that P (Et ) = 1 − 1/n and P (Etc ) = 1/n for all t ≤ T . For any t0 ≥ 0, a direct
application of Lemma 3 gives
              E δt+1 | Eδt0 = P (Et ) E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + P (Etc ) E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0


                                       1                        1
                                            E δt+1 | Et , Eδt0 + E δt+1 | Etc , Eδt0

                               = 1−
                                       n                           n
                                                          2αt L
                               ≤ (1 + αt β) E δt | Eδt0 +          + µβαt .
                                                               n
then by solving this recursion we have
                                                   X   T         T
                                        2L                       Y
                      E δT | Eδt0 ≤         + µβ            αt       (1 + βαj ) .
                                         n          t=t +1     j=t+1
                                                            0


Proof of Theorem 3 (Nonconvex). Recall that η = 1+βαt for general (nonconvex) losses . Assuming
that αt ≤ C/t for all t ≤ T and µ ≤ nc we have
                                              X  T         T
                                    2L                    Y
                  E δT | Eδt0 ≤        + µβ           αt       (1 + αj β)
                                     n         t=t +1    j=t+1
                                                        0
                                                          XT        T
                                           2L                   1 Y          Cβ
                                 ≤C           + µβCd                      1+
                                            n            t=t +1
                                                                t j=t+1       j
                                                                0


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        XT        T
                                                     2L                       1 Y           Cβ
                                          ≤C            + µβCd                        exp
                                                      n                t=t +1
                                                                              t j=t+1        j
                                                                             0
                                                                   XT
                                                   Cβ 2L                  1      1
                                          ≤ C(eT )          + µβ
                                                       n          t=t0 +1
                                                                          t (t + 1)Cβ
                                                         Cβ             !
                                            2L + cβ    eT
                                          ≤                      − eCβ
                                               n
                                            | {z }      t 0
                                                   D

We define q ≜ Cβ and find the value of t0 that minimizes the right part of
                                                                                 q
                                 t0                               t0           eT
 E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|] ≤ sup f (w, z) + LE δT | Eδt0 ≤                    − eq ,

                                                                        + LD
                                 n w,z                               n         t0
which is t∗0 = min (qnLD)1/(q+1) (eT )q/(q+1) , T . Then we gives


               E [|f (WT , z) − f (WT′ , z)|]
                                              q
                       (           1
                                                                               )
                          (qnLD) q+1 (eT ) q+1 1 + 1/q        1      q
                                                                             q
               ≤ max                            ,      (qnLD) (eT )
                                                             q+1    q+1 − LDe
                                   n              n
                        1
                   1 + βC                     1          βC
               ≤                 2CL2 + βCcL βC+1 (eT ) βC+1 .
                       n



H     P ROOF OF G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS OF ZO-GD
In the case of full-batch GD and ZO-GD the algorithm is deterministic and we assume
that z1 , z2 , . . . , zi , . . . , zn , zj′ are i.i.d. and define S ≜ (z1 , z2 , . . . , zi , . . . , zn ) and S ′ ≜
 z1 , z2 , . . . , zj′ , . . . , zn , W0 = W0′ , the updates for any t ≥ 1 are


                                             n                     n
                                          αt X                  1X
                   wt+1 = wt −                  ∇f (wt , zj ) =       (wt − αt ∇f (wt , zi )) ,
                                          n j=1                 n i=1
                                                 n
                    ′                     αt     X                           αt
                   wt+1 = wt′ −                           ∇f (wt′ , zj ) −      ∇f (wt′ , zi′ )
                                          n                                  n
                                               j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                
                         n
                      1 X
                           (wt′ − αt ∇f (wt′ , zi )) + wt′ − αt ∇f (wt′ , zj′ )  .

                    =
                      n
                               i=1,i̸=j

Then, for any t ≥ 1
                                   n
                                 1 X
                   δt+1 ≤            [(wt − wt′ ) − αt (∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi ))]
                                 n
                                    i=1,i̸=j
                             1
                                 (wt − wt′ ) − αt ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ )

                           +
                             n
                             n−1           1                 2αt L
                           ≤       ηδt + min{η, 1}δt +
                               n           n                    n
                                   2αt L
                           ≤ ηδt +       .
                                     n
Therefore, for full-batch ZO-GD, we have
                         n
                     αt X ˆ
     wt+1 =wt −            ∇f (wt , zj )
                     n j=1


                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         n                               n                     n
                      1X                              αt X                  αt X ˆ
                  =         (wt − αt ∇f (wt , zi )) +       ∇f (wt , zi ) −       ∇f (wt , zi ),
                      n i=1                           n i=1                 n i=1
                                 n
       ′                   αt    X
                                           ˆ (wt′ , zi ) − αt ∇f
                                                              ˆ wt′ , zj′
           =wt′ −

      wt+1                                 ∇f
                           n                               n
                                i=1,i̸=j
                                                                         
                  n
               1 X
                    (wt′ − αt ∇f (wt′ , zi )) + wt′ − αt ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) 

             =
               n
                      i=1,i̸=j
                            n
                      αt    X
                                                        ˆ (wt′ , zi ) + αt ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) − ∇f

                                                                                             ˆ (wt′ , zj′ ) .
                  +                    ∇f (wt′ , zi ) − ∇f
                      n                                                 n
                           i=1,i̸=j


Then, for any t ≥ 1
                  2αt L
δt+1 ≤ ηδt +
                   n
       n                                   n
    αt X                   ˆ (wt , zi )) −
                                           X
                                                                ˆ (wt′ , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) − ∇f
                                                                                                  ˆ (wt′ , zj′ )

+         (∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f                  ∇f (wt′ , zi ) − ∇f
    n i=1
                                                       i=1,i̸=j



Proof of Theorem 4. Recall that utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss function is
Lipschitz , smooth and f (·) ≤ 21 . The last display and the triangle inequality give
                                       n
                            2αt L αt K X
        δt+1 ≤ ηδt +             + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥
                             n    n
                                                  i=1,i̸=j
                                                                                n
                  αt K                                  αt Ad                   X
              +     Γ ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) +                                ∥f (wt , zi ) − f (wt′ , zi )∥
                  n d                                    nµ
                                                                            i=1,i̸=j
               αt Ad
              +       f (wt , zj ) − f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
                nµ

                                                            2αt L ΓK

                            K                Ad L                  d +1     Ad α t

              ≤ 1 + αt Γd + 1 β +                      δt +               +        + µβCd αt
                                               µ                  n          nµ

Then by solving the recursion we find
          T                                        ! T
               2αt L ΓK

                       d +1        Ad αt                                    Ad L
        X                                            Y
                                                                  K

   δT ≤                         +        + µβCd αt        1 + αt Γd + 1 β +
         t=1
                      n             nµ              j=t+1
                                                                             µ

                                        C
Under the choice αt ≤                      Ad L the last display gives

                                t (ΓK
                                    d +1)β+ µ

                                         ! T                        T
                  2L ΓK

                      d +1     Ad                      C                      C
                                          X                        Y
       δT ≤                  +    + µβCd                                  1 +
                      n        nµ         t=1 t   ΓK + 1 β + Ad L j=t+1
                                                                              j
                                                                      d                   µ
            2L(ΓK
                d +1)
                      +Anµ + µβCd
                         d         T      T
                n
                                  X   C Y          C
        ≤                   Ad L
                                                1+
               ΓKd +1 β+ µ        t=1
                                      t j=t+1      j
                          T          T
            2L2 + β + βL X C        X    C
        ≤                      exp
                nβL      t=1
                             t     j=t+1
                                         j
                          T
            2L2 + β + βL X C

                                            eT
        ≤                      exp C log
                nβL      t=1
                             t             t+1


                                                              31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                          T            C
         C 2L2 + β + βL X 1

                                   eT
       ≤
                nβL      t=1
                              t t+1
                C                T
         C (eT ) 2L2 + β + βL X 1
       ≤
                   nβL          t=1
                                    tC+1
              C
         (eT ) 2L2 + β + βL
       ≤                      min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                  nβL
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                2L2 + β + βL      C
                       ϵgen ≤                (eT ) min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                                     nβ


Theorem 14 (convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, convex, β-smooth for
all z ∈ Z. Consider the  update rule Eq.equation 13 with T the total number of iterates, αt ≤
C/t β(Γkd + 1) + LAd /µ for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error
of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                   ϵgen ≤ min{C + 1, C log(eT )}(2L2 + β + βL)(eT )C /(nβ).

Proof of Theorem 14. Recall that η = 1, utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss function
is Lipschitz , smooth and f (·) ≤ 12 . The last display and the triangle inequality give
                          n
               2αt L αt K X                                   αt
δt+1 ≤ ηδt +        + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥ + ΓK ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ )
                n    n                                        n d
                                i=1,i̸=j
           n
 αt Ad     X                                     αt Ad
+               ∥f (wt , zi ) − f (wt′ , zi )∥ +        f (wt , zj ) − f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
  nµ                                              nµ
       i=1,i̸=j

                                        2αt L ΓK

              K      Ad L                        d +1       Ad αt
≤ 1 + αt Γd β +                 δt +                     +           + µβCd αt
                       µ                        n            nµ

Then by solving the recursion we find
             T                                        ! T
                  2αt L ΓK

                           d +1       Ad αt                                Ad L
            X                                           Y
                                                                     K
      δT ≤                         +        + µβCd αt        1 + αt Γd β +
            t=1
                          n            nµ              j=t+1
                                                                            µ

                                 C
Under the choice αt ≤               Ad L the last display gives

                         t (ΓK
                             d +1)β+ µ

                                      ! T                        T
               2L ΓK

                   d +1     Ad                      C                     C
                                       X                        Y
      δT ≤                +    + µβCd                                  1+
                   n        nµ         t=1 t   ΓK + 1 β + Ad L j=t+1
                                                                          j
                                                             d               µ
           2L(ΓK
               d +1)
                     +Anµ + µβCd
                        d         T      T
               n
                                 X   C Y           C
       ≤                   Ad L
                                               1 +
              ΓKd +1 β+ µ        t=1
                                     t j=t+1       j
                         T          T
           2L2 + β + βL X C        X    C
       ≤                      exp
               nβL      t=1
                            t     j=t+1
                                        j
                       T
         2L2 + β + βL X C

                                           eT
       ≤                      exp C log
             nβL      t=1
                           t              t+1
                            T           C
         C 2L2 + β + βL X 1

                                   eT
       ≤
               nβL         t=1
                                t t+1


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       C                T
           C (eT )       2L2 + β + βL X 1
       ≤
                         nβL            t=1
                                            tC+1
                   C
           (eT )       2L2 + β + βL
       ≤                              min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                        nβL
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                    2L2 + β + βL      C
                           ϵgen ≤                (eT ) min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                                         nβ


Theorem 15 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, γ-strongly convex,
β-smooth for all z ∈ Z. Consider
                                 the update rule Eq.equation 13 with T the total number of iterates,
αt ≤ C/t β(Γkd + 1) + LAd /µ for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization
error of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                       ϵgen ≤ min{C + 1, C log(eT )}(2L2 + β + βL)(eT )C /(nβ).

Proof of Theorem 15. Recall that η = 1 − αβ+γ  t βγ
                                                    , utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss
function is Lipschitz , smooth and f (·) ≤ 12 . The last display and the triangle inequality give
                                      n
                           2αt L αt K X
      δt+1 ≤ ηδt +              + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥
                            n    n
                                          i=1,i̸=j
                                                                  n
               αt K                                  αt Ad        X
           +     Γ ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) +                        ∥f (wt , zi ) − f (wt′ , zi )∥
               n d                                    nµ
                                                                 i=1,i̸=j
            αt Ad
           +       f (wt , zj ) − f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
             nµ

                                                            2αt L ΓK

                       K          βγ           Ad L                d +1     Ad αt
           ≤ 1 + αt Γd β −                +            δt +               +       + µβCd αt
                                 β+γ            µ                 n          nµ

Then by solving the recursion we find
        T                                         ! T
             2αt L ΓK

                      d +1       Ad α t                                 βγ   Ad L
       X                                            Y
 δT ≤                         +         + µβCd αt        1 + αt ΓK
                                                                 d β −     +
       t=1
                     n             nµ              j=t+1
                                                                       β+γ    µ

                                     C
Under the choice αt ≤                   Ad L the last display gives

                             t (ΓK
                                 d +1)β+ µ

                                       ! T                        T
                2L ΓK

                    d +1     Ad                      C                     C
                                        X                        Y
       δT ≤                +    + µβCd                                  1+
                    n        nµ         t=1 t   ΓK + 1 β + Ad L j=t+1
                                                                           j
                                                             d                   µ
           2L(ΓK
               d +1)
                     +Anµ + µβCd
                        d         T      T
               n
                                 X   C Y           C
       ≤                   Ad L
                                               1 +
              ΓKd +1 β+ µ        t=1
                                     t j=t+1       j
                         T          T
           2L2 + β + βL X C        X    C
       ≤                      exp
               nβL      t=1
                            t     j=t+1
                                        j
                       T
         2L2 + β + βL X C

                                           eT
       ≤                      exp C log
             nβL      t=1
                           t              t+1
                            T           C
         C 2L2 + β + βL X 1

                                   eT
       ≤
               nβL         t=1
                                t t+1


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       C                 T
           C (eT )        2L2 + β + βL X 1
       ≤
                          nβL            t=1
                                             tC+1
                   C
           (eT )        2L2 + β + βL
       ≤                               min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                         nβL
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 1-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                       2L2 + β + βL      C
                           ϵgen ≤                   (eT ) min{C + 1, C log (eT )}.
                                            nβ


Proof of Theorem 5. Recall that utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss function is
Lipschitz and smooth . The last display and the triangle inequality give
                                                   n
                                        2αt L αt K X
                       δt+1 ≤ηδt +           + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥
                                         n    n
                                                      i=1,i̸=j
                             αt
                            + ΓK    ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
                              n d
                                      K
                                                        2αt L ΓK    d +1
                            ≤ 1 + αt Γd + 1 β δt +                          + µβCd αt
                                                                   n
Then by solving the recursion we find
                           T                                 ! T
                           X         2αt L ΓK
                                            d +1
                                                               Y
                                                                    1 + αj ΓK

                 δT ≤                              + µβCd αt                d +1 β
                           t=1
                                           n                  j=t+1


Under the choice αt ≤ t ΓKC+1 β the last display gives
                       ( d )
                             X  T        T
             2L d                       Y
                                              1 + βαj 1 + ΓdK

     δT ≤        ΓK + µβCd         αt
              n               t=1     j=t+1
                               T                T
             ΓdK + 1

                              X        C       Y       Cβ
           ≤         (2 + c)L                      1 +
                n             t=1
                                  t ΓdK + 1 j=t+1       j
                                             
                        T            T                     T
             (2 + c)L X C           X    Cβ  (2 + c)L X C                    eT
           ≤                 exp               ≤               exp Cβ log
                 n     t=1
                           t       j=t+1
                                          j         n     t=1
                                                              t              t+1
                                 T    Cβ                        T
                                             C(eT )Cβ (2 + c)L X 1

               C(2 + c)L X 1     eT
           =                             ≤
                   n     t=1
                             t  t+1                  n         t=1
                                                                   tCβ+1
             (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L

                                    Cβ + 1
           ≤                  min          , C log(eT ) .
                    n                 β
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                              (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L2

                                                      Cβ + 1
                      ϵgen ≤                    min          , C log(eT ) .
                                      n                 β


Theorem 16 (convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, convex and β-smooth
for all z ∈ Z. Consider
                         the update rule Eq.equation 14 with T the total number of iterates,
αt ≤ C/ Γkd + 1 t for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error of
ZO-GD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                       (2 + c)L2      Cβ    Cβ + 1
                            ϵgen ≤               (eT ) min{        , C log (eT )}.
                                           n                  β

                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 16. Recall that η = 1, utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss function
is Lipschitz and smooth. The last display and the triangle inequality give
                                           n
                                2αt L αt K X
                 δt+1 ≤ηδt +         + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥
                                 n    n
                                               i=1,i̸=j
                       αt
                      + ΓK     ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
                        n d
                                K
                                            2αt L ΓK
                                                   d +1
                      ≤ 1 + αt Γd β δt +                        + µβCd αt
                                                  n

Then by solving the recursion we find
                         T                              ! T
                         X      2αt L ΓK
                                       d +1
                                                          Y
                                                               1 + αj ΓK

                  δT ≤                        + µβCd αt                d β
                         t=1
                                      n                  j=t+1


Under the choice αt ≤ t ΓKC+1 β the last display gives
                       ( d )
                             X  T        T
             2L d                       Y
                                              1 + βαj ΓK

     δT ≤        ΓK + µβCd         αt                  d
              n               t=1     j=t+1
                              T                T
            ΓdK + 1

                             X        C       Y      Cβ
          ≤         (2 + c)L                      1+
               n             t=1
                                 t ΓdK + 1 j=t+1      j
                                            
                       T            T                    T
            (2 + c)L X C           X    Cβ  (2 + c)L X C                   eT
          ≤                 exp               ≤              exp Cβ log
                n     t=1
                          t       j=t+1
                                         j         n    t=1
                                                            t              t+1
                         T           Cβ                        T
                                            C(eT )Cβ (2 + c)L X 1

            C(2 + c)L X 1       eT
          =                             ≤
                n     t=1
                          t    t+1                  n         t=1
                                                                  tCβ+1
            (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L

                                   Cβ + 1
          ≤                  min          , C log(eT ) .
                   n                 β
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                              (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L2

                                                      Cβ + 1
                      ϵgen ≤                    min          , C log(eT ) .
                                      n                 β


Theorem 17 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss f (·, z) ∈ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz, γ-strongly convex
and β-smooth for all z ∈  Z. Consider the update rule Eq.equation 14 with T the total number of
iterates, αt ≤ C/ Γkd + 1 t for some (fixed) C > 0 and for all t ≤ T . Then the generalization error
of ZO-GD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                                (2 + c)L2      Cβ    Cβ + 1
                       ϵgen ≤             (eT ) min{        , C log (eT )}.
                                    n                  β

Proof of Theorem 16. Recall that η = 1 − αβ+γt βγ
                                                  , utk are independent for all k≤ K, t≤T and the loss
function is Lipschitz and smooth. The last display and the triangle inequality give
                                           n
                                2αt L αt K X
                 δt+1 ≤ηδt +         + Γd    ∥∇f (wt , zi ) − ∇f (wt′ , zi )∥
                                 n    n
                                               i=1,i̸=j
                       αt
                      + ΓK     ∇f (wt , zj ) − ∇f (wt′ , zj′ ) + αt µβCd
                        n d
                                K       αt βγ        2αt L ΓK   d +1
                      ≤ 1 + αt Γd β −           δt +                    + µβCd αt
                                       β+γ                     n

                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then by solving the recursion we find
                     T                              ! T
                            2αt L ΓK

                                   d +1                                αt βγ
                     X                                Y
              δT ≤                        + µβCd αt        1 + αj ΓK
                                                                   d −       β
                      t=1
                                  n                  j=t+1
                                                                       β+γ

Under the choice αt ≤ t ΓKC+1 β the last display gives
                       ( d )
                             X  T        T
             2L d                       Y                   αt βγ
     δT ≤        ΓK + µβCd         αt          1 + βαj ΓK
                                                        d −
              n               t=1     j=t+1
                                                            β+γ
                                XT       T
                  2L d                  Y
                                             1 + βαj (ΓK

          ≤          ΓK + µβCd      αt                 d + 1)
                   n            t=1    j=t+1
                              T                T
            ΓdK + 1

                             X        C       Y       Cβ
          ≤         (2 + c)L                      1 +
               n             t=1
                                 t ΓdK + 1 j=t+1       j
                                            
                       T            T                     T
            (2 + c)L X C           X    Cβ  (2 + c)L X C                    eT
          ≤                 exp               ≤               exp Cβ log
                n     t=1
                          t       j=t+1
                                         j         n     t=1
                                                             t              t+1
                            T        Cβ                        T
                                            C(eT )Cβ (2 + c)L X 1

            C(2 + c)L X 1       eT
          =                             ≤
                n     t=1
                          t    t+1                  n         t=1
                                                                  tCβ+1
            (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L

                                   Cβ + 1
          ≤                  min          , C log(eT ) .
                   n                 β
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with 2-point gradient estimation is bounded by
                              (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L2

                                                      Cβ + 1
                      ϵgen ≤                    min          , C log(eT ) .
                                      n                 β


Proof of Theorem 6. Recall that t ≤ T and the loss function is Lipschitz and smooth . The last
display and the triangle inequality give
                                                         2αt L
                                        δt+1 ≤ ηδt +           + µβαt .
                                                          n
In this case we can use the 1-expansivity of the update rule G̃t which uses the fact that the objective
function is convex, αt ≤ 2/β and µ ≤ nc . Hence, we have
                                                              2αt L + αt βc
                                      E [δt+1 ] ≤ E [δt ] +                 .
                                                                    n
Unraveling the recursion gives
                                                                  T
                                                      2L + βc X
                                          E [δT ] ≤               αt .
                                                         n    t=1

Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with coordinate gradient estimation is bounded by
                                                                  T
                                                   2L2 + βcL X
                                          ϵgen ≤                 αt .
                                                       n     t=1


In this case we can use the (1 − αγ)-expansivity of the update rule G̃t which uses the fact that the
objective function is γ-strongly convex , αt ≤ 1/β and µ ≤ nc . Hence, we have
                                                                  2αt L + αt βc
                                E [δt+1 ] ≤ (1 − αγ) E [δt ] +                  .
                                                                        n

                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Unraveling the recursion gives
                                                     T
                                      2αL + αβc X           t  2L + βc
                         E [δT ] ≤                  (1 − αγ) ≤         .
                                          n     t=0
                                                                 nγ

Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with coordinate gradient estimation is bounded by
                                                    2L2 + βcL
                                          ϵgen ≤              .
                                                       nγ

In this case we can use the (1 + αt β)-expansivity of the update rule G̃t which uses the fact that the
                                                 cL
objective function is Lipschitz, smooth and µ ≤ nβ  . Hence, we have

                                                                 2αt L + αt βc
                              E [δt+1 ] ≤ (1 + αt β) E [δt ] +
                                                                       n

Then by solving the recursion we find
                                T                   YT
                               X      2αt L αt βc
                          δT ≤             +             (1 + αj β) .
                               t=1
                                       n     n     j=t+1


Under the choice αt ≤ Ct the last display gives
                      T       T                          T        T
            (2 + c)L X       Y                 (2 + c)L X C Y             Cβ
       δT ≤              αt       (1 + βαj ) ≤                         1+
                n    t=1    j=t+1
                                                   n    t=1
                                                              t j=t+1      j
                                           
                      T             T                       T
            (2 + c)L X C           X    Cβ  (2 + c)L X C                       eT
          ≤                 exp               ≤                  exp Cβ log
                n    t=1
                          t       j=t+1
                                         j           n     t=1
                                                                t              t+1
                         T           Cβ                        T
                                            C(eT )Cβ (2 + c)L X 1

              C(2 + c)L X 1     eT
          =                             ≤
                  n     t=1
                            t  t+1                  n         t=1
                                                                  tCβ+1
            (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L

                                   Cβ + 1
          ≤                  min          , C log(eT ) .
                   n                 β
Then the generalization error of ZO-GD with coordinate gradient estimation is bounded by
                              (eT )Cβ (2 + c)L2

                                                      Cβ + 1
                      ϵgen ≤                    min          , C log(eT ) .
                                      n                 β



I     P ROOF OF SVRG G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS

I.1   SVRG

Theorem 18 (Convex Case). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, convex and L-
Lipschitz for every z. Suppose that we run SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ c/ms for m steps. Then, at
stage S we have

                                       6cL      2βc
                              E[δS ] ≤      +       + 1 E[δS−1 ].
                                        ns       s
After S stages, SVRG satisfies uniform stability with
                                             2βc
                                      6L (eS)
                                                   min c + β −1 , c log(eS) .

                             ϵgen ≤
                                           n

                                                     37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 19 (Strongly Convex Case). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth,γ-strongly
convex and L-Lipschitz for every z. Suppose that we run SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ 1/β for m steps.
Then, at one stage we have
                                                                       6Lαt
                          E[δt + 1] ≤ (1 − αγ) E[δt ] + 2αβ[δ1 ] +          .
                                                                        n
After S stages, SVRG satisfies uniform stability with
                                                       6SL2
                                              ϵgen ≤        .
                                                        nγ
Theorem 20 (Nonconvex Case). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, and L-Lipschitz
for every z. Suppose that we run SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/ms for m steps. Then, at stage S we
have

                                  Cβ       2Cβ                6CL       Cβ
                     E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+          E[δS−1 ] +     exp      .
                                   s          s                ns        s
After K stages, SVRG satisfies uniform stability with
                                                   2L2 eCβ S 3Cβ
                                        ϵgen ≤                   .
                                                        nβ

At stage S, we have
    E[δt+1 ] ≤ ∥wt − wt′ − αt (∇f (wt , zt ) − ∇f (wt′ , zt ))∥ + αt ∥∇f (w1 , zt ) − ∇f (w1′ , zt )∥
                      n                   n
                    1 X                 1 X
            + αt        ∇f (w1 , zi ) −     ∇f (w1′ , zi )
                    n                   n
                      i=1,i̸=j                     i=1,i̸=j
              αt
                  ∇f (w1 , zj ) − ∇f w1′ , zj′

            +
              n
                        2Lαt                   2Lαt                2Lαt
            ≤ ηE[δt ] +       + αt βE[δ1 ] +        + αt βE[δ1 ] +
                          n                      n                  n
                                      6Lαt
            = ηE[δt ] + 2αt βE[δ1 ] +      .
                                       n

Proof of Theorem 18.
                                  6Lαt
    E[δt+1 ] ≤E[δt ] + 2αt βE[δ1 ] +
                                    n    !                                                     !
                   m            m                      m                         m
               6L X            X                   6L X C                        X C
             ≤        αt + 2β      αt + 1 E[δ1 ] ≤           +              2β              + 1 E[δ1 ]
                n t=1          n=1
                                                    n t=1 ms                     n=1
                                                                                       ms

               6CL       2βC
             ≤      +        + 1 E[δ1 ].
                ns        s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then

                                     6CL     2βC
                            E[δS ] ≤     +        + 1 E[δS−1 ].
                                      ns      s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                    S      S                             2βC
             6CL X 1 Y                2βC        6L (eS)
                                                              min C + β −1 , C log(eS) .

    E[δS ] ≤                      1+          ≤
               n s=1 s j=s+1            j             n

Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                             2βC
                                  6L2 (eS)
                                                   min C + β −1 , C log(eS) .

                         ϵgen ≤
                                       n



                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 19.
                                                         6Lα
           E[δt + 1] ≤ (1 − αγ) E[δt ] + 2αβ[δ1 ] +
                                                          n
                                         m−1                          m−1
                        m
                                         X          6Lα Xt             t
            = (1 − αγ) E[δ1 ] + 2αβ            (1 − αγ) E[δ1 ] +
                                                              (1 − αγ)
                                 t=1
                                                      n   t=0
                               m
              6Lα 1 − (1 − αγ)                   m  2β             m
            ≤                     + (1 − (1 − αγ) )     + (1 − αγ)     E[δ1 ]
               n            αγ                       γ
                       6L
            ≤ E[δ1 ] +    .
                       nγ
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then
                                                               6L
                                        E[δS ] ≤ E[δS−1 ] +       .
                                                               nγ
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                       6SL
                                            E[δS ] ≤       .
                                                        nγ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                                     6SL2
                                            ϵgen ≤        .
                                                      nγ



Proof of Theorem 20.
                                                    6Lαt
       E[δt+1 ] ≤ (1 + αt β) E[δt ] + 2αt βE[δ1 ] +
                                                      n
                        Cβ              2Cβ           6CL
                ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
                        sm               sm           nsm
                             m                   m           t           m         t
                        Cβ                2Cβ X          Cβ         6LC X      Cβ
                = 1+            E[δ1 ] +             1+        δ1 +         1+
                        sm                 sm t=0        sm         nsm t=0    sm
                      Cβ          2Cβ      Cβ            6CL      Cβ
                ≤ exp    E[δ1 ] +      exp      E[δ1 ] +      exp
                       s            s         s           ns       s
                      Cβ         2Cβ            6CL        Cβ
                = exp      1+          E[δ1 ] +        exp    .
                       s          s              ns         s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                                  Cβ      2Cβ              6CL     Cβ
                     E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+       E[δS−1 ] +     exp    .
                                   s       s                ns      s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                S      S
                                        6LCeCβ X 1 Y           3Cβ
                             E[δS ] ≤                      exp
                                          n    s=1
                                                   s j=s+1
                                                                j
                                                         S
                                        6LCe3Cβ S Cβ X 1        1
                                    ≤                              3Cβ
                                            n        s=1
                                                         s (s + 1)
                                                         S
                                        6LCe3Cβ S Cβ X      1
                                    ≤                     1+3Cβ
                                            n        s=1
                                                         s
                                        2Le3Cβ S 3Cβ
                                    ≤                .
                                            nβ

                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                                2L2 eCβ S 3Cβ
                                       ϵgen ≤                 .
                                                     nβ



I.2   ZO-SVRG

Proof of Theorem 7. Recall that η = 1 + αt β, and then we have

                                     αt LAd                                 αt LAd
     E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt β Γkd + 1 +                 E[δt ] + 2 αt β Γkd + 1 +         E[δ1 ]
                                            µ                                  µ

                6L Γkd + 1 αt                     Ad
              +                 + 3µβCd αt +
                       n                          µn
                                                   6L2 C + 3βc + 3βLC

                       C             2C
              ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
                      sm             sm                    nβLsm
                           m                  m              t
                       C               2C X              C
              ≤ 1+            E[δ1 ] +             1+          δ1
                      sm               sm t=0           sm
                                           m              t
                6L2 C + 3βC + 3βLC X                 C
              +                                 1+
                       nβLsm             t=0
                                                    sm
                                              6L2 + 3β + 3βL

                    C        2C                                     C
              ≤ exp      1+         E[δ1 ] +                     exp .
                    s         s                     nβLs            s

For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,
                                                    6L2 + 3β + 3βL

                              C     2C                                C
                 E[δS ] ≤ exp    1+      E[δS−1 ] +                exp .
                              s      s                   nβLs         s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                 S       S
                                6L2 + 3β + 3βL X 1 Y              3C
                       E[δS ] ≤                               exp
                                     nβL        s=1
                                                    s j=s+1
                                                                   j
                                                            S
                                 6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1          1
                              ≤
                                          nβL              s=1
                                                               s (s + 1)3C
                                                            S
                                 6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1
                              ≤
                                          nβL              s=1
                                                               s1+3C

                                 2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                              ≤                        .
                                        nβLC

Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have

                                           2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                                   ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                     nβC


Theorem 21 (convex). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, convex, and L-Lipschitz
for every z. Suppose that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/ sm(β(Γkd + 1) + LA        µ )
                                                                                            d


for T steps.
                  S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies with Then, at stage S we have E[δS ] ≤
               After
                                  2
exp Cβ
     s 1 + 2βc
            s  E[δS−1 ] + 6L +3β+3βL
                             βLns    exp Cs . After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies with ϵgen ≤
(2L2 + β + βL)S 3C exp C/(Cβn).


                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 21. Recall that η = 1, and then we have

                           αt LAd                            αt LAd
E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt βΓkd +              E[δt ] + 2 αt βΓkd +            E[δ1 ]
                               µ                                µ

           6L Γkd + 1 αt                      Ad
         +                 + 3µβCd αt +
                  n                           µn
                                               6L2 C + 3βc + 3βLC

                  C              2C
         ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
                 sm              sm                   nβLsm
                      m                 m               t                          m         t
                                                               6L2 C + 3βC + 3βLC X

                  C               2C X              C                                     C
         ≤ 1+           E[δ1 ] +              1+          δ1 +                        1+
                 sm               sm t=0           sm                 nβLsm       t=0
                                                                                         sm
                                            2

               C        2C              6L + 3β + 3βL           C
         ≤ exp      1+         E[δ1 ] +                     exp .
               s         s                      nβLs            s

For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,
                                                    6L2 + 3β + 3βL

                              C     2C                                C
                 E[δS ] ≤ exp    1+      E[δS−1 ] +                exp .
                              s      s                   nβLs         s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                 S       S
                                6L2 + 3β + 3βL X 1 Y              3C
                        E[δS ] ≤                              exp
                                     nβL        s=1
                                                    s j=s+1
                                                                   j
                                                            S
                                 6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1          1
                              ≤                                          3C
                                          nβL              s=1
                                                               s (s + 1)
                                                            S
                                 6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1
                              ≤
                                          nβL              s=1
                                                               s1+3C

                                 2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                              ≤                        .
                                        nβLC

Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have

                                           2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                                   ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                     nβC


Theorem 22 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, γ-strongly convex,
and L-Lipschitz for every z. Suppose that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/ sm(β(Γkd +
1) + LA

       µ  ) for T  steps. After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies with Then, at stage S we have E[δS ] ≤
        d

                                  2
exp Cβ
     s    1 + 2βc
               s    E[δS−1 ] + 6L +3β+3βL
                                    βLns    exp Cs . After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies with


                            ϵgen ≤ (2L2 + β + βL)S 3C exp C/(Cβn).

Proof of Theorem 22. Recall that η = 1 − αβ+γt βγ
                                                  , and then we have

                     k   αt βγ       αt LAd                       k     αt LAd
E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt βΓd −          +              E[δt ] + 2 αt βΓd +              E[δ1 ]
                         β+γ            µ                                  µ

           6L Γkd + 1 αt                    Ad
         +               + 3µβCd αt +
                 n                          µn

                      k         α t LA  d                     k     αt LAd
         ≤ 1 + αt β(Γd + 1) +               E[δt ] + 2 αt βΓd +               E[δ1 ]
                                    µ                                  µ

                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         6L Γkd + 1 αt                     Ad
       +                 + 3µβCd αt +
                n                          µn
                                            6L2 C + 3βc + 3βLC

                C             2C
       ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
               sm             sm                   nβLsm
                    m                 m              t                          m         t
                                                            6L2 C + 3βC + 3βLC X

                C               2C   X           C                                     C
       ≤ 1+           E[δ1 ] +              1+         δ1 +                        1+
               sm               sm t=0          sm                 nβLsm       t=0
                                                                                      sm
                                      6L2 + 3β + 3βL

             C        2C                                     C
       ≤ exp      1+         E[δ1 ] +                    exp .
             s         s                     nβLs            s

For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,
                                                    6L2 + 3β + 3βL

                              C     2C                                C
                 E[δS ] ≤ exp    1+      E[δS−1 ] +                exp .
                              s      s                   nβLs         s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                               S       S
                              6L2 + 3β + 3βL X 1 Y              3C
                      E[δS ] ≤                              exp
                                   nβL        s=1
                                                  s j=s+1        j
                                                          S
                               6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1          1
                            ≤
                                        nβL              s=1
                                                             s (s + 1)3C
                                                          S
                               6L2 + 3β + 3βL eC S 3C X 1
                            ≤
                                        nβL              s=1
                                                             s1+3C

                               2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                            ≤                        .
                                      nβLC

Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have

                                           2L2 + β + βL eC S 3C
                                   ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                     nβC



Proof of Theorem 8.

                                                                   6L Γkd + 1 αt
                        Γkd + 1                     Γkd + 1

   E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt β            E[δt ] + 2αt β          E[δ1 ] +               + 3µβCd αt
                                                                         n
                    Cβ            2Cβ             6CL + 3cC
            ≤ 1+         E[δt ] +       E[δ1 ] +
                    sm             sm               nsm
                        m                   m            t                    m          t
                    Cβ              2Cβ X            Cβ           6LC + 3cC X        Cβ
            ≤ 1+          E[δ1 ] +               1+        δ1 +                  1+
                    sm               sm t=0          sm              nsm     t=0
                                                                                     sm

                  Cβ       2Cβ                6L + 3c     Cβ
            ≤ exp      1+           E[δ1 ] +          exp     .
                   s          s                  nβ        s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                                Cβ      2Cβ              6L + 3c     Cβ
                   E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+       E[δS−1 ] +         exp    .
                                 s       s                 nβ         s

Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                     S      S
                                       (6L + 3c)eCβ X 1 Y           3Cβ
                         E[δS ] ≤                               exp
                                            nβ      s=1
                                                        s j=s+1
                                                                     j


                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           S
                                   (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X 1        1
                                 ≤                                  3Cβ
                                           n          s=1
                                                          s (s + 1)
                                                           S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X      1
                                 ≤                           1+3Cβ
                                             n          s=1
                                                            s
                                     (2L + c)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                 ≤                     .
                                            nβ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                              (2L2 + cL)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                     ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                      nβ


Theorem 23 (convex). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, convex,and
                                                                                    L-Lipschitz for
every z. Suppose that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/sm Γkd + 1 for T steps. After S
stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies
                              ϵgen ≤ (2L2 + cL)S 3βC exp Cβ/(βn).

Proof of Theorem 23. Recall η = 1, then we have

                                                     6L Γkd + 1 αt
   E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt βΓkd E[δt ] + 2αt βΓkd E[δ1 ] +

                                                                     + 3µβCd αt
                                                            n
                    Cβ            2Cβ            6CL + 3cC
            ≤ 1+         E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
                    sm             sm                nsm
                        m                   m             t                   m          t
                    Cβ              2Cβ X            Cβ            6LC + 3cC X       Cβ
            ≤ 1+           E[δ1 ] +             1+          δ1 +                  1+
                    sm               sm t=0           sm             nsm     t=0
                                                                                     sm

                  Cβ       2Cβ               6L + 3c       Cβ
            ≤ exp       1+          E[δ1 ] +           exp     .
                   s          s                 nβ          s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                                Cβ      2Cβ              6L + 3c     Cβ
                   E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+       E[δS−1 ] +         exp    .
                                 s       s                 nβ         s

Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                   S      S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ X 1 Y           3Cβ
                          E[δS ] ≤                            exp
                                          nβ      s=1
                                                      s j=s+1
                                                                   j
                                                           S
                                   (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X 1        1
                                 ≤                                  3Cβ
                                           n          s=1
                                                          s (s + 1)
                                                           S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X      1
                                 ≤                           1+3Cβ
                                             n          s=1
                                                            s
                                     (2L + c)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                 ≤                     .
                                            nβ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                              (2L2 + cL)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                     ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                      nβ



                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 24 (strongly convex). Assume that the loss function f (·; z) is β-smooth, convex,and
                                                                                             L-
Lipschitz for every z. Suppose that we run ZO-SVRG with step sizes αt ≤ C/sm Γkd + 1 for T
steps. After S stages, ZO-SVRG satisfies
                              ϵgen ≤ (2L2 + cL)S 3βC exp Cβ/(βn).

Proof of Theorem 24. Recall η = 1 − αβ+γt βγ
                                             , then we have

                                                                  6L Γkd + 1 αt

                         k    αt βγ                     k
   E[δt+1 ] ≤ 1 + αt βΓd −             E[δt ] + 2αt βΓd E[δ1 ] +                 + 3µβCd αt
                             β+γ                                        n

                                                            6L Γkd + 1 αt
            ≤ 1 + αt β(Γkd + 1) E[δt ] + 2αt βΓkd E[δ1 ] +

                                                                            + 3µβCd αt
                                                                    n
                    Cβ             2Cβ             6CL + 3cC
            ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +      E[δ1 ] +
                    sm              sm                nsm
                        m                    m             t                    m            t
                    Cβ               2Cβ    X          Cβ          6LC + 3cC X         Cβ
            ≤ 1+           E[δ1 ] +                1+        δ1 +                   1+
                    sm                sm t=0           sm             nsm      t=0
                                                                                       sm

                  Cβ        2Cβ                 6L + 3c     Cβ
            ≤ exp       1+           E[δ1 ] +           exp     .
                   s           s                  nβ         s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                                Cβ      2Cβ              6L + 3c     Cβ
                   E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+       E[δS−1 ] +         exp    .
                                 s       s                 nβ         s

Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                   S      S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ X 1 Y           3Cβ
                          E[δS ] ≤                            exp
                                          nβ      s=1
                                                      s j=s+1
                                                                   j
                                                           S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X 1        1
                                 ≤                                    3Cβ
                                             n          s=1
                                                            s (s + 1)
                                                           S
                                     (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X      1
                                 ≤                           1+3Cβ
                                             n          s=1
                                                            s
                                     (2L + c)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                 ≤                     .
                                            nβ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                              (2L2 + cL)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                     ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                      nβ



Proof of Theorem 9 (Nonconvex).
                                                6Lαt
   E[δt+1 ] ≤ (1 + αt β) E[δt ] + 2αt βE[δ1 ] +       + 3µβαt
                                                   n
                    Cβ              2Cβ            6CL + 3cC
            ≤ 1+          E[δt ] +       E[δ1 ] +
                    sm               sm              nsm
                         m                    m           t                 m          t
                    Cβ                2Cβ    X        Cβ         6LC + 3cC X       Cβ
            ≤ 1+            E[δ1 ] +              1+        δ1 +                1+
                    sm                 sm t=0         sm           nsm     t=0
                                                                                   sm

                  Cβ          2Cβ              6L + 3c     Cβ
            ≤ exp        1+           E[δ1 ] +         exp     .
                   s            s                 nβ        s


                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                               Cβ      2Cβ              6L + 3c     Cβ
                  E[δS ] ≤ exp      1+       E[δS−1 ] +         exp    ..
                                s       s                 nβ         s

Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                      S      S
                                        (6L + 3c)eCβ X 1 Y           3Cβ
                          E[δS ] ≤                               exp
                                             nβ      s=1
                                                         s j=s+1
                                                                      j
                                                                S
                                        (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X 1        1
                                    ≤                                    3Cβ
                                                n          s=1
                                                               s (s + 1)
                                                                S
                                        (6L + 3c)eCβ S 3Cβ X      1
                                    ≤                           1+3Cβ
                                                n          s=1
                                                               s
                                        (2L + c)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                    ≤                     .
                                               nβ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have

                                                 (2L2 + cL)eCβ S 3Cβ
                                        ϵgen ≤                       .
                                                         nβ



Proof of Theorem 9 (Convex) .
                                                        (6L + 3c)αt
                      E[δt+1 ] ≤E[δt ] + 2αt βE[δ1 ] +
                                                             n        !
                                               m             m
                                    (6L + 3c) X             X
                                  ≤               αt + 2β       αt + 1 E[δ1 ]
                                        n     t=1           n=1
                                             m              m
                                                                       !
                                    6L + 3c X C            X    C
                                  ≤                 + 2β            + 1 E[δ1 ]
                                       n    t=1
                                                ms         n=1
                                                                ms

                                    6CL + 3cC        2βC
                                  ≤             +         + 1 E[δ1 ].
                                        ns            s
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,

                                   6cL + 3cC     2βc
                          E[δS ] ≤           +       + 1 E[δS−1 ].
                                       ns         s
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                          S      S
                               6CL + 3cC X 1 Y           2βc
                      E[δS ] ≤                        1+
                                   n     s=1
                                             s j=s+1      j
                                                    2βc
                                  (6L + 3c) (eS)
                                                           min c + β −1 , c log(eS) .

                              ≤
                                         n
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                                     2βc
                              (6L2 + 3cL) (eS)
                                                           min c + β −1 , c log(eS) .

                     ϵgen ≤
                                       n


                                                      45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 9 (Strongly Convex).
                                                    (6L + 3c)α
       E[δt + 1] ≤ (1 − αγ) E[δt ] + 2αβ[δ1 ] +
                                                        n
                                    m−1                                m−1
                    m
                                    X              (6L + 3c)α X
                                                    t                      t
        = (1 − αγ) E[δ1 ] + 2αβ           (1 − αγ) E[δ1 ] +       (1 − αγ)
                                t=1
                                                       n      t=0
                                    m
          (6L + 3c)α 1 − (1 − αγ)                     m 2β             m
        ≤                              + (1 − (1 − αγ) )    + (1 − αγ)     E[δ1 ]
                n            αγ                           γ
                   6L + 3c
        ≤ E[δ1 ] +         .
                     nγ
For the S-stage, we have ws = wm and wS−1 = w1 . Then,
                                                         6L + 3c
                                   E[δS ] ≤ E[δS−1 ] +           .
                                                           nγ
Summing the above inequality for S stages, and unraveling the recursion gives
                                                   6LS + 3cS
                                        E[δS ] ≤             .
                                                      nγ
Note that E |f (wT ; z) − f (wT′ ; z)| ≤ LE [δT ], then we have
                                                6SL2 + 3cLS
                                       ϵgen ≤               .
                                                    nγ


                                                   46
