Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NTROPY C ODING OF
U NORDERED DATA S TRUCTURES
 Julius Kunze                                             Daniel Severo
 University College London                                University of Toronto and Vector Institute
 juliuskunze@gmail.com                                    d.severo@mail.utoronto.ca

 Giulio Zani                           Jan-Willem van de Meent         James Townsend
 University of Amsterdam               University of Amsterdam         University of Amsterdam
 g.zani@uva.nl                         j.w.vandemeent@uva.nl           j.h.n.townsend@uva.nl



                                              A BSTRACT

         We present shuffle coding, a general method for optimal compression of sequences
         of unordered objects using bits-back coding. Data structures that can be com-
         pressed using shuffle coding include multisets, graphs, hypergraphs, and others.
         We release an implementation that can easily be adapted to different data types
         and statistical models, and demonstrate that our implementation achieves state-of-
         the-art compression rates on a range of graph datasets including molecular data.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The information stored and communicated by computer hardware, in the form of strings of bits
and bytes, is inherently ordered. A string has a first and last element, and may be indexed by
numbers in N, a totally ordered set. For data like text, audio, or video, this ordering carries meaning.
However, there are also numerous data structures in which the ‘elements’ have no meaningful order.
Common examples include graphs, sets and multisets, and ‘map-like’ datatypes such as JSON.
Recent applications of machine learning to molecular data benefit from large datasets of molecules,
which are graphs with vertex and edge labels representing atom and bond types (some examples
are shown in Table 1 below). All of these data are necessarily stored in an ordered manner on a
computer, but the order then represents redundant information. This work concerns optimal lossless
compression of unordered data, and we seek to eliminate this redundancy.


Table 1: Examples of molecules and their order information. The ‘discount’ column shows the
saving achieved by shuffle coding by removing order information (see eq. 14). For each molecule
m, n is the number of atoms and |Aut(m)| is the size of the automorphism group. All values are in
bits, and log denotes the binary logarithm.

                                           Permutation     Symmetry               Discount
           Molecular structure
                                              log n!      log|Aut(m)|      log n! − log|Aut(m)|
            Nitric oxide   N   O               1.00            0.00                 1.00
                               O
                   Water   H       H
                                               2.58            1.00                 1.58

     Hydrogen peroxide         O O             4.58            1.00                 3.58
                           H           H

                           H           H
                Ethylene       C   C           9.49            3.00                 6.49
                           H           H

                           H O   H
                              B O
              Boric acid     O
                                               12.30           2.58                 9.71
                              H


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Recent work by Severo et al. (2023a) showed how to construct an optimal lossless codec for (un-
ordered) multisets from a codec for (ordered) vectors, by storing information in an ordering. Their
method depends on the simple structure of multisets’ automorphism groups, and does not extend
to other unordered objects such as unlabeled graphs. In this paper we overcome this issue and de-
velop shuffle coding, a method for constructing codecs for general ‘unordered objects’ from codecs
for ‘ordered objects’. Our definitions of ordered and unordered objects are based on the concept
of ‘combinatorial species’ (Bergeron et al., 1997; Joyal, 1981), originally developed to assist with
the enumeration of combinatorial structures. They include multisets, as well as all of the other
unordered data structures mentioned above, and many more.
Although the method is applicable to any unordered object, we focus our experiments on unordered
(usually referred to as ‘unlabeled’) graphs, as these are a widely used data type, and the improve-
ments in compression rate from removing order information are large (as summarized in Table 2).
We show that shuffle coding can achieve significant improvements relative to existing methods,
when compressing unordered graphs under the Erdős-Rényi G(n, p) model of Erdős and Rényi
(1960) as well as the recently proposed Pólya’s urn-based model of Severo et al. (2023b). Shuffle
coding extends to graphs with vertex and edge attributes, such as the molecular and social network
datasets of TUDatasets (Morris et al., 2020), which are compressed in Section 5. We release source
code1 with straightforward interfaces to enable future applications of shuffle coding with more so-
phisticated models and to classes of unordered objects other than graphs.

2       BACKGROUND

The definitions for ordered and unordered objects are given in Section 2.1. Entropy coding is re-
viewed in Section 2.2. Examples are given throughout the section for clarification.

2.1     P ERMUTABLE CLASSES

For n ∈ N, we let [n] := {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}, with [0] = ∅. The symmetric group of permutations
on [n], i.e. bijections from [n] to [n], will be denoted by Sn . Permutations compose on the left, like
functions, i.e., for s, t ∈ Sn , the product st denotes the permutation formed by performing t then s.
Permutations are represented as follows

                                          0       1
                                                      = (2, 0, 1) ∈ S3 .                                   (1)
                                              2

The glyph on the left-hand side represents the permutation that maps 0 to 2, 1 to 0 and 2 to 1. This
permutation can also be represented concretely by the vector (2, 0, 1).
Concepts from group theory, including subgroups, cosets, actions, orbits, and stabilizers are used
throughout. We provide a brief introduction in Appendix A.
We will be compressing objects which can be ‘re-ordered’ by applying permutations. This is for-
malized in the following definition:
Definition 2.1 (Permutable class2 ). For n ∈ N, a permutable class of order n is a set F, equipped
with a left group action of the permutation group Sn on F, which we denote with the · binary
operator. We refer to elements of F as ordered objects.
Example 2.1 (Length n strings). For a fixed set X, let Fn = X n , that is, length n strings of
elements of X, and let Sn act on a string in Fn by rearranging its elements.
Taking X to be the set of ASCII characters, we can define a permutable class of ASCII strings, with
action by rearrangement, for example

                                         0        1
                                                      · "Team" = "eaTm".                                   (2)
                                         3        2
    1
    Source code, data and results are available at https://github.com/juliuskunze/shuffle-coding.
    2
    This definition is very close to that of a ‘combinatorial species’, the main difference being that we fix a
specific n. See discussion in Yorgey (2014, pp. 66–67).


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Example 2.2 (Simple graphs Gn ). Let Gn be the set of simple graphs with vertex set [n]. Specifically,
an element g ∈ Gn is a set of ‘edges’, which are unordered pairs of elements of [n]. We define the
action of Sn on a graph by moving the endpoints of each edge in the direction of the arrows, for
example
                                        0   1        0       1           0   1
                                                ·                =               .                  (3)
                                        3   2        3       2           3   2

Our main contribution in this paper is a general method for compressing unordered objects. These
may be defined formally in terms of the equivalence classes, known as orbits, which comprise objects
that are identical up to re-ordering (see Appendix A for background):
Definition 2.2 (Isomorphism, unordered objects). For two objects f and g in a permutable class F,
we say that f is isomorphic to g, and write f ≃ g, if there exists s ∈ Sn such that g = s · f (i.e.
if f and g are in the same orbit under the action of Sn ). Note that the relation ≃ is an equivalence
relation. For f ∈ F we use f˜ to denote the equivalence class containing f , and Fe to denote the
quotient set of equivalence classes. We refer to elements f˜ ∈ Fe as unordered objects.

For the case of strings in example 2.1, an object’s isomorphism class is characterized by the multiset
of elements contained in the string. For the simple graphs in example 2.2, the generalized isomor-
phism in definition 2.2 reduces to the usual notion of graph isomorphism. We can define a shorthand
notation for unordered graphs, with points at the nodes instead of numbers:
                                                             ^
                                                             0 1
                                                    :=                   .                          (4)
                                                             3   2

Using this notation, the unordered simple graphs on three vertices, for example, can be written:
                                  n                                  o
                             G
                             f3 =         ,       ,        ,            .                        (5)

Finally, we define the subgroup of Sn which contains the symmetries of a given object f :
Definition 2.3 (Automorphism group). For an element f of a permutable class F, we let Aut(f )
denote the automorphism group of f , defined by
                                   Aut(f ) := {s ∈ Sn | s · f = f }.                                (6)
This is the stabilizer subgroup of f under the action of Sn .

The elements of the automorphism group of the simple graph from example 2.2 are:
                                 ! (                                 )
                               0   1                0        1                   0   1
                        Aut             =                            ,                   .          (7)
                               3   2                3        2                   3   2

2.1.1     C ANONICAL ORDERINGS
To define a codec for unordered objects, we will introduce the notion of a ‘canonical’ representative
of each equivalence class in F.
                             e This allows us, for example, to check whether two ordered objects
are isomorphic, by mapping both to the canonical representative and comparing.
Definition 2.4 (Canonical ordering). A canonical ordering is an operator · : F → F, such that

        1. For f ∈ F, we have f ≃ f .
        2. For f, g ∈ F, f = g if and only if f ≃ g.

For strings, any sorting function satisfies properties 1 and 2 and is therefore a valid canonical order-
ing. For graphs, the canonical orderings we use are computed using the nauty and Traces libraries
(McKay and Piperno, 2014). The libraries provide a function, which we call canon_perm, which,
given a graph g, returns a permutation s such that s · g = g. In addition to canon_perm, nauty and


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Traces can compute the automorphism group of a given graph, via a function which we refer to as
aut.3
Our method critically depends on the availability of such a function for a given permutation class.
While permutable objects other than graphs cannot be directly canonized by nauty and Traces, it is
often possible to embed objects into graphs in such a way that the structure is preserved and the can-
onization remains valid (see Anders and Schweitzer (2021)). We use an embedding of edge-colored
graphs into vertex-colored graphs in order to canonize and compress graphs with edge attributes
(which are not directly supported by nauty/traces). We leave more systematic approaches to canon-
izing objects from permutable classes as an interesting direction for future work4 .

2.2    C ODECS

We fix a set M of prefix-free binary messages, and a length function l : M → [0, ∞), which mea-
sures the number of physical bits required to represent values in M . Our method requires stack-like
(LIFO) codecs, such as those based on the range variant of asymmetric numeral systems (rANS), to
save bits corresponding to the redundant order using bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019).
Definition 2.5 ((Stack-like) codec). A stack-like codec (or simply codec) for a set X is an invertible
function
                                     encode : M × X → M.                                           (8)
We call a codec optimal for a probability distribution over X with mass function P if for any m ∈ M
and x ∈ X,
                                                                  1 5
                               l(encode(m, x)) ≈ l(m) + log          .                            (9)
                                                               P (x)
                  1
We refer to log P (x) as the optimal rate and to the inverse of encode as decode. Since decode has
to be implemented in practice, we treat it as an explicit part of a codec below.

The encode function requires a pre-existing message as its first input. Therefore, at the beginning of
encoding we set m equal to some fixed, short initial message m0 , with length less than 64 bits. As
in other entropy coding methods, which invariably have some small constant overhead, this ’initial
bit cost’ is amortized as we compress more data.
We will assume access to three primitive codecs provided by rANS. These are

        • Uniform(n), optimal for a uniform distribution on {0, 1, . . . , n-1}.
        • Bernoulli(p), optimal for a Bernoulli distribution with probability p.
        • Categorical(ps), optimal for a categorical distribution with probability vector ps.

These primitive codecs can be composed to implement codecs for strings and simple graphs. In
appendix B, we show such a string codec optimal for a distribution where each character is drawn
i.i.d. from a categorical with known probabilities, and a codec for simple graphs optimal for the
Erdős-Rényi G(n, p) model, where each edge’s existence is decided by an independent draw from
a Bernoulli with known probability parameter. We will use these codecs for ordered objects as a
component of shuffle coding.
There is an implementation-dependent limit on the parameter n of Uniform and on the number of
categories for Categorical. In the 64-bit rANS implementation which we wrote for our experi-
ments, this limit is 248 . This is not large enough to, for example, cover Sn for large n, and therefore
permutations must be encoded and decoded sequentially, see Appendix C. For details on the imple-
mentation of the primitive rANS codecs listed above, see Duda (2009) and Townsend (2021).

   3
      In fact, a list of generators for the group is computed, rather than the entire group, which may be very large.
   4
      Schweitzer and Wiebking (2019) describe generic methods for canonization starting from a constructive
definition of permutable objects using ‘hereditarily finite sets’ (i.e. not using the species definition).
    5
      This condition, with a suitable definition of ≈, is equivalent to rate-optimality in the usual Shannon sense,
see Townsend (2020).


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           0       1            0        1                           0       1
                               2                    2                                    2

                           0       1             0       1           0       1       0       1
                                                                 ·               =
                               2                     2                   2               2

                           0       1        0        1                               0       1
                               2                2                                        2

Figure 1: Visualization of lemma 3.2. For a fixed graph g, the six elements s ∈ S3 can be partitioned
according to the value of s · g. The three sets in the partition are the left cosets of Aut(g).


3   C ODECS FOR UNORDERED OBJECTS
Our main contribution in this paper is a generic codec for unordered objects, i.e. a codec respecting
a given probability distribution on F.
                                     e We first derive an expression for the optimal rate that this
codec should achieve, then in Section 3.1 we describe the codec itself.
To help simplify the presentation, we will use the following generalization of exchangeability from
sequences of random variables to arbitrary permutable classes:
Definition 3.1 (Exchangeability). For a probability distribution P defined on a permutable class F,
we say that P is exchangeable if isomorphic objects have equal probability under P , i.e. if
                                         f ≃ g ⇒ P (f ) = P (g).                                 (10)

We can assume, without loss of modeling power, that unordered objects are generated by first gen-
erating an ordered object f from an exchangeable distribution and then ‘forgetting’ the order by
projecting f onto its isomorphism class f˜:
Lemma 3.1 (Symmetrization). For any distribution Q on a class of unordered objects F,   e there
exists a unique exchangeable distribution P on ordered objects F for which
                                                X
                                        Q(f˜) =     P (g).                                   (11)
                                                             g∈f˜


Proof. For existence, set P (f ) := Q(f˜)/|f˜| for f ∈ F, and note that g ∈ f˜ ⇒ g̃ = f˜. For
uniqueness, note that definition 3.1 implies that the restriction of P to any particular class must be
uniform, which completely determines P .

We will model real-world permutable objects using an exchangeable model, which will play the role
of P in eq. (11). To further simplify our rate expression we will also need the following application
of the orbit-stabilizer theorem (see Appendix A for more detail), which is visualized in Figure 1:
Lemma 3.2. Given a permutable class F, for each object f ∈ F, there is a fixed bijection between
the left cosets of Aut(f ) in Sn and the isomorphism class f˜. This is induced by the function θf :
Sn → F defined by θf (s) := s · f . This implies that
                                                  |Sn |        n!
                                       |f˜| =             =           .                          (12)
                                                |Aut(f )|   |Aut(f )|

Proof. Follows directly from the orbit-stabilizer theorem (theorem A.1) and the definitions of Aut,
f and f˜.

For any f ∈ F, this allows us to express the right hand side of eq. (11) as:
                              X                            n!
                                  P (g) = |f˜|P (f ) =           P (f )                          (13)
                                                       |Aut(f )|
                               g∈f˜


                                                             5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     where the first equality follows from exchangeability of P , and the second from eq. (12). Finally,
     from eqs. (11) and (13), we can immediately write down the following optimal rate expression,
     which a codec on unordered objects should achieve:
                                          1            1             n!
                                   log         = log        − log           .                            (14)
                                            ˜
                                         Q(f )       P (f )       |Aut(f )|
                                                  Ordered rate    Discount


     Note that only the log 1/P (f ) term depends on the choice of model. The log(n!/|Aut(f )|) term can
     be computed directly from the data, and is the ‘discount’ that we get for compressing an unordered
     object vs. compressing an ordered one. The discount is larger for objects which have a smaller
     automorphism group, i.e. objects which lack symmetry. It can be shown that almost all simple
     graphs have a trivial automorphism group for large enough n, see e.g. Bollobás (2001, Chapter 9),
     and thus in practice the discount is usually equal to or close to log n!.

     3.1   ACHIEVING THE TARGET RATE FOR UNORDERED OBJECTS

     How can we achieve the optimal rate in eq. (14)? In appendix B we give examples of codecs for
     ordered strings and simple graphs which achieve the ‘ordered rate’. To operationalize the negative
     ‘discount’ term, we can use the ‘bits-back with ANS’ method introduced by Townsend et al. (2019),
     the key idea being to decode an ordering as part of an encode function (see line 3 in the code below).
     The value of the negative term in the rate provides a hint at how exactly to decode an ordering: the
     discount is equal to the logarithm of the number of cosets of Aut(f ) in Sn , so a uniform codec
     for those cosets will consume exactly that many bits. Lemma 3.2 tells us that there is a direct
     correspondence between the cosets of Aut(f ) and the set f˜, so if we uniformly decode a choice of
     coset, we can reversibly map that to an ordering of f .
     The following is an implementation of shuffle coding, showing, on the right, the effect of the steps
     on message length.

 1   def encode(m, f):                                                       Effect on message length:
 2     f_canon = action_apply(canon_perm(f), f)
                                                                                      n!
 3     m, s = UniformLCoset(f_canon.aut).decode(m)                           − log |Aut(f )|
 4     g = action_apply(s, f_canon)
                                                                                     1
 5     m = P.encode(m, g)                                                    + log P (f )
 6     return m
 7
 8   def decode(m):
 9     m, g = P.decode(m)
10     s_ = inv_canon_perm(g)
11     f_canon = action_unapply(s_, f)
12     m = UniformLCoset(f_canon.aut).encode(m, s_)
13     return m, f_canon

     The encode function accepts a pair (m, f), and reversibly decodes a random choice g from the
     isomorphism class of f. This is done using a uniform codec for left cosets, UniformLCoset, which
     we discuss in detail in Appendix C. The canonization on line 2 is necessary so that the decoder can
     recover the chosen coset and encode it on line 12. While the codec technically maps between M × Fe
     and M , we avoid representing equivalence classes explicitly as sets, and instead use a single element
     of the class as a representative. Thus the encoder accepts any f in the isomorphism class being
     encoded, and the decoder then returns the canonization of f. Similarly, UniformLCoset.encode
     accepts any element of the coset, and UniformLCoset.decode returns a canonical coset element.

     3.2   I NITIAL BITS

     The increase in message length from shuffle coding is equal to the optimal rate in eq. (14). However,
     the decode step on line 3 of the encode function assumes that there is already some information in
     the message which can be decoded. At the very beginning of encoding, these ‘initial bits’ can be


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generated at random, but they are unavoidably encoded into the message, meaning that for the first
object, the discount is not realized. This constant initialization overhead means that the rate, when
compressing only one or a few objects, is not optimal, but tends to the optimal rate if more objects
are compressed, as the overhead is amortized.


4   R ELATED WORK

To date, there has been a significant amount of work on compression of what we refer to as ‘ordered’
graphs, see Besta and Hoefler (2019) for a comprehensive survey. Compression of ‘unordered’
graphs, and unordered objects in general, has been less well studied, despite the significant potential
benefits of removing order information (see Table 2). The work of Varshney and Goyal (2006) is
the earliest we are aware of to discuss the theoretical bounds for compression of sets and multisets,
which are unordered strings.
Choi and Szpankowski (2012) discuss the optimal rate for unordered graphs (a special case of our
eq. 14), and present a compression method called ‘structural ZIP’ (SZIP), which asymptotically
achieves the rate
                                      1
                                log         − n log n + O(n),                               (15)
                                    PER (g)
where PER is the Erdős-Rényi G(n, p) model. Compared to our method, SZIP is less flexible in the
sense that it only applies to simple graphs (without vertex or edge attributes), and it is not an entropy
coding method, thus the model PER cannot be changed easily. On the other hand, SZIP can achieve
good rates on single graphs, whereas, because of the initial bits issue (see Section 3.2), our method
only achieves the optimal rate on sequences of objects. We discuss this issue further and provide a
quantitative comparison in Section 5.
Steinruecken (2014, 2015, 2016) provides a range of specialized methods for compression of various
ordered and unordered permutable objects, including multisets, permutations, combinations and
compositions. Steinruecken’s approach is similar to ours in that explicit probabilistic modeling is
used, although different methods are devised for each kind of object rather than attempting a unifying
treatment as we have done.
Our method can be viewed as a generalization of the framework for multiset compression pre-
sented in Severo et al. (2023a), which also used ‘bits-back with ANS’ (BB-ANS; Townsend, 2021;
Townsend et al., 2019). Severo et al. (2023a) use interleaving to reduce the initial bits overhead and
achieve an optimal rate when compressing a single multiset (which can also be applied to a sequence
of multisets), whereas the method presented in this paper is optimal only for sequences of unordered
objects (including sequences of multisets). However, as mentioned in Section 1, their method only
works for multisets and not for more general unordered objects.
There are a number of recent works on deep generative modeling of graphs (see Zhu et al. (2022)
for a survey), which could be applied to entropy coding to improve compression rates. Particu-
larly relevant is Chen et al. (2021), who optimize an evidence lower-bound (ELBO), equivalent to
an upper-bound on the rate in eq. (14), when P is not exchangeable. Finally, the ‘Partition and
Code’ (PnC; Bouritsas et al., 2021) method uses neural networks to compress unordered graphs. We
compare to PnC empirically in Table 3. PnC is also specialized to graphs, although it does employ
probabilistic modeling to some extent.


5   E XPERIMENTS

To demonstrate the method experimentally, we first applied it to the TUDatasets graphs (Morris
et al., 2020), with a very simple Erdős-Rényi G(n, p) model for P . Table 2 shows a summary,
highlighting the significance of the discount achieved by shuffle coding. We compressed a dataset
at a time (note that for each high-level graph type there are multiple datasets in TUDatasets).
To handle graphs with discrete vertex and edge attributes, we treated all attributes as independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) within each dataset. For each dataset, the codec computes and
encodes a separate empirical probability vector for vertices and edges, as well as an empirical p
parameter, and the size n of each graph. We use run-length encoding for these meta-data, described


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in detail in Appendix E. Some datasets in TUDatasets contain graphs with continuous attributes.
We did not encode these attributes, since for these values lossy compression would usually be more
appropriate, and the focus of this work is on lossless.

Table 2: For the TUDatasets, this table shows the significance of the discount term - in eq. (14).
With an Erdős-Rényi (ER) model, with edge probability adapted to each dataset, the percentage
improvement (Discount) is the difference between treating the graph as ordered (Ordered ER) and
using Shuffle coding to forget the order (Shuffle coding ER). Rates are measured in bits per edge.
                 Graph type           Ordered ER Shuffle coding ER Discount
                 Small molecules         2.11               1.14             46%
                 Bioinformatics          9.20               6.50             29%
                 Computer vision         6.63               4.49             32%
                 Social networks6        3.98               2.97             26%
                 Synthetic               5.66               2.99             47%

We also compared directly to Bouritsas et al. (2021), who used a more sophisticated neural method
to compress graphs (upper part of Table 3). They reported results for six of the datasets from the
TUDatasets with vertex and edge attributes removed, and for two of the six they reported results
which included vertex and edge attributes. Because PnC requires training, it was evaluated on a
random test subset of each dataset, whereas shuffle coding was evaluated on entire datasets.
We found that for some types of graphs, such as the bioinformatics and social network graphs,
performance was significantly improved by using a Pólya urn (PU) preferential attachment model for
ordered graphs introduced by Severo et al. (2023b). In this model, a sequence of edges is sampled,
where the probability of an edge being connected to a specific node is approximately proportional
to the number of edges already connected to that node. Such a ‘rich-get-richer’ dynamic is plausibly
present in the formation of many real-world graphs, explaining the urn model’s good performance.
It treats edges as a set, and we were able to use an inner shuffle codec for sets to encode the edges,
demonstrating the straightforward compositionality of shuffle coding. See Appendix D for details.
The average initial bit cost per TU dataset in Table 3 is 0.01 bits per edge for both ER and PU,
demonstrating good amortization.
As mentioned in Section 4, SZIP achieves a good rate for single graphs, whereas shuffle coding is
only optimal for sequences of graphs. In the lower part of Table 3, we compare the ‘net rate’, which
is the increase in message length from shuffle coding the graphs, assuming some existing data is
already encoded into the message. The fact that shuffle coding ‘just works’ with any statistical
model for ordered graphs is a major advantage of the method, as demonstrated by the fact that we
were easily able to improve on the Erdős-Rényi results by swapping in a recently proposed model.
We report speeds in Appendix F. Our implementation has not yet been optimized. One thing that
will not be easy to speed up is canonical ordering, since for this we use the nauty and Traces
libraries, which have already been heavily optimized. Fortunately, those calls are currently only 10
percent of the overall time, and we believe there is significant scope for optimization of the rest.

6   L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Time complexity. Shuffle coding relies on computing an object’s canonical ordering and automor-
phism group, for which no polynomial-time algorithm is known for graphs. In consequence, while
nauty and Traces solve this problem efficiently for various graph classes, it is impractical in the
worst case. This limitation can be overcome by approximating an object’s canonical ordering, in-
stead of calculating it exactly. This introduces a trade-off between speed and compression rate in
the method, and lowers runtime complexity to polynomial time. We leave a detailed description of
that more sophisticated method to future work.
Initial bits. A limitation of the version of shuffle coding presented in this paper is that it only
achieves an optimal rate for sequences; the rate ‘discount’ cannot be realized in the one-shot case,
   6
     Three of the 24 social network datasets, REDDIT-BINARY, REDDIT-MULTI-5K, REDDIT-MULTI-12K,
were excluded because compression running time was too long.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparison between shuffle coding, with Erdős-Rényi (ER) and our Pólya urn (PU) mod-
els, and the best results obtained by PnC (Bouritsas et al., 2021) and SZIP (Choi and Szpankowski,
2012) for each dataset. We also show the discount realized by shuffle coding. Each SZIP compar-
ison is on a single graph, and thus for shuffle coding we report the optimal (net) compression rate,
that is the additional cost of compressing that graph assuming there is already some compressed data
to append to. All measurements are in bits per edge.
                                                                     Shuffle coding
                     Dataset                         Discount      ER         PU          PnC
 Small molecules     MUTAG                            2.77        1.88        2.66     2.45±0.02
                     MUTAG (with attributes)          2.70        4.20        4.97     4.45
                     PTC_MR                           2.90        2.00        2.53     2.97±0.14
                     PTC_MR (with attributes)         2.87        4.88        5.40     6.49±0.54
                     ZINC_full                        3.11        1.82        2.63     1.99
 Bioinformatics      PROTEINS                         2.48        3.68        3.50     3.51±0.23
 Social networks     IMDB-BINARY                      0.97        2.06        1.50     0.54
                     IMDB-MULTI                       0.88        1.52        1.14     0.38

                                                                Shuffle coding (net)
                     Dataset                         Discount      ER         PU         SZIP
 SZIP                Airports (USAir97)               1.12        5.09        2.90        3.81
                     Protein interaction (YeastS)     3.55        6.84        5.70        7.05
                     Collaboration (geom)             3.45        8.30        4.41        5.28
                     Collaboration (Erdos)            7.80        7.00        4.37        5.08
                     Genetic interaction (homo)       3.97        8.22        6.77        8.49
                     Internet (as)                    7.34        8.37        4.47        5.75



as explained in Section 3.2. However, it is possible to overcome this by interleaving encoding and
decoding steps, as done in the ‘bit-swap’ method of Kingma et al. (2019). Information can be
eagerly encoded during the progressive decoding of the coset, reducing the initial bits needed by
shuffle coding from O(log n!) to O(log n). This is a generalization of the multiset coding method
described by Severo et al. (2023a). We again defer a detailed description to future work.
Models. Unlike PnC, we do not rely on compute-intensive learning or hyperparameter tuning. Shuf-
fle coding achieves state-of-the-art compression rates when using simple models with minimal pa-
rameters. There is currently active research on deep generative models for graphs, see Zhu et al.
(2022) for a survey. We expect improved rates for shuffle coding when combined with such neural
models.


7   C ONCLUSION

A significant proportion of the data which needs to be communicated and stored is fundamentally un-
ordered. We have presented shuffle coding, the first general method which achieves an optimal rate
when compressing sequences of unordered objects. We have also implemented experiments which
demonstrate the practical effectiveness of shuffle coding for compressing many kinds of graphs, in-
cluding molecules and social network data. We look forward to future work applying the method to
other forms of unordered data, and applying more sophisticated probabilistic generative models to
gain improvements in compression rate.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

James Townsend acknowledges funding under the project VI.Veni.212.106, financed by the Dutch
Research Council (NWO). We thank Ashish Khisti for discussions and encouragement, and Heiko
Zimmermann for feedback on the paper.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anders, Markus and Schweitzer, Pascal (2021). Parallel Computation of Combinatorial Symmetries.
  arXiv: 2108.04590 [cs].
Bergeron, François, Labelle, Gilbert, and Leroux, Pierre (1997). Combinatorial Species and Tree-
  like Structures. Trans. by Margaret Readdy. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its Applications.
  Cambridge.
Besta, Maciej and Hoefler, Torsten (2019). Survey and Taxonomy of Lossless Graph Compression
  and Space-Efficient Graph Representations. arXiv: 1806.01799 [cs, math].
Bollobás, Béla (2001). Random Graphs. 2nd ed. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics.
  Cambridge.
Bouritsas, Giorgos, Loukas, Andreas, Karalias, Nikolaos, and Bronstein, Michael (2021). Partition
  and Code: Learning How to Compress Graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems. Vol. 34, pp. 18603–18619.
Chen, Xiaohui, Han, Xu, Hu, Jiajing, Ruiz, Francisco, and Liu, Liping (2021). Order Matters: Prob-
  abilistic Modeling of Node Sequence for Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the 38th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1630–1639.
Choi, Yongwook and Szpankowski, Wojciech (2012). Compression of Graphical Structures: Funda-
  mental Limits, Algorithms, and Experiments. In IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 58.2,
  pp. 620–638.
Duda, Jarek (2009). Asymmetric Numeral Systems. arXiv: 0902.0271 [cs, math].
Erdős, Paul and Rényi, Alfréd (1960). On the Evolution of Random Graphs. In Publications of the
  Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences 5.1, pp. 17–60.
Holt, Derek F. (2005). Handbook of Computational Group Theory. In collab. with Bettina Eick and
  Eamonn A. O’Brien. Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications. Boca Raton, Florida.
Joyal, André (1981). Une théorie combinatoire des séries formelles. In Advances in Mathematics
  42.1, pp. 1–82.
Kingma, Friso, Abbeel, Pieter, and Ho, Jonathan (2019). Bit-Swap: Recursive Bits-Back Coding
  for Lossless Compression with Hierarchical Latent Variables. In Proceedings of the 36th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3408–3417.
Knuth, Donald E. (1981). The Art of Computer Programming. 2nd ed. Vol. 2. Reading, Mass.
McKay, Brendan D. and Piperno, Adolfo (2014). Practical Graph Isomorphism, II. In Journal of
  Symbolic Computation 60, pp. 94–112.
Morris, Christopher, Kriege, Nils M., Bause, Franka, Kersting, Kristian, Mutzel, Petra, and Neu-
  mann, Marion (2020). TUDataset: A Collection of Benchmark Datasets for Learning with Graphs.
  In ICML 2020 Workshop on Graph Representation Learning and beyond (GRL+ 2020). arXiv:
  2007.08663.
Schweitzer, Pascal and Wiebking, Daniel (2019). A Unifying Method for the Design of Algorithms
  Canonizing Combinatorial Objects. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
  on Theory of Computing. STOC 2019. New York, NY, USA, pp. 1247–1258.
Seress, Ákos (2003). Permutation Group Algorithms. Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics 152. Cam-
  bridge.
Severo, Daniel, Townsend, James, Khisti, Ashish, Makhzani, Alireza, and Ullrich, Karen (2023a).
  Compressing Multisets with Large Alphabets. In IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information
  Theory.
Severo, Daniel, Townsend, James, Khisti, Ashish J., and Makhzani, Alireza (2023b). Random Edge
  Coding: One-Shot Bits-Back Coding of Large Labeled Graphs. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning.
Sims, Charles C. (1970). Computational Methods in the Study of Permutation Groups. In Computa-
  tional Problems in Abstract Algebra, pp. 169–183.
Steinruecken, Christian (2014). Lossless Data Compression. University of Cambridge.
Steinruecken, Christian (2015). Compressing Sets and Multisets of Sequences. In IEEE Transactions
  on Information Theory 61.3, pp. 1485–1490.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Steinruecken, Christian (2016). Compressing Combinatorial Objects. In 2016 Data Compression
  Conference (DCC), pp. 389–396.
Townsend, James (2020). A Tutorial on the Range Variant of Asymmetric Numeral Systems. arXiv:
  2001.09186 [cs, math, stat].
Townsend, James (2021). Lossless Compression with Latent Variable Models. arXiv: 2104.10544.
Townsend, James, Bird, Thomas, and Barber, David (2019). Practical Lossless Compression with
  Latent Variables Using Bits Back Coding. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR).
Varshney, L.R. and Goyal, V.K. (2006). Toward a Source Coding Theory for Sets. In Data Compres-
  sion Conference (DCC’06), pp. 13–22.
Yorgey, Brent (2014). Combinatorial Species and Labelled Structures. University of Pennsylvania.
Zhu, Yanqiao, Du, Yuanqi, Wang, Yinkai, Xu, Yichen, Zhang, Jieyu, Liu, Qiang, and Wu, Shu
  (2022). A Survey on Deep Graph Generation: Methods and Applications. In Proceedings of the
  First Learning on Graphs Conference, 47:1–47:21.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    G ROUP ACTIONS , ORBITS AND STABILIZERS
This appendix gives the definitions of group actions, orbits and stabilizers as well as a statement
and proof of the orbit-stabilizer theorem, which we make use of in section 3. We use the shorthand
H ≤ G to mean that H is a subgroup of G, and for g ∈ G, we use the usual notation, gH := {gh |
h ∈ H} and Hg := {hg | h ∈ H} for left and right cosets, respectively.
Definition A.1 (Group action). For a set X and a group G, a group action, or simply action, is a
binary operator
                                          ·G : G × X → X                                       (16)
which respects the structure of G in the following sense:
      1. The identity element e ∈ G is neutral, that is e ·G x = x.
      2. The operator ·G respects composition. That is, for g, h ∈ G,
                                           g ·G (h ·G x) = (gh) ·G x.                             (17)

We will often drop the subscript G and use infix · alone where the action is clear from the context.
Definition A.2 (Orbit). An action of a group G on a set X induces an equivalence relation ∼G on
X, defined by
                x ∼G y      if and only if there exists g ∈ G such that y = g · x.                (18)
We refer to the equivalence classes induced by ∼G as orbits, and use OrbG (x) to denote the orbit
containing an element x ∈ X. We use X/G to denote the set of orbits, so for each x ∈ X,
OrbG (x) ∈ X/G.
Definition A.3 (Stabilizer subgroup). For an action of a group G on a set X, for each x ∈ X, the
stabilizer
                                StabG (x) := {g ∈ G | g · x = x}                            (19)
forms a subgroup of G.
We make use of the orbit-stabilizer theorem in Section 3. Here we give a statement and brief proof
of this well-known theorem.
Theorem A.1 (Orbit-stabilizer theorem). For an action of a finite group G on a set X, for each
x ∈ X, the function θx : G → X defined by
                                          θx (g) := g · x                                     (20)
induces a bijection from the left cosets of StabG (x) to OrbG (x). This implies that the orbit OrbG (x)
is finite and
                                                          |G|
                                       |OrbG (x)| =              .                                 (21)
                                                     |StabG (x)|

Proof. We show that θf induces a well defined function on the left-cosets of StabG (x), which we
call θ̃f . Specifically, we define
                                   θ̃f (g StabG (x)) := g · x,                               (22)
and show that θ̃f is injective and surjective.
To see that θ̃f is well defined and injective, note that
                              h ∈ g StabG (x) ⇐⇒ g −1 h ∈ StabG (x)                               (23)
                                                           −1
                                                   ⇐⇒ g h · x = x                                 (24)
                                                   ⇐⇒ g · x = h · x,                              (25)
using the definition of StabG .
For surjectivity, we have
                              y ∈ OrbG (x) =⇒ ∃g ∈ G s.t. y = g · x                               (26)
                                                 =⇒ y = θ̃f (g StabG (x))                         (27)
using the definition of OrbG .


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Appendix C.2, it will be helpful to have an explicit bijection between G and the Cartesian product
OrbG (x) × StabG (x). This requires a way of selecting a canonical element from each left coset of
StabG (x) in G. This is similar to the canonical ordering of definition 2.4:
Definition A.4 (Transversal). For a group G with subgroup H ≤ G, a transversal of the left cosets
of H in G is a mapping t : G → G such that
      1. For all g ∈ G, we have t(g) ∈ gH.
      2. For all f, g ∈ G, if f ∈ gH, then t(f ) = t(g).
Given such a transversal, we can setup the bijection mentioned above:
Lemma A.1. Let G be a group acting on a set X. If, for x ∈ X, we have a transversal tx of the
left cosets of StabG (x) in G, then we can form an explicit bijection between G and OrbG (x) ×
StabG (x).

Proof. For g ∈ G, let
                                        ox (g) := g · x                                         (28)
                                                          −1
                                        sx (g) := tx (g) g,                           (29)
then ox ∈ OrbG (x). By condition 1 in definition A.4, there exists h ∈ StabG (x) such that
t(g) = gh, and in particular sx (g) = h ∈ StabG (x). So there is a well-defined function
ϕx (g) := (ox (g), sx (g)) with ϕx : G → OrbG (x) × StabG (x).
To see that ϕx is injective, suppose that ϕx (f ) = ϕx (g). Then ox (f ) = ox (g), so f · x = g · x,
and therefore f ∈ g StabG (x). Condition 2 in definition A.4 implies that tx (f ) = tx (g), and since
sx (g) = sx (f ) we have tx (f )−1 f = tx (g)−1 g, so f = g.
The orbit-stabilizer theorem implies that |G| = |OrbG (x)||StabG (x)|, and therefore if ϕx is injec-
tive it must also be bijective.

B    C ODECS FOR ORDERED OBJECTS
Codecs for strings and graphs can be composed from the primitive codecs introduced in section 2.2:
    def String(ps, length):                               def ErdosRenyi(n, p):
      def encode(m, string):                                def encode(m, g):
        assert len(string) == length                          assert len(g) == n
        for c in reversed(string):                            for i in reversed(range(n)):
          m = Categorical(ps).encode(m, c)                      for j in reversed(range(i)):
        return m                                                  e = g[i][j]
                                                                  m = Bernoulli(p).encode(m, e)
      def decode(m):                                          return m
        string = []
        for _ in range(length):                             def decode(m):
          m, c = Categorical(ps).decode(m)                    g = []
          string.append(c)                                    for i in range(n):
        return m, str(string)                                   inner = []
      return Codec(encode, decode)                              for j in range(i)
                                                                  m, e = Bernoulli(p).decode(m)
                                                                  inner.append(e)
                                                                g.append(inner)
                                                              return (m, g)
                                                            return Codec(encode, decode)
Left: Codec for fixed-length strings implemented by applying a Categorical codec to each char-
acter. Right: Codec for graphs respecting an Erdős-Rényi distribution G(n, p), implemented by
applying the Bernoulli codec to each edge.

C     A UNIFORM CODEC FOR COSETS OF A PERMUTATION GROUP
Shuffle coding, as described in Section 3, requires that we can encode and decode left cosets in Sn
of the automorphism group of a permutable object. In this appendix we describe a codec for cosets


                                                 13
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     of an arbitrary permutation group characterized by a list of generators. We first describe the codec,
     which we call UniformLCoset, on a high level and then in Appendices C.1 and C.2, we describe the
     two main components in more detail.
     The optimal rate for a uniform coset codec is equal to the log of the number of cosets, that is
                                               |Sn |
                                         log         = log n! − log|H|.                                (30)
                                               |H|
     This rate expression hints at an encoding method: to encode a coset, we first decode a choice of
     element of the coset (equivalent to decoding a choice of element of H and then multiplying it by a
     canonical element of the coset), and then encode that chosen element using a uniform codec on Sn .
     Note that if the number of cosets is small we could simply encode the index of the coset directly, but
     in practice this is rarely feasible.
     The following is a concrete implementation of a left coset codec:

 1   def UniformLCoset(grp):                                       Effects on l(m):
 2     def encode(m, s):
 3       s_canon = coset_canon(grp, s)
 4       m, t = UniformPermGrp(grp).decode(m)                      − log|H|
 5       u = s_canon * t
 6       m = UniformS(n).encode(m, u)                              + log(n!)
 7       return m
 8
 9     def decode(m):
10       m, u = UniformS(n).decode(m)
11       s_canon = coset_canon(subgrp, u)
12       t = inv(s_canon) * u
13       m = UniformPermGrp(grp).encode(m, t)
14       return m, s_canon
15     return Codec(encode, decode)

     The codecs UniformS and UniformPermGrp are described in Appendix C.1 and Appendix C.2 re-
     spectively. UniformS(n) is a uniform codec over the symmetric group Sn , and UniformPermGrp is
     a uniform codec over elements of a given permutation group, i.e., a subgroup of Sn .
     We use a stabilizer chain, discussed in more detail in Appendix C.2, which is a computation-
     ally convenient representation of a permutation group. A stabilizer chain allows computation
     of a transversal which can be used to canonize coset elements (line 3 and line 11 in the code
     above). Routines for constructing and working with stabilizer chains are standard in computa-
     tional group theory, and are implemented in SymPy (https://www.sympy.org/), as well as the
     GAP system (https://www.gap-system.org/), see Holt (2005, Chapter 4) for theory and de-
     scription of the algorithms. The method we use for coset_canon is implemented in the function
     MinimalElementCosetStabChain in the GAP system.

     C.1    A UNIFORM CODEC FOR PERMUTATIONS IN THE SYMMETRIC GROUP

     We use a method for encoding and decoding permutations based on the Fisher-Yates shuffle (Knuth,
     1981, pp. 139–140). The following is a Python implementation:

 1   def UniformS(n):
 2     def swap(s, i, j):
 3       si_old = s[i]
 4       s[i] = s[j]
 5       s[j] = si_old
 6
 7     def encode(m, s):
 8       p = list(range(n))
 9       p_inv = list(range(n))
10       to_encode = []


                                                       14
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


11         for j in reversed(range(2, n + 1)):
12           i = p_inv[x[j - 1]]
13           swap(p_inv, p[j - 1], x[j - 1])
14           swap(p, i, j - 1)
15           to_encode.append(i)
16
17         for j, i in zip(range(2, n + 1), reversed(to_encode)):
18           m = Uniform(j).encode(m)
19         return m
20
21       def decode(m):
22         s = list(range(n))
23         for j in reversed(range(2, n + 1)):
24           m, i = Uniform(j).decode(m)
25           swap(s, i, j - 1)
26         return m, s
27       return Codec(encode, decode)

     The decoder closely resembles the usual Fisher-Yates sampling method, and the encoder has been
     carefully implemented to exactly invert this process. Both encoder and decoder have time complex-
     ity in O(n).

     C.2    A UNIFORM CODEC FOR PERMUTATIONS IN AN ARBITRARY PERMUTATION GROUP

     For coding permutations from an arbitrary permutation group, we use the following construction,
     which is a standard tool in computational group theory (see Holt (2005) and Seress (2003)):
     Definition C.1 (Base, stabilizer chain). Let H ≤ Sn be a permutation group, and B =
     (b0 , . . . , bK−1 ) a list of elements of [n]. Let H0 := H, and Hk := StabHk−1 (bk−1 ) for
     k = 1, . . . , K. If HK is the trivial group containing only the identity, then we say that B is a
     base for H, and the sequence of groups H0 , . . . , HK is a stabilizer chain of H relative to B.

     Bases and stabilizer chains are guaranteed to exist for all permutation groups, and can be efficiently
     computed using the Schreier-Sims algorithm (Sims, 1970). The algorithm also produces a transver-
     sal for the left cosets of each Hk+1 in Hk for each k = 0, . . . , K − 1, in a form known as a Schreier
     tree (Holt, 2005).
     If we define Ok := OrbHk (bk ), for k = 0, . . . , K − 1, then by applying the orbit-stabilizer theorem
                                QK−1
     recursively, we have |H| = k=0 |Ok |, which gives us a decomposition of the optimal rate that a
     uniform codec on H should achieve:
                                                       K−1
                                                       X
                                            log|H| =         log|Ok |.                                 (31)
                                                       k=0

     Furthermore, by applying lemma A.1 recursively, using the transversals produced by Schreier-Sims,
                                                                                    QK−1
     we can construct an explicit bijection between H and the Cartesian product k=0 Ok . We use this
     bijection, along with a sequence of uniform codecs on O0 , . . . , OK−1 for coding automorphisms at
     the optimal rate in eq. (31). For further details refer to the implementation.

     D     P ÓLYA URN MODEL DETAILS
     We implemented Pólya urn models mostly as described in Severo et al. (2023b), with few modi-
     fications. Differently to the original implementation, we apply shuffle coding to the list of edges,
     resulting in a codec for the set of edges.
     We also disallow edge redraws and self-loops, leading to an improved rate, as shown in appendix G.
     This change breaks edge-exchangeability, leading to a ‘stochastic’ codec, meaning that the code
     length depends on the initial message. Shuffle coding is compatible with such models. In this
     more general setting, the ordered log-likelihood term in the optimal rate (eq. 14) is replaced with a
     variational ‘evidence lower bound’ (ELBO). The discount term is unaffected. The derivations in the


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


main text are based on the special case of exchangeable models, where log-likelihoods are exact, for
simplicity. They can be generalized with little effort and new insight.

E    PARAMETER CODING DETAILS
All bit rates reported for our experiments include model parameters. Once per dataset, we code the
following lists of natural numbers by coding both the list length and the bit count ⌈log m⌉ of the
maximum element m with a 46-bit and 5-bit uniform codec respectively, as well as each element of
the list with a codec respecting a log-uniform distribution in [0, ⌈log m⌉]:

      • A list resulting from sorting the graphs’ numbers of vertices, and applying run-length cod-
        ing, encoding run lengths and differences between consecutive numbers of vertices.
      • For datasets with vertex attributes: a list of all vertex attribute counts within a dataset.
      • For datasets with edge attributes: a list of all edge attribute counts within a dataset.
      • For Erdős-Rényi models: a list consisting of the following two numbers: the total number
        of edges in all graphs, and the number of vertex pairs that do not share an edge.

Coding these empirical count parameters allows coding the data according to maximum likelihood
categorical distributions. For Pólya urn models, we additionally code the edge count for each graph
using a uniform codec over [0, 21 n(n − 1)], exploiting the fact that the vertex count n is already
coded as described above. For each dataset, we use a single bit to code whether or not self-loops are
present and adapt the codec accordingly.

F   C OMPRESSION SPEED
We show compression and decompression speeds of our experiments in Table 4. These speeds
include time needed for gathering dataset statistics and parameter coding. The results show that for
our implementation, only a small fraction of runtime is spent on finding automorphism groups and
canonical orderings with nauty.

G    M ODEL ABLATIONS
We present results of additional ablation experiments on the PnC datasets in Table 5. We do an
ablation that uses a uniform distribution for vertex and edge attributes with an Erdős-Rényi model
(unif. ER). There is a clear advantage to coding maximum-likelihood categorical parameters (ER),
justifying it as the approach used throughout this paper. We also show the rates obtained by the
original method proposed in Severo et al. (2023b) (PU redr.), demonstrating a clear rate advantage
of our approach disallowing edge redraws and self-loops (PU) in the model.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Compression and decompression speeds in kilobytes per second (kB/s) of shuffle coding
with the Erdős-Rényi (ER) and Pólya urn (PU) models, for all previously reported TU and SZIP
datasets. We show SZIP compression speeds calculated from the runtimes reported in Choi and
Szpankowski (2012) for comparison. All results are based on the ordered ER rate as the reference
uncompressed size. All shuffle coding speeds are for a single thread on a MacBook Pro 2018 with a
2.7GHz Intel Core i7 CPU. We also report the share of time spent on nauty calls that determine the
canonical ordering and generators of the automorphism group of all graphs.
                                                    ER                   PU          SZIP
      Dataset                         nauty     encode    decode     encode     decode    encode
      TU by type
      Small molecules                  15%          54        56         –            –         –
      Bioinformatics                    2%          51        66         –            –         –
      Computer vision                   3%          25        28         –            –         –
      Social networks                  <1%       0.440     0.467         –            –         –
      Synthetic                         7%          98       110         –            –         –
      Small molecules
      MUTAG                             7%        115       122         51           40         –
      MUTAG (with attributes)          16%        135       141         67           62         –
      PTC_MR                            8%        107       103         50           45         –
      PTC_MR (with attributes)         18%        117       125         67           62         –
      ZINC_full                         7%        105       105         50           47         –
      Bioinformatics
      PROTEINS                          3%         88        94         30           30         –
      Social networks
      IMDB-BINARY                       4%         17        18          8            8         –
      IMDB-MULTI                        3%         11        12          6            5         –
      SZIP
      Airports (USAir97)                1%          82        78          5          5       164
      Protein interaction (YeastS)      8%       2.442     2.391      1.238      0.859        77
      Collaboration (geom)             <1%       0.004     0.005      0.005      0.005        64
      Collaboration (Erdos)            15%       0.025     0.025      0.024      0.024        18
      Genetic interaction (homo)        7%       0.180     0.154      0.117      0.141        32
      Internet (as)                    13%       0.002     0.003      0.002      0.002         7



            Table 5: Model ablations compared to PnC. All results are in bits per edge.
                                                Shuffle coding
      Dataset                        unif. ER      ER          PU        PU redr.         PnC
      Small molecules
      MUTAG                            –           1.88       2.66            2.81    2.45±0.02
      MUTAG (with attributes)         6.37         4.20       4.97            5.13    4.45
      PTC_MR                           –           2.00       2.53            2.74    2.97±0.14
      PTC_MR (with attributes)        8.04         4.88       5.40            5.61    6.49±0.54
      ZINC_full                         –          1.82       2.63            2.75    1.99
      Bioinformatics
      PROTEINS                          –          3.68       3.50            3.62    3.51±0.23
      Social networks
      IMDB-BINARY                       –          2.06       1.50            2.36    0.54
      IMDB-MULTI                        –          1.52       1.14            2.17    0.38



                                                  17
