Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C IRCUMVENTING C ONCEPT E RASURE M ETHODS F OR
T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS
 Minh Pham, Kelly O. Marshall, Niv Cohen, Govind Mittal & Chinmay Hegde
 New York University
 {mp5847, km3888, nc3468, mittal, chinmay.h}@nyu.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Text-to-image generative models can produce photo-realistic images for an ex-
         tremely broad range of concepts, and their usage has proliferated widely among
         the general public. Yet, these models have numerous drawbacks, including their
         potential to generate images featuring sexually explicit content, mirror artistic
         styles without permission, or even hallucinate (or deepfake) the likenesses of
         celebrities. Consequently, various methods have been proposed in order to “erase”
         sensitive concepts from text-to-image models. In this work, we examine seven
         recently proposed concept erasure methods, and show that targeted concepts are
         not fully excised from any of these methods. Specifically, we devise an algorithm
         to learn special input word embeddings that can retrieve “erased” concepts from
         the sanitized models with no alterations to their weights. Our results highlight the
         brittleness of post hoc concept erasure methods, and call into question their use in
         the algorithmic toolkit for AI safety.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Motivation. Text-to-image models (Chang et al., 2023; Gafni et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021;
2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022) have garnered
significant attention due to their exceptional ability to synthesize high-quality images based on
text prompts. Such models, most prominently Stable Diffusion (SD) ( Rombach et al. (2022)) and
DALL-E 2 ( Ramesh et al. (2022)), have been adopted in a variety of commercial products spanning
application realms ranging from digital advertising to graphics to game design. In particular, the open-
sourcing of Stable Diffusion has democratized the landscape of image generation technology. This
shift underlines the growing practical relevance of these models in diverse real-world applications.
However, despite their burgeoning popularity, these models come with serious caveats: they have
been shown to produce copyrighted, unauthorized, biased, and potentially unsafe content (Mishkin
et al., 2022; Rando et al., 2022).
What is the best way to ensure that text-to-image models do not produce sensitive or unsafe concepts?
Dataset pre-filtering (AI, 2022) may present the most obvious answer. However, existing filtering
procedures are imperfect and may exhibit a large proportion of false negatives. See the extensive
studies reported in Birhane et al. (2021) on how LAION-400M, a common dataset used in training
text-image models, contains numerous offensive image samples which persist after applying standard
NSFW filters.
Even if perfect data pre-filtering were possible, substantial resources would be required to retrain
large models from scratch in response to issues unearthed post-training. As a result, several post hoc
concept-erasure methods have emerged of late. Some advocate inference guidance (Schramowski
et al., 2023; AUTOMATIC1111, 2022). Others require fine-tuning the weights on an auxiliary subset
of training data ( Gandikota et al. (2023a); Heng & Soh (2023); Zhang et al. (2023)). These may be
categorized as more practical alternatives to full model-retraining with a stripped-down version of
the original training data. Many of these methods are accompanied by public releases of the weights
of the “sanitized” models. Such concept erasure methods are purported “to permanently remove
[targeted concepts] from the weights”; moreover, they are presented as “not easy to circumvent since
[the method] modifies weights” (Gandikota et al., 2023a). An array of results on several test instances


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


across use cases (object removal, artistic style forgetting, avoidance of NSFW content, avoiding
likeness of specific people) seem to support the efficacy of these methods.

                         NSFW Concept           Art Concept            Object Concept


             SD Model
              Original
             SD Model
              Erased
             Inversion
              Concept


Figure 1: Concept erasure methods fail to excise concepts from text-to-image models. This figure
shows results from ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023a), which is a variant of Stable Diffusion trained to
avoid generating NSFW content, specific artist styles, and specific objects, like trucks (2nd row). We
circumvent this method by generating the “erased” concepts (3rd row) by designing special prompts.


Our contributions. Our main contribution in this paper is to show that:

         Post hoc concept erasure in generative models provides a false sense of security.

We investigate seven recently announced concept-erasure methods for text-to-image generative
models: (i) Erased Stable Diffusion (Gandikota et al., 2023a), (ii) Selective Amnesia (Heng & Soh,
2023), (iii) Forget-me-not (Zhang et al., 2023), (iv) Ablating Concepts (Kumari et al., 2023), (v)
Unified Concept Editing (Gandikota et al., 2023b), (vi) Negative Prompt (AUTOMATIC1111, 2022),
and (vii) Safe Latent Diffusion (Schramowski et al., 2023). All of these were either published or
appeared online in the first 9 months of 2023.
Somewhat surprisingly, we show that all seven techniques can be circumvented. In all cases, the very
same “concept-erased” models — with zero extra training or fine-tuning — may produce the erased
concept with a suitably constructed (soft) prompt. Therefore, the seemingly-safe model may still
be used to produce sensitive or offensive content. Overall, our results indicate that there may be a
fundamental brittleness to post hoc erasure methods, and entirely new approaches for building (and
evaluating) safe generative models may be necessary. See Figure 1 for examples.

Techniques. Our approach stems from the hypothesis that existing concept erasure methods may
be, in reality, performing some form of input filtering. More specifically, in these methods, the
modified generative models produced by these methods are evaluated on a limited subset of text
inputs: the original offending/sensitive text, and related prompts. However, this leaves the model
vulnerable to more sophisticated text prompts. In particular, we design individual Concept Inversion
(CI) “attack” techniques to discover special word embeddings that can recover erased concepts when
fed to the modified model. Through the application of CI, we provide evidence that these unique word
embeddings outmaneuver concept erasure methods across various use cases such as facial likeness,
artistic style, object-types, and NSFW concepts. Therefore, it is not the case that these concepts have
been permanently removed from the model; these still persist, albeit remapped to new embeddings.

Implications. Our extensive experiments below highlight two key points:
1. Our results call into question the premise that existing erasure methods (fully) excise concepts
   from the model. Our results show that this premise is not correct and that the results in these
   previous works on concept erasure should be scrutinized carefully.
2. We call for stronger evaluation methodologies for concept erasure methods. Measuring the degree
   of concept erasure in text-to-image models is tricky, since there are potentially a vast number of


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    prompts that a motivated (and moderately well-equipped) attacker can use as inputs. As a first
    step to mitigate this issue, we recommend evaluating models in terms of our CI attacks during
    evaluation, and not merely limited to evaluating over mild variations of the original text prompts.
Overall, our findings shine a spotlight on the considerable challenges in sanitizing already trained
generative AI models (such as Stable Diffusion) and making them safe for wide public use.

2    BACKGROUND
Denoising Diffusion Models. Diffusion models belong to a category of generative models that
sample from a distribution via an iterative Markov-based denoising process (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020). The process begins with a sampled Gaussian noise vector, denoted as xT ,
and undergoes a series of T denoising steps to ultimately restore the final data, referred to as x0 . In
practical applications, the diffusion model is trained to predict the noise ϵt at each timestep, t, utilized
to generate the progressively denoised image, xt . Latent diffusion models (LDM) (Rombach et al.,
2022) offer improved efficiency by operating in a lower dimensional space learned by an autoencoder.
The first component of LDM consists of an encoder E and a decoder D that have been pre-trained
on a large collection of images. During the training of LDM, for an image x, the encoder learns to
map x into a spatial latent code z = E(x). The decoder maps such latent codes back to the original
images such that D(E(x)) ≈ x. The second component is a diffusion model trained to produce codes
within the learned latent space. Given a conditional input c, the LDM is trained using the following
objective function:                                     h                   i
                            L = Ez∼E(x),t,c,ϵ∼N (0,1) ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , c, t)∥22 ,                            (1)
Here zt is the latent code for time t, and ϵθ is the denoising network. At inference time, a random
noise tensor is sampled and gradually denoised to produce a latent z0 , which is then transformed into
an image through the pre-trained decoder such that x′ = D(z0 ).
Ho & Salimans (2022) propose a classifier-free guidance technique is used during inference and
requires that the model be jointly trained on both conditional and unconditional denoising. The
unconditional and conditional scores are used to create the final latent z0 . There, we start with
zT ∼ N (0, 1) which is transformed to obtain ϵ̃θ (zt , c, t) = ϵθ (zt , t) + α(ϵθ (zt , c, t) − ϵθ (zt , t)) , to
get zT −1 . This process is repeated sequentially until z0 is produced.

Machine Unlearning. The conventional goal in machine learning is to foster generalization while
minimizing reliance on direct memorization. However, contemporary large-scale models possess
the capacity for explicit memorization, whether employed intentionally or as an inadvertent byprod-
uct (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2023b;a). The possibility of such memorization has led to
the development of many works in machine unlearning (Golatkar et al., 2020a;b), the core aim of
which is to refine the model to behave as though a specific set of training data was never presented.

Mitigating Undesirable Image Generation. Numerous methods have been proposed to discourage
the creation of undesirable images by generative models. One initial approach is to exclude certain
subsets of the training data. However, this solution can necessitate the retraining of large-scale
models from scratch, which can be prohibitive. An alternative put forward by Schramowski et al.
(2023); AUTOMATIC1111 (2022) involves manipulating the inference process in a way that steers
the final output away from the target concepts. Yet another approach employs classifiers to alter the
output (Rando et al., 2022; AI, 2022; Bedapudi, 2022). Since inference guiding methods can be
evaded with sufficient access to model parameters (SmithMano, 2022), subsequent works (Gandikota
et al., 2023a; Heng & Soh, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023; Gandikota et al., 2023b)
suggest fine-tuning Stable Diffusion models. Qu et al. (2023) study the capability of generating
unsafe images and hateful memes of various text-to-image models.

Diffusion-based Inversion. Image manipulation with generative networks often requires inversion
(Zhu et al., 2016; Xia et al., 2021), the process of finding a latent representation that corresponds to a
given image. For diffusion models, (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) demonstrate that the DDIM (Song
et al., 2021) sampling process can be inverted in a closed-form manner, extracting a latent noise map
that will produce a given real image. More recent works (Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023; Shi et al.,
2023; Han et al., 2023) try to invert a user-provided concept to a new pseudo-word in the model’s


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


vocabulary. The most relevant approach for our work is Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023)) which
learns to capture the user-provided concept by representing it through new “words” in the embedding
space of a frozen text-to-image model without changing the model weights. In particular, the authors
designate a placeholder string, c∗ , to represent the new concept the user wishes to learn. They replace
the vector associated with the tokenized string with a learned embedding v∗ , in essence “injecting”
the concept into the model vocabulary. The technique is referred to as Textual Inversion and consists
of finding an approximate solution to the following optimization problem:
                      v∗ = arg min Ez∼E(x),c∗ ,ϵ∼N (0,1),t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , c∗ , t)∥22 .
                                                            h                      i

                                v


3       P RELIMINARIES
Basic setup and threat model. For the remainder of the paper, we will leverage inversion techniques
to design an “attack” on concept-erased models. We assume the adversary has: (1) access to the
weights and components of the erased model, (2) knowledge of the erasure method, (3) access to
example images with the targeted concept (say via an image search engine), and (4) moderately
significant computational power.
A trivial approach to “un-erase” an erased concept would be via fine-tuning a sanitized model on
sufficiently many example images. Therefore, we also assume that: (5) the adversary cannot modify
the weights of the erased model.
To show that our CI attack is a reliable tool for establishing the existence of concepts in a model, we
conduct two experiments to investigate whether Textual Inversion (TI) by itself can generate a concept
that the model has not captured during training. If TI can hallucinate totally novel concepts, then even
data filtering before training might not be able to avoid producing harmful/copyrighted content. In the
first experiment, we compare TI performance on concepts that are better represented in the training
data of Stable Diffusion 1.4, versus those that are likely not present. In the second experiment, we
conducted a more controlled study by training two diffusion models on MNIST (LeCun et al., 2010)
from scratch. We include all the training classes in the first run and exclude one class in the second
run. In both experiments, we find that Textual Inversion works significantly worse when the concept
is not well represented in the training set of the generative model. See Figure 15 in the Appendix.

4       C IRCUMVENTING C ONCEPT E RASURE
4.1      E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In this section, we examine seven (7) different concept erasure methods. To the best of our knowledge,
this list constitutes all the concept erasure methods for Stable Diffusion models published up to
September 19, 2023. We design CI procedures tailored to each erasure method that search the space
of word embeddings to recreate the (purportedly) erased visual concepts. Importantly, our approach
relies solely on the existing components of the post-erasure diffusion models. For these experiments,
wherever possible we use the pre-trained models released by the authors unless explicitly stated
otherwise; for concepts where erased models were not publicly available, we used public code
released as-is by the authors to reproduce their erasure procedure. In each subsection, we start
by describing the approach, then show how to attack their approach using Concept Inversion. We
interleave these with results, and reflect on their implications. Finally, we show evidence that current
concept erasure methods are likely performing input filtering, and demonstrate transferability of the
learned word embeddings.
Due to page limit constraints, we will focus on results for two fine-tuning-based methods (ESD, UCE)
as well as two inference-guiding-based methods (NP, SLD). We refer readers to the full set of results
for all seven models in Appendix C. 1

4.2      E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

For each concept erasure method that we will be discussing below, we initially deploy it to erase
4 concept categories including art style, object, ID, and NSFW content. We use Stable Diffusion
    1
        Our code is available for reproducibility purposes at https://nyu-dice-lab.github.io/CCE/


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.4 (SD 1.4) for all our experiments. We assume that the adversary can access a small number of
examples of the targeted concept from Google Images; see Appendix for details.

Art style: We select 6 styles from modern artists and artistic topics that have been reported to have
been captured by SD 1.4: the movie series “Ajin: Demi Human”, Thomas Kinkade, Tyler Edlin,
Van Gogh, Kelly McKernan, and Tyler Edlin. We generate images from the erased models using
the prompt “A painting in the style of [artist name]”. After performing CI, we generate images by
replacing [artist name] with c∗ - the special placeholder string associated with the learned word
embedding. In addition to qualitative results, we follow Gandikota et al. (2023a) and conduct a
human study to measure the effectiveness of our CI methods. In particular, for each artist, we collect
10 images of art created by those artists from Google Images. We then generate 10 images from the
erased model using the standard concept name, and 10 images using CI per style and per concept
erasure method. Participants were shown 5 real reference images from the same artist and another
image of the same style (either real, from the erased model or from CI). They were then asked to
estimate, on a five-point Likert scale, their confidence level that the experimental image has the same
style as the reference images. Our study consists of 50 participants, with 96 responses per participant.

Objects: Following Gandikota et al. (2023a), we investigate the Imagenette (Howard, 2019) dataset
which comprises ten easily identifiable classes (cassette player, chain saw, church, etc.) We evaluate
CI methods by examining the top-1 predictions of a ResNet-50 Imagenet classifier on 500 generated
images. We generate images from the erased models using the prompt “A photo of a [object name]”.
For CI, we generate images by replacing [object name] with the special string c∗ .

ID: Following Heng & Soh (2023), we select “Brad Pitt” and “Angelina Jolie” as identity concepts.
We then utilize the GIPHY celebrity detector (Giphy, 2020) for Concept Inversion evaluation. We
generate 500 images from the erased models using the prompt “A photo of a [person name]”. For CI,
we generate the same number of images by replacing [person name] with the special placeholder
string c∗ .

NSFW content: Introduced by Schramowski et al. (2023), the I2P dataset comprises 4703 unique
prompts with corresponding seeds, which (to date) is the definitive benchmark for measuring the
effectiveness of NSFW concept erasure. This process involves generating images using the prompts
and seeds and subsequently utilizing NudeNet (Bedapudi, 2022) to classify the images into various
nudity classes. The I2P benchmark is effective as its prompts do not necessarily contain words strictly
related to nudity. Hence, an effective erasure method on this benchmark requires some degree of
robustness to prompt selection. To evaluate each concept erasure method, we first used SD 1.4 to
generate 4703 images using the I2P dataset. We used NudeNet to filter out 382 images with detected
exposed body parts, on which we performed Concept Inversion. To measure how well the NSFW
concept is recovered, we generated another 4703 images using the erased model by using the I2P
prompts with the special placeholder string c∗ prepended, which are then evaluated by NudeNet.


                          4

                          3

                          2

                          1

                          0                                              NP
                               Real   SD 1.4   ESD   CI       UCE   CI        CI   SLD-Med   CI


Figure 2: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for artistic concept: Our human study ratings
(with ± 95% confidence intervals) show that we can recover the erased artistic concept across all
models. The CI Likert score is even higher than the images generated by SD 1.4.


4.2.1   E RASED S TABLE D IFFUSION (ESD)
Concept Erasure Method Details. Gandikota et al. (2023a) fine-tune the pre-trained diffusion
U-Net model weights to remove a specific style or concept. The authors reduce the probability of

                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Real    SD 1.4        ESD    ESD (CI)     UCE        UCE (CI)      NP            NP (CI)     SLD-Med   SLD-Med (CI)


Kinkade
Thomas
Gogh
Van


Figure 3: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion for artistic concept: Columns 4, 6, 8, and
10 demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted artistic
concepts. However, we can still generate images of the erased styles using CI.


Table 1: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for object concept (Acc. % of erased model
/ Acc. % of CI): Concept erasure methods can cleanly erase many object concepts from SD 1.4,
evidenced by a significant drop in classification accuracy. Using Concept Inversion, we can generate
images of the erased objects, which can be seen by an increase in average accuracy across all methods.
                                      SD 1.4         ESD           UCE            NP           SLD-Med
                  cassette player       6.4        0.2 / 6.2     0.0 / 2.8     4.0 / 9.4        1.0 / 2.4
                  chain saw            68.6       0.0 / 64.0    0.0 / 43.6    4.0 / 82.8        0.8 / 86.6
                  church               79.6       0.8 / 87.4   10.0 / 82.2   25.4 / 78.4       20.6 / 72.0
                  english springer     93.6       0.2 / 48.2    0.0 / 69.6   27.0 / 90.4       24.6 / 96.4
                  french horn          99.3       0.0 / 81.6    0.4 / 99.4   62.4 / 99.0       17.0 / 97.6
                  garbage truck        83.2       0.8 / 57.0   16.4 / 89.6   39.4 / 84.6       19.8 / 94.8
                  gas pump             76.6       0.0 / 73.8    0.0 / 73.0   18.0 / 79.6       12.8 / 75.6
                  golf ball            96.2       0.0 / 28.6    0.2 / 18.6   45.2 / 88.4       60.2 / 98.8
                  parachute            96.2       0.0 / 94.2    1.6 / 94.2   32.8 / 77.2       52.8 / 95.8
                  tench                79.6       0.3 / 59.7    0.0 / 20.6   27.6 / 72.6       20.6 / 75.4
                  Average              77.9       0.2 / 60.1    2.9 / 59.4   28.6 / 76.2       23.0 / 79.5



generating an image x based on the likelihood described by the textual description of the concept,
                    θ (x)             ∗
i.e. Pθ∗ (x) ∝ PθP(c|x)   η , where θ   is the updated weights of the diffusion model (U-Net), θ is the
original weights, η is a scale power factor, c is the target concept to erase, and P(x) represents
the distribution generated by the original model. Based on Tweedie’s formula ( Efron (2011)) and
the reparametrization trick ( Ho et al. (2020)), the authors derive a denoising prediction problem
as ϵθ∗ (xt , c, t) ← ϵ(xt , t) − η[ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t)]. By optimizing this equation, the fine-tuned
model’s conditional prediction is steered away from the erased concept when prompted with it. The
authors propose two variants of ESD: ESD-x and ESD-u, which finetune the cross-attentions and
unconditional layers (non-cross-attention modules) respectively.

Concept Inversion Method. We employ standard Textual Inversion on fine-tuned Stable Diffusion
models from Gandikota et al. (2023a) to learn a new word embedding that corresponds to the concept
of the training images. The authors provide pre-trained ESD-x models for all 6 artistic concepts, the
pre-trained ESD-u model for NSFW content concept, and training scripts for object concepts. For ID
concepts, we train our own ESD-u models prior to CI.

4.2.2       U NIFIED C ONCEPT E DITING (UCE)
Concept Erasure Method Details. Latent diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) operate on low-
dimensional embedding that is modeled with a U-Net generation network. The model incorporates
conditioned textual information via embeddings derived from a language model. These embeddings
are introduced into the system via cross-attention layers. Inspired by Orgad et al. (2023) and Meng
et al. (2023), Gandikota et al. (2023b) edit the U-Net of Stable Diffusion models without training
using a closed-form solution conditioned on cross-attention outputs. They update attention weights
to induce targeted changes to the keys/values that correspond to specific text embeddings for a set of
edited concepts, while minimizing changes to a set of preserved concepts.

Concept Inversion Method. We employ standard Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023) on fine-tuned
Stable Diffusion models from UCE (Gandikota et al., 2023b) to learn a new word embedding that
corresponds to the (identity) concept of the training images. Gandikota et al. (2023b) provide training


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    SD 1.4                ESD            ESD (CI)                UCE              UCE (CI)                    NP                  NP (CI)               SLD-Med            SLD-Med (CI)



Angelina
 Jolie
Brad
Pitt


Figure 4: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion for ID concept: Columns 3, 5, 7, and 9
demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating Brad Pitt and Angelina
Jolie. However, we can still generate images of the erased IDs using CI.

                        CI SD 1.4 ESD                                  CI SD 1.4 UCE                                         CI SD 1.4 NP                                     CI SD 1.4 SLD-Med
           103                                                                                                103                                                   103
                                                          102
           102                                                                                                102                                                   102
                                                 Count


                                                                                                      Count
 Count


                                                                                                                                                            Count
                1                                              1                                                   1
           10                                             10                                                  10                                                    101
                0                                                                                                  0
           10                                                                                                 10
                       st ia ia st s ts ly et                            st ia ia st s ts ly et                              st ia ia st s ts ly et                              st ia ia st s ts ly et
                     ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe                        ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe                           ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe                            ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe
                   Br ni ni Br tto rm B                             Br ni ni Br tto rm B                                Br ni ni Br tto rm B                                 Br ni ni Br tto rm B
               a le Ge Ge ale Bu A                            a le Ge Ge ale Bu A                                 a le Ge Ge ale Bu A                                    a le Ge Ge ale Bu A
                   e
             m l l M  e                                     m     l e l e  M                                    m     l e l e  M                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                       m l l M  e
           Fe ema Ma                                      Fe ema Ma                                           Fe ema Ma                                              Fe ema Ma
            F                                              F                                                   F                                                      F


         (a) Erased Stable Diffusion                 (a) Unified Concept Editing                               (a) Negative Prompt                                  (a) Safe Latent Diffusion


Figure 5: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for NSFW concept: On average, the number
of detected body parts from SD 1.4 and the erased models is 99.75 (across 4703 images) and 26.21
(across 4703 images and 7 erasure methods), respectively. Using CI, the average number of detected
body parts is 170.93 across 7 methods.


scripts to reproduce their art style, object, and NSFW content concepts. For ID concepts, we adapt
their publicly posted code to train our own models.

4.2.3                N EGATIVE P ROMPT (NP)
Concept Erasure Method Details. Negative Prompt (NP) is a guiding inference technique used in
the Stable Diffusion community (AUTOMATIC1111, 2022). Instead of updating the weights of the
original model, it replaces the unconditional score with the score estimate conditioned on the erased
concept in classifier-free guidance. Gandikota et al. (2023a) illustrate how NP can prevent the image
generation of targeted artistic concepts.

Concept Inversion Method. In our experiments, vanilla Textual Inversion was not able to circum-
vent NP. We modify the objective function for Textual Inversion to:
                                                        h
                      v∗ = arg min Ez∼E(x),c,ϵ∼N (0,1),t ∥(ϵθ (zt , t) + α(ϵθ (zt , c, t) − ϵθ (zt , t))
                                      v
                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                          − (ϵθ (zt , c, t) + α(ϵθ (zt , c∗ , t) − ϵθ (zt , c, t))∥22 ,

where c is the target concept. Our method learns a word embedding associated with the special string
c∗ such that the predicted noise from NP equals the true predicted noise using classifier-free guidance.

4.2.4                S AFE L ATENT D IFFUSION (SLD)
Concept Erasure Method Details. Safe Latent Diffusion (Schramowski et al., 2023) is an inference
guiding method that is a more sophisticated version of NP, where the second unconditional score
term is replaced with a safety guidance term. Instead of being constant like NP, this term is dependent
on: (1) the timestep, and (2) the distance between the conditional score of the given prompt and
the conditional score of the target concept at that timestep. In particular, SLD modifies the score


                                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


estimates during inference as ϵθ (xt , c, t) ← ϵθ (xt , t) + µ[ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t) − γ(zt , c, cS )]. We
refer the reader to the Appendix C and the original work by Schramowski et al. (2023) for a more
detailed explanation of γ(zt , c, cS ). Note that SLD does not modify the weights of the original
diffusion models, but only adjusts the sampling process. By varying the hyperparameters of the safety
guidance term, the authors propose 4 variants of SLD: SLD-Weak, SLD-Medium, SLD-Strong, and
SLD-Max. A more potent variant of SLD yields greater success in erasing undesirable concepts.

Concept Inversion Method. In our experimentation, we encountered an issue akin to the one with
Negative Prompt when applying vanilla Textual Inversion. Furthermore, the guidance term of SLD
at timestep t depends on that at the previous timestep. This recursive dependency implies that in
order to calculate the guidance term within our inversion algorithm, it becomes necessary to keep a
record of the preceding terms for optimization purposes. Given the high number of denoising steps
involved, such a process could result in significant memory usage, presenting an efficiency problem.
To address this issue, we propose a new strategy to perform Concept Inversion. Instead of having a
constant safety guidance term, SLD requires storing all the guidance terms from step 1 to step t − 1
to calculate the one at timestep t. Since doing so will be memory-intensive, we instead approximate
it by calculating only a subset of guidance terms at evenly spaced timesteps between 1 and t. We
can then learn a word embedding that counteracts the influence of the safety guidance term. The
pseudocode for our CI scheme can be found in Appendix C.
             SD 1.4   ESD          ESD (CI)            UCE          UCE (CI)            NP           NP (CI)         SLD-Med   SLD-Med (CI)
cassette
 player
 chain saw


Figure 6: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion for object concept: Columns 3, 5, 7, and
9 demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted object
concepts. However, we can still generate images of the object using CI. We refer the readers to the
Appendix C for the complete results on all object classes.


Table 3: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for ID concept (Acc. % of erased model /
Acc. % of CI): Concept erasure methods can cleanly erase images of Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie
from SD 1.4, evidenced by a significant drop in classification accuracy. CI can recover images of the
erased IDs, which can be seen by an increase in average accuracy across all methods.
                                              SD 1.4           ESD           UCE                 NP            SLD-Med
                        Brad Pitt              90.2          0.0 / 61.2    0.0 / 59.4        43.2 / 71.4       4.8 / 71.8
                      Angelina Jolie           91.6          0.8 / 60.1    0.0 / 65.2        46.2 / 75.2       5.2 / 72.8
                        Average                90.9          0.4 / 60.7    0.0 / 62.3        44.7 / 73.2       5.0 / 72.3



4.3          R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

On the plus side, our experiments confirm that whenever the target concept is explicitly mentioned
in the input prompt, all sevem concept erasure methods are effective. Therefore, these methods can
indeed provide protection against obviously-offensive text inputs. We confirm this even for concept
categories that the methods did not explore in their corresponding publications. However, on the
minus side, all seven methods can be fully circumvented using our CI attacks. In other words, these
erasure methods are only effective against their chosen inputs.
For artistic concepts, our human study in Figure 2 shows an average (across all methods) score of 1.31
on Likert rating on images generated by the erased model. This score expectedly increases to 3.85
when Concept Inversion is applied. Figure 3 displays images generated from the erased model and
CI side-by-side, which shows that CI is effective in recovering the erased style. For object concepts,
the average accuracy across all methods of the pre-trained classifier in predicting the erased concept


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


increases from 13.68 to 68.8 using our attack (Table 1). This is supported by qualitative results
shown in Figure 6. For ID concepts, the average accuracy across all methods of the GIPHY detector
increases from 12.52 to 67.13 in Table 3. For NSFW concepts, Figure 5 suggests that CI can recover
the NSFW concept, which is shown by an increase from 26.2 to 170.93 in the average number of
detected exposed body parts.
Among the 7 concept erasure methods, the most challenging one to circumvent is SLD. Our Concept
Inversion technique manages to counteract the influence of SLD-Weak, SLD-Medium, and even SLD-
Strong under most circumstances. Among the variants, SLD-Max proves to be the most challenging
to circumvent. However, this variant comes with a drawback: it has the potential to entirely transform
the visual semantics of the generated images. We provide several more results of variants of SLD in
the Appendix C. In our proposed CI scheme for SLD, we observed that more GPU memory can give
us better approximations of the safety guidance terms and therefore counteract their influence.

4.4       T RANSFERABILITY AND U SEABILITY OF O UR ATTACKS

Intriguingly, we show that the learned special tokens derived from CI can be applied to the original
SD 1.4 model to generate images of the erased concept. Figure 7 demonstrates our results. This
lends further evidence that current concept erasure methods are merely suppressing the generation
of the targeted concept when conditioned on the input embeddings corresponding to the concept
text. However, there exist word embeddings that trigger the generation of the erased concept in SD
1.4 that also work on the erased model. This means that some degree of input filtering is occurring.
Additionally, we provide evidence that the learned word embeddings through CI are useable in
practice. Following Gal et al. (2023) and study the reconstruction effectiveness and editability of
these embeddings. In particular, we generate two sets of images using CI with each concept erasure
method: first, a set of generated images using the inverted concept; second, a set of generated
images of the inverted concept in different scenes. We evaluate using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
how well the inverted concepts are produced with the erased models, and how transferable are they
to different scenes. In both cases, the erased models achieve performance similar to that of the
original Stable-Diffusion model, pointing to the models are in principle still being able to produce the
seemingly erased concepts.

             Recontruction                    Editability
    FMN                                                           ESD       FMN        SA      SLD-Med
                                 FMN
     NP                           NP
     AC                           AC
     SA                           SA
    ESD                          ESD
    UCE                          UCE
    SLD                          SLD
     SD                           SD
           0.7   0.72 0.74             0.18    0.2      0.22


Figure 7: (Left) Reconstruction: A higher score indicates a better ability to replicate the provided
concept. (Middle) Editability: A higher score indicates a better ability to modify the concepts using
textual prompts. (Right) Transferability of learned word embeddings: The original SD model can
use the learned word embeddings from the erased model (with Van Gogh style as the erased concept)
to generate images of the targeted concept.


5     C ONCLUSIONS
As text-to-image generative AI models continue to gain popularity and usage among the public,
issues surrounding the ability to generate proprietary, sensitive, or unsafe images come to the fore.
Numerous methods have been proposed in the recent past that claim to erase target concepts from
trained generative models, and ostensibly make them safe(r) for public consumption. In this paper,
we take a step back and scrutinize these claims. We show that post-hoc erasure methods have not
excised the targeted concepts; fairly straightforward “attack” procedures can be used to design special
prompts that regenerate the unsafe outputs.
As future work, it might be necessary to fundamentally analyze why the “input filtering” phenomenon
seems to be occurring in all these recent methods, despite the diversity of algorithmic techniques
involved in each of them. Such an understanding could facilitate the design of better methods that
improve both the effectiveness and robustness of concept erasure.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors were partially supported by the AI Research Institutes Program supported by NSF and
USDA-NIFA under grant no. 2021-67021-35329. KM was supported by a DoE GAANN fellowship.
NC was partially supported by the Israeli data science scholarship for outstanding postdoctoral
fellows (VATAT).

R EFERENCES
Stability AI. Stable diffusion 2.0 release, 2022. URL https://stability.ai/blog/
  stable-diffusion-v2-release. Jul 9, 2023.
AUTOMATIC1111. Negative prompt, 2022. URL https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/
 stable-diffusion-webui/wiki/Negative-prompt.
Romain Beaumont. Clip retrieval: Easily compute clip embeddings and build a clip retrieval system
  with them. https://github.com/rom1504/clip-retrieval, 2022.
Praneeth Bedapudi. Nudenet: Neural nets for nudity detection and censoring, 2022. URL https:
  //github.com/notAI-tech/NudeNet/.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. CoRR, abs/2110.01963, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramèr,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  CoRR, abs/2301.13188, 2023.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, Aaron Maschinot, José Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
 Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T. Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, Yuanzhen Li, and Dilip Krishnan.
  Muse: Text-to-image generation via masked generative transformers. CoRR, abs/2301.00704,
  2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  106(496):1602–1614, 2011. ISSN 0162-1459.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023a.
Rohit Gandikota, Hadas Orgad, Yonatan Belinkov, Joanna Materzynska, and David Bau. Unified
  concept editing in diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2308.14761, 2023b.
Giphy.   Giphy celebrity detector,          2020.      URL https://github.com/Giphy/
  celeb-detection-oss.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2020a.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Forgetting outside the box: Scrubbing deep
  networks of information accessible from input-output observations. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2020b.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ligong Han, Yinxiao Li, Han Zhang, Peyman Milanfar, Dimitris Metaxas, and Feng Yang. Svdiff:
  Compact parameter space for diffusion fine-tuning. In International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2023.
Alvin Heng and Harold Soh. Selective amnesia: A continual learning approach to forgetting in deep
  generative models. CoRR, abs/2305.10120, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems Workshop, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jeremy Howard. Imagenette, 2019. URL https://github.com/fastai/imagenette/.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis,
  Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
  neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, , and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. In International Conference on Computer
 Vision, 2023.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher J.C. Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. ATT
  Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J. Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-editing
  memory in a transformer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Pamela Mishkin, Lama Ahmad, Miles Brundage, Gretchen Krueger, and Girish Sas-
  try.  Dall·e 2 preview - risks and limitations, 2022. URL https://github.
  com/openai/dalle-2-preview/blob/main/system-card.md](https:
  //github.com/openai/dalle-2-preview/blob/main/system-card.md).
Hadas Orgad, Bahjat Kawar, and Yonatan Belinkov. Editing implicit assumptions in text-to-image
  diffusion models. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
Yiting Qu, Xinyue Shen, Xinlei He, Michael Backes, Savvas Zannettou, and Yang Zhang. Unsafe
  diffusion: On the generation of unsafe images and hateful memes from text-to-image models. In
  ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. CoRR, abs/2204.06125, 2022.
Javier Rando, Daniel Paleka, David Lindner, Lennart Heim, and Florian Tramèr. Red-teaming the
  stable diffusion safety filter. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop,
  2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan
  Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with
  deep language understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jitsev.
  LAION-5B: an open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning. CoRR, abs/2304.03411, 2023.
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
SmithMano.  Tutorial: How to remove the safety filter in 5 seconds, 2022.                        URL
  https://www.reddit.com/r/StableDiffusion/comments/wv2nw0/
  tutorial_how_to_remove_the_safety_filter_in_5/.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  Workshop, 2015.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023a.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Understand-
  ing and mitigating copying in diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023b.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Weihao Xia, Yulun Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, Bolei Zhou, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. GAN
 inversion: A survey. CoRR, abs/2101.05278, 2021.
Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Versatile diffusion: Text,
  images and variations all in one diffusion model. CoRR, abs/2211.08332, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana Parekh, Xin
   Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich
   text-to-image generation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Forget-me-not: Learning
  to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2303.17591, 2023.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Krähenbühl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A. Efros. Generative visual manipula-
  tion on the natural image manifold. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2016.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
The attack scenario described in Section 3 is closer to the white-box setting. However, despite limited
practicality, our attacks offers valuable insights into the intrinsic limitations and behaviors of current
concept erasure methods. Our experimental results suggest that input-filtering is occurring among
concept erasure methods. Let x be the observed data, i.e. the images containing the concept we
wish to erase, and θ be the weights of our conditional generative model. From a likelihood-based
perspective, we believe current erasure methods are minimizing the conditional probability Pθ (x|y)
for only certain inputs y. In order to make the generative model more robust, we may want to directly
minimize the marginal probability Pθ (x), which is unfortunately intractable to calculate in practice.
One possible solution is to perform adversarial training and minimize probability conditioned on the
adversarial inputs. Nevertheless, it is also crucial to maintain the overall generative performance of
the model on unrelated concepts. For instance, Figure 10 demonstrates that the erased models that
are more robust against Concept Inversion can create artifacts or generate images not aligned with
the prompt.

B     T RAINING D ETAILS
For the training of Concept Inversion, we use 6 samples for art style concept, 30 samples for object
concept, and 25 samples for ID concept. For all our Concept Inversion experiments, unless mentioned
otherwise, we perform training on one A100 GPU with a batch size of 4, and a learning rate of
5e − 03. We optimize the word embedding for 1,000 steps while keeping the weights of the erased
models frozen. The CI training procedure is the same across erasure methods and concepts, except
for ID concepts we optimize for 5,000 steps, and for SLD we we train for 1,000 steps with batch size
1.

B.1   E RASED S TABLE D IFFUSION (ESD)

For artistic concepts and NSFW concept, we used the pre-trained models released by the authors. For
object concepts, we trained ESD-u models using the suggested parameters by the authors. For ID
concepts, we trained ESD-u models using the parameters for object concepts.

B.2   U NIFIED C ONCEPT E DITING (UCE)

For artistic concepts, object concepts, and NSFW concept, we trained the erased models using
the training script provided by the author. For ID concepts, we used the same script without the
preservation loss term.

B.3   S ELECTIVE A MNESIA (SA)

For artistic concepts, generated images with photorealism style as the surrogate dataset. We then
applied SA to finetune the cross-attention layers of SD 1.4 for 200 epochs. We used the default
parameters for training. For object concepts, we used a similar training procedure as above but used
images of kangaroos (a class in ImageNet) as the surrogate dataset. Moreover, we finetuned the
unconditional layers (non-cross-attention modules) of SD 1.4. For ID concepts and NSFW concept,
we used the training script provided by the authors.

B.4   A BLATING C ONCEPTS (AC)

For artistic concepts, we used the training scripts provided by the authors to train the erased models.
For object concepts, we also used the training script provided by the authors with the anchor
distribution set to images of kangaroos. For ID concepts, we used the training script for object
concepts and set the anchor distribution to images of middle-aged people. For NSFW concept, we
used the training script for object concepts and set the anchor distribution to images of people wearing
clothes.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5    F ORGET-M E -N OT (FMN)

For artistic concepts, we employed FMN to finetune the cross-attention layers for 5 training steps with
a learning rate of 1e − 4. The reference images we used are generated paintings with a photorealism
style. For object concepts, we finetuned the unconditional layers (non-cross-attention modules) for
100 epochs with a learning rate of 2e − 06. The reference images we used are generated photos of
kangaroos. For ID concepts, we finetuned the unconditional layers for 120 epochs with a learning
rate of 2e − 06. The reference images we used are generated photos of middle-aged people. For
NSFW concept, we finetuned unconditional layers for 100 epochs with a learning rate of 2e − 06.
The reference images we used are generated photos of people wearing clothes. Since the authors do
not provide any training details, we tuned the number of epochs and learning rate until we observed
effective erasure.

B.6    N EGATIVE P ROMPT (NP)

To apply Negative Prompt to SD 1.4, we changed the negative prompt argument to the concept we
would like to erase during inference using codebase from Hugging Face.

B.7    S AFE L ATENT D IFFUSION (SLD)

We used to authors’ public code to apply SLD to Stable Diffusion 1.4. During CI, we sampled 35
evenly spaced timesteps between 1 and 1000. The range between the smallest and largest timesteps
is 90. We set guidance scale sS = 5000, warm-up step δ = 0, threshold λ = 1.0, momentum scale
sm = 0.5, and momentum beta βm = 0.7. This is the hyperparameters for SLD-Max.


C     R ESULTS O N OTHER C ONCEPT E RASURE M ETHODS

C.1    S ELECTIVE A MNESIA (SA)

Concept Erasure Method Details. Heng & Soh (2023) pose concept erasure as a problem of
continual learning, taking inspiration from Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017) and Generative Replay (Shin et al., 2017). Consider a dataset D that can be partitioned as
                       (n) (n) Nf          (n) (n)
D = Df ∪ Dr = {(xf , cf )}n=1         ∪ {(xr , cr )}Nn=1 , where Df is the data to forget and Dr is
                                                       r


the data to remember. The underlying distribution of D is given by p(x, c) = p(x|c)p(c). In the case
of concept erasure, Df contains the images of the concept we would like to erase, and Dr consists of
images we want to preserve the model performance. They maximize the following objective function
for concept erasure:
                                                   X Fi
       L = − Ep(x|c)p(cf ) [log p(x|θ∗ , c)] − λ             (θi − θi∗ )2 + Ep(x|c)p(xr ) [log p(x|θ∗ , c)],   (2)
                                                    i
                                                         2

where F is the Fisher information matrix and the third term is a generative replay term to prevent
model degradation on samples that do not contain the erased concept. In practice, the authors
optimize Eq. 2 by substituting the likelihood terms with the standard ELBOs. Moreover, they observe
that directly minimizing the ELBO can lead to poor results. Hence, they propose to maximize the
log-likelihood of a surrogate distribution of the concept to forget, q(x|cf ) ̸= p(x|cf ). This is done by
replacing − Ep(x|c)p(cf ) [log p(x|θ∗ , c)] with Eq(x|c)p(cf ) [log p(x|θ∗ , c)]. Intuitively, this fine-tuning
will result in a generative model that will produce images according to the surrogate distribution
when conditioned on cf .

Concept Inversion Method. We employ standard Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023) on fine-tuned
Stable Diffusion models from Heng & Soh (2023) to learn a new word embedding that corresponds
to the concept of the training images. The authors provide training scripts for Brad Pitt, Angelina
Jolie, and NSFW content concepts. In particular, they use images of clowns and middle-aged people
as the surrogate dataset for ID concepts, and images of people wearing clothes for NSFW content
concept. For other concepts, we train our own models by appropriately modifying their training
scripts prior to CI.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       SD 1.4    SA        SA (CI)      FMN       FMN (CI)       AC        AC (CI)


            Angelina
             Jolie
            Brad
            Pitt



Figure 8: Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for IDs. Columns 3, 5, and 7
demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating Brad Pitt and Angelina
Jolie. However, we can still generate images of the erased IDs using CI.


Experimental Results. For artistic concepts, our human study in Figure 2 shows an average of 1.12
Likert score on images generated by the erased models. This score is increased to 3.55 when Concept
Inversion is applied. Qualitative results in Figure 13 demonstrate that CI can recover the erased style.
When evaluated on object concepts, Table 8 indicates that the average accuracy of the pre-trained
classifier increases from 10.6 to 40.3. With respect to ID concepts, the accuracy of GIPHY detector
increases from 4.8 to 67.1 in Table 6. Figure 8 shows that CI can still generate images of Brad Pitt
and Angelina Jolie. In the context of NSFW content, the average number of exposed body parts
detected increases from 2.5 to 5 in Figure 11. While CI is not effective in recovering the NSFW
concept, we observe that the performance of the erased model on unrelated concepts is affected.

C.2    F ORGET-M E -N OT (FMN)

Concept Erasure Method Details. Zhang et al. (2023) propose fine-tuning the cross-attention
layers of Stable Diffusion’s U-Net to map the erased concept to that of a set of reference images. The
authors first locate the word embeddings associated with the forgetting concept. This can be done by
tokenizing a pre-defined prompt or through Textual Inversion. They then compute the attention maps
between the input features and these embeddings, and minimize the Frobenius norm of attention
maps and backpropagate the network. Algorithm 1 describes the concept erasure process.

Algorithm 1 Forget-Me-Not on diffuser
Require: Context embeddings C containing the forgetting concept, embedding locations N of the forgetting
  concept, reference images R of the forgetting concept, diffuser Gθ , diffusion step T .
  repeat
     t ∼ Uniform([1...T ]); ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
     ri ∼ R; ej ∼ C; nj ∼ N
     x0 ← √ ri        √
     xt ← αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ                                                       ▷ αt : noise variance schedule
       ,
     xt−1 , At ← Gθ (xt , ej , t)                                                      ▷ At : all attention maps
                       [nj]
     L ← at ∈At ∥at ∥2
            P
                                                                                  ▷ L : attention resteering loss
     Update θ by descending its stochastic gradient ∇θ L
  until Concept forgotten


Concept Inversion Method. We employ standard Textual Inversion Gal et al. (2023) on fine-tuned
Stable Diffusion models from Zhang et al. (2023) to learn a new word embedding that corresponds to
the concept of the training images. Zhang et al. (2023) only provides training scripts for ID concepts.
Hence, we have to train our models on other concepts using their public code prior to CI.

Experimental Results. For artistic concepts, our human study in Figure 2 shows an average of
1.43 Likert score on images generated by the erased models. This score is increased to 3.66 when
Concept Inversion is applied. Our qualitative results in Figure 13 also shows that CI can reconstruct
the erased artistic concept. When evaluated on object concepts, Table 8 indicates that the average
accuracy of the pre-trained classifier increases from 3.9 to 44.6. In cases where CI is not as effective
(chain saw, church, english springer), we observe that the erased model has poor performance in
generating unrelated images. With respect to ID concepts, the accuracy of GIPHY detector increases


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for ID concept (Acc. % of erased model /
Acc. % of CI): Concept erasure methods can cleanly erase images of Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie
from the original SD 1.4 model, evidenced by a significant drop in classification accuracy. Using
Concept Inversion, we can generate images of the erased IDs, which can be seen by an increase in
average accuracy across all methods.
                      SD 1.4     ESD          FMN          UCE           AC            NP        SLD-Med         SA
Brad Pitt              90.2    0.0 / 61.2   0.6 / 52.8   0.0 / 59.4   3.2 / 73.6   43.2 / 71.4   4.8 / 71.8   0.0 / 66.6
Angelina Jolie         91.6    0.8 / 60.1   0.0 / 41.2   0.0 / 65.2   0.6 / 79.6   46.2 / 75.2   5.2 / 72.8   9.6 / 67.7
Average                90.9    0.4 / 60.7   0.3 / 47.0   0.0 / 62.3   1.9 / 76.6   44.7 / 73.2   5.0 / 72.3   4.8 / 67.1



from 0.3 to 47.0 in Table 6. Additionally, in the context of NSFW content, the average number of
exposed body parts detected increases from 1.88 to 52.13 in Figure 11.

C.3     A BLATING C ONCEPTS (AC)

Concept Erasure Method Details. Kumari et al. (2023) perform concept erasure by overwriting
the target concept with an anchor weight, which can be a superset or a similar concept. The authors
propose two variants to erase the target concept, namely Model-based concept ablation and Noise-
based concept ablation. In the former method, the authors fine-tune the pre-trained Stable Diffusion
U-Net model by minimizing the following objective function:
                                                    h                                                i
           arg min Ez∼E,z∗ ∼E(x∗ ),c,c∗ ,ϵ∼N (0,1),t wt ∥ϵθ∗ (zt , c, t).sg() − ϵθ∗ (zt∗ , c∗ , t)∥22 .
                 θ∗
where wt is a time-dependent weight, θ∗ is initialized with the pre-trained weight, x∗ is the (generated)
images with the anchor concept c∗ , and .sg() is the stop-gradient operation. For the second variant,
the authors redefine the ground truth text-image pairs as <a target concept text prompt, image of
the anchor concept>. The authors then fine-tune the model on the redefined pairs with the standard
diffusion training loss. In addition, they add an optional standard diffusion loss term on the anchor
concept image and corresponding texts as a regularization as the target text prompt can consist of
the anchor concept. In both variants, the authors propose to fine-tune on different parts of Stable
Diffusion: (1) cross-attention, (2) embedding: the text embedding the text transformer, (2) full
weights: all parameters of U-Net.

Concept Inversion Method. We employ standard Textual Inversion Gal et al. (2023) on fine-tuned
Stable Diffusion models from AC ( Kumari et al. (2023)) to learn a new word embedding that
corresponds to the (identity) concept of the training images. Kumari et al. (2023) provide training
scripts for art style and object concepts. Consequently, we extend their public code to erase the
remaining concepts.

Experimental Results. For artistic concepts, our human study in Figure 2 shows an average of 1.47
Likert score on images generated by the erased models. This score is increased to 3.84 when Concept
Inversion is applied. When evaluated on object concepts, Table 8 indicates that the average accuracy
of the pre-trained classifier increases from 0.04 to 45.5. With respect to ID concepts, the accuracy of
GIPHY detector increases from 1.9 to 76.6 in Table 6. Additionally, in the context of NSFW content,
the average number of exposed body parts detected increases from 12.5 to 252.63 in Figure 11.

C.4     S AFE L ATENT D IFFUSION (SLD)

Concept Erasure Method Details. Safe Latent Diffusion Schramowski et al. (2023) is an inference
guiding method, in which during inference the score estimates for the x−prediction are modified as:
                 ϵθ (xt , c, t) ← ϵθ (xt , t) + µ[ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t) − γ(zt , c, cS )]           (3)
Where cS is the concept we would like to steer the generated images away from, γ is the safety
guidance term γ(zt , c, cS ) = β(c, cS ; sS , λ)(ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t)), and β applies a guidance scale
sS element-wise by considering those dimensions of the prompt conditioned estimate that would
guide the generation process toward the erased concept: β(c, cS ; sS , λ) =

           max{1, |sS (θϵ (xt , ct ) − ϵ(xt , cS , t)|}, where ϵθ (xt , c, t) ⊖ ϵθ (xt , cS , t) ≤ λ,
           0,                                              otherwise.


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             SD 1.4     SLD-Weak      SLD-Med     SLD-Strong   SLD-Max    CI (SLD-Weak)   CI (SLD-Med)   CI (SLD-Strong)   CI (SLD-Max)


Demi Human
   Ajin:
Kinkade
Thomas
Edlin
Tyler
Gogh
Van
Kilian
 Eng
McKernan
 Kelly


Figure 9: Concept Inversion (CI) on SLD for art concept. Columns 2 to 5 demonstrate the
effectiveness of erasing artistic styles for each SLD variant. Concept Inversion can recover the style
most consistently for SLD-Weak and SLD-Strong. In most cases, we can observe recovery for even
SLD-Strong.


Larger threshold λ and sS lead to a more substantial shift away from prompt text and in the opposite
direction of the erased concept. Moreover, to facilitate a balance between removal of undesired
content from the generated images and minimizing the changes introduced, the authors introduce
two modifications. First, they accelerate guidance over time by utilizing a momentum term vt for the
safety guidance γ. In particular, γt , denoting γ(zt , c, cS ), is defined as:
                                   γt = β(c, cS ; sS , λ)(ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t)) + sm vt
with sm ∈ [0, 1] and vt+1 = ζm vt + (1 − ζm )γt . Here, v0 = 0 and βm ∈ [0, 1), with larger ζm
resulting in less volatile changes in momentum. Note that SLD does not modify the weights of the
original diffusion models, but only adjusts the sampling process. By varying the hyperparameters,
the authors propose 4 variants of SLD: SLD-Weak, SLD-Medium, SLD-Strong, and SLD-Max.

Concept Inversion Method. The pseudocode for our CI method on SLD is shown in Alg. 2.

Algorithm 2 Concept Inversion for SLD
Require: Concept placeholder string c∗ , erased concept c, number of iterations N
  for i = 1 to N do
      Sample x0 from training data. Randomly select m ≥ 1 and n ≤ T
      ϵ ∼ N (0, 1); z0 ← E(x0 ); γ(z0 , m, cS ) ← 0; vm ← 0
      for t = m toh n by k do                                   ▷ iterating t from m to k with an increment of k
           L ← ∥(ϵθ (zt , t) + α(ϵθ (zt , cS , t) − ϵθ (zt , t)) − (ϵθ (xt , t) + µ[ϵθ (xt , c∗ , t) − ϵθ (xt , t) −
                      i
  γ(zt , c, cS )])∥22
               vt+1 ← ζm vt + (1 − ζm )γt
               γt+1 ← β(c, cS ; sS , λ)(ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵθ (xt , t)) + sm vt
               Update v∗ by descending its stochastic gradient ∇v∗ L
           end for
        end for


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5         FAILURE C ASES FOR CI

In our experiments, we observed a small handful of cases where CI was not able to recover the erased
concepts. However, as shown in Figure 10, these models can have poor image generation quality
even on prompts not related to the erased concepts. Hence, this shows that while they are more robust
to CI, such models are not very useful in real-world applications.


                                                   SA (erasing   FMN (erasing FMN (erasing FMN (erasing                    SLD-Max
                                                    NSFW)         chain saw)    church)      English                        (erasing
                                                                                            Springer)                       Thomas
                                                                                                                           Kinkade)


Figure 10: Samples from erased models where CI struggles. We generate images using the prompt
“A painting in the style of Van Gogh”. The output images do not contain the targeted artistic style and
contain artifacts.


Table 7: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for objects.
(Acc. % of erased model / Acc. % of CI). Concept erasure methods can cleanly erase many object
concepts from a model when the object is mentioned in the prompt, evidenced by a significant drop
in classification accuracy. Using Concept Inversion, we can generate images of the erased objects,
which can be seen by an increase in average accuracy across all methods.
                                  SD 1.4               ESD              FMN                    UCE                  AC             NP                 SLD-Med                      SA
cassette player                     6.4              0.2 / 6.2         0.2 / 8.8             0.0 / 2.8            0.0 / 4.2     4.0 / 9.4              1.0 / 2.4                0.6 / 6.2
chain saw                          68.6             0.0 / 64.0         0.0 / 0.2            0.0 / 43.6           0.0 / 17.8     4.0 / 82.8             0.8 / 86.6               0.0 / 2.0
church                             79.6             0.8 / 87.4         0.0 / 0.0           10.0 / 82.2           0.4 / 72.6    25.4 / 78.4            20.6 / 72.0             56.2 / 65.6
english springer                   93.6             0.2 / 48.2         0.0 / 0.0            0.0 / 69.6           0.0 / 32.6    27.0 / 90.4            24.6 / 96.4               0.0 / 8.2
french horn                        99.3             0.0 / 81.6        0.0 / 59.0            0.4 / 99.4           0.0 / 66.6    62.4 / 99.0            17.0 / 97.6              0.2 / 87.0
garbage truck                      83.2             0.8 / 57.0        6.4 / 69.6           16.4 / 89.6           0.0 / 79.4    39.4 / 84.6            19.8 / 94.8             12.6 / 35.4
gas pump                           76.6             0.0 / 73.8       7.8 / 80.4             0.0 / 73.0           0.0 / 31.2    18.0 / 79.6            12.8 / 75.6              0.6 / 54.8
golf ball                          96.2             0.0 / 28.6       22.6 / 74.4            0.2 / 18.6           0.0 / 28.4    45.2 / 88.4            60.2 / 98.8              3.0 / 49.0
parachute                          96.2             0.0 / 94.2        2.0 / 93.4            1.6 / 94.2           0.0 / 92.4    32.8 / 77.2            52.8 / 95.8             22.6 / 78.6
tench                              79.6             0.3 / 59.7        0.4 / 60.6            0.0 / 20.6           0.0 / 29.4    27.6 / 72.6            20.6 / 75.4             10.2 / 16.0
Average                            77.9             0.2 / 60.1        3.9 / 44.6            2.9 / 59.4           0.04 / 45.5   28.6 / 76.2            23.0 / 79.5             10.6 / 40.3


                        CI SD 1.4 FMN                                                    CI SD 1.4 AC                                                 CI SD 1.4 SA
                                                                          103
            102                                                                                                                        102
                                                                          102
    Count


                                                                  Count


                                                                                                                               Count


            101                                                                                                                        101
                                                                          101

            100                                                           100                                                          100
                         st ia ia st s ts ly et                                        st ia ia st s ts ly et                                       st ia ia st s ts ly et
                       ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe                                     ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe                                    ea tal tal ea ck pi el Fe
                    Br ni ni Br tto rm B                                          Br ni ni Br tto rm B                                         Br ni ni Br tto rm B
                 le Ge Ge le Bu A                                              le Ge Ge le Bu A                                             le Ge Ge le Bu A
             e ma ale ale Ma                                               e ma ale ale Ma                                              e ma ale ale Ma
            F em M                                                        F em M                                                       F em M
             F                                                             F                                                            F
                                                      (a)                                                           (a)                                                            (a)
                    Forget-Me-Not                                               Ablating Concepts                                            Selective Amnesia

Figure 11: Quantitative results of Concept Inversion for NSFW concept: On average, the number
of detected body parts from SD 1.4 and the erased models is 99.75 (across 4703 images) and 26.21
(across 4703 images and 7 erasure methods), respectively. Using CI, the average number of detected
body parts is 170.93 across 7 methods.


                                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Real             SD 1.4      ESD   ESD (CI)     UCE          UCE (CI)     NP       NP (CI)   SLD-Med     SLD-Med (CI)


Demi Human
   Ajin:
Kinkade
Thomas
Edlin
Tyler
Gogh
Van
Kilian
 Eng
McKernan
 Kelly


Figure 12: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion on Erased Stable Diffusion, Unified Concept
Editing, Negative Prompt, and Safe Latent Diffusion for artistic concept: Columns 4, 6, 8, and
10 demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted artistic
concepts. However, we can still generate images of the erased styles using CI.



                            Real       SD 1.4    SA        SA (CI)         FMN       FMN (CI)      AC       AC (CI)
               Demi Human
                  Ajin:
               Kinkade
               Thomas
               Edlin
               Tyler
               Gogh
               Van
               Kilian
                Eng
               McKernan
                Kelly


Figure 13: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion on Selective Amnesia, Forget-Me-Not, and
Ablating Concepts for artistic concept: Columns 4, 6, and 8 demonstrate the effectiveness of
concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted artistic concepts. However, we can still
generate images of the erased styles using CI.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  cassette player   chain saw   church   gas pump   tench        garbage truck   english    golf ball   parachute   french horn
                                                                                                 springer


   SD 1.4
   ESD
   ESD (CI)
   UCE
   UCE (CI)
   NP
   NP (CI)
   SLD-Med
   SLD-Med (CI)
   SA
   SA (CI)
   FMN
   FMN (CI)
   AC
   AC (CI)


Figure 14: Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for objects. Odd rows (except
1) demonstrate the effectiveness of erasure methods in erasing object concepts. However, Concept
Inversion can recover the objects.



                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Spiderman 2099   Gwen Stacy   Miles Morales   Sonic


                                                                       Textual Inversion Textual Inversion
                                                                                           (all classes)
  Real


                                                                         (no class 0)
Inversion
 Textual


Figure 15: (Left) Qualitative results of Textual Inversion on 4 film character concepts: TI works
significantly worse for concepts not abundant in the LAION 5-B ( Schuhmann et al. (2022)) such as
Spiderman 2099 and Gwen Stacy compared to Miles Morales and Sonic, both of which we observed
many duplicates. Refer to the Appendix D to see how we check for existence of these concepts in
LAION 5-B. (Right) Qualitative results of Textual Inversion on MNIST: Textual Inversion works
worse when excluding class 0 from the training dataset.


D               D ETAILS : C HECKING FOR E XISTENCE OF C ONCEPTS


To check for the concepts’ existence in LAION-5B, we utilize CLIP Retrieval ( Beaumont (2022)) to
search for images nearest to the concept image in the CLIP image embedding space. Our searches
indicate that the images of Sonic and Miles Morales appear a lot with multiple duplicates, while
images of Gwen Stacy and Spiderman 2099 appear few to none.


Figure 16: Images of the character Miles Morales appear with many duplicates in our search using
https://rom1504.github.io/clip-retrieval.


                                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 17: Images of the character Sonic appear with many duplicates in our search using https:
//rom1504.github.io/clip-retrieval.


Figure 18: Images of the character Gwen Stacy appear only few in our search using https:
//rom1504.github.io/clip-retrieval.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 19: Images of the character Spiderman 2099 does not appear in our search using https:
//rom1504.github.io/clip-retrieval. This is reasonable since the character was intro-
duced in a film released after the release of LAION-5B.


E            A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

             Real   SD 1.4   ESD   ESD (CI)   UCE        UCE (CI)   NP   NP (CI)   SLD-Med   SLD-Med (CI)
Demi Human
   Ajin:
Kinkade
Thomas
Edlin
Tyler
Gogh
Van
Kilian
 Eng
McKernan
 Kelly


Figure 20: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion on Erased Stable Diffusion, Unified Concept
Editing, Negative Prompt, and Safe Latent Diffusion for artistic concept: Columns 4, 6, 8, and
10 demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted artistic
concepts. However, we can still generate images of the erased styles using CI.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Real            SD 1.4              SA          SA (CI)          FMN       FMN (CI)         AC       AC (CI)


           Demi Human
              Ajin:
           Kinkade
           Thomas
           Edlin
           Tyler
           Gogh
           Van
           Kilian
            Eng
           McKernan
            Kelly


Figure 21: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion on Selective Amnesia, Forget-Me-Not, and
Ablating Concepts for artistic concept: Columns 4, 6, and 8 demonstrate the effectiveness of
concept erasure methods in not generating the targeted artistic concepts. However, we can still
generate images of the erased styles using CI.


           SD 1.4                      ESD              ESD (CI)         UCE             UCE (CI)        NP          NP (CI)    SLD-Med       SLD-Med (CI)
Angelina
 Jolie
Brad
Pitt


Figure 22: Qualitative results of Concept Inversion for ID concept: Columns 3, 5, 7, and 9
demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating Brad Pitt and Angelina
Jolie. However, we can still generate images of the erased IDs using CI.


                                      SD 1.4              SA            SA (CI)           FMN         FMN (CI)        AC        AC (CI)
                        Angelina
                         Jolie
                        Brad
                        Pitt


Figure 23: Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for IDs. Columns 3, 5, and 7
demonstrate the effectiveness of concept erasure methods in not generating Brad Pitt and Angelina
Jolie. However, we can still generate images of the erased IDs using CI.


                                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  cassette player   chain saw   church   gas pump   tench        garbage truck   english    golf ball   parachute   french horn
                                                                                                 springer


   SD 1.4
   ESD
   ESD (CI)
   UCE
   UCE (CI)
   NP
   NP (CI)
   SLD-Med
   SLD-Med (CI)
   SA
   SA (CI)
   FMN
   FMN (CI)
   AC
   AC (CI)


Figure 24: Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for objects. Odd rows (except
1) demonstrate the effectiveness of erasure methods in erasing object concepts. However, Concept
Inversion can recover the objects.



                                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR S TABLE D IFFUSION 2.0

                        SD 2.0        AC         AC (CI)     SLD-Med    SLD-Med (CI)


                Brad
                Pitt
                Gogh
                Van


Figure 25: Concept Inversion (CI) on concept erasure methods for IDs and art styles on SD
2.0. For Brad Pitt concept, the classification accuracy is 96.6% for SD 2.0. This accuracy drops to
17.4% and 28.2% when AC ( Kumari et al. (2023)) and SLD ( Schramowski et al. (2023)) are applied,
respectively. When CI is applied, the accuracy increases to 89.8% and 54.4%.


                                                26
