Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AS ANALOGICAL REASONERS
    Michihiro Yasunaga,1,2 Xinyun Chen,1 Yujia Li,1 Panupong Pasupat,1 Jure Leskovec,2
    Percy Liang,2 Ed H. Chi,1 Denny Zhou1
                            1
                              Google DeepMind 2 Stanford University
                     myasu@cs.stanford.edu, {xinyunchen,dennyzhou}@google.com


                                               ABSTRACT
          Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting for language models demonstrates impressive
          performance across reasoning tasks, but typically needs labeled exemplars of the
          reasoning process. In this work, we introduce a new prompting approach, analogical
          prompting, designed to automatically guide the reasoning process of large language
          models. Inspired by analogical reasoning, a cognitive process in which humans draw
          from relevant past experiences to tackle new problems, our approach prompts language
          models to self-generate relevant exemplars or knowledge in the context, before proceed-
          ing to solve the given problem. This method presents several advantages: it obviates the
          need for labeling or retrieving exemplars, offering generality and convenience; it can
          also tailor the generated exemplars and knowledge to each problem, offering adaptability.
          Experimental results show that our approach outperforms 0-shot CoT and manual few-
          shot CoT in a variety of reasoning tasks, including math problem solving in GSM8K
          and MATH, code generation in Codeforces, and other reasoning tasks in BIG-Bench.


1     INTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate strong performance across various tasks (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2023). Recently, chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting
has demonstrated LLMs’ abilities to tackle complex tasks, such as solving math problems, by prompting
them to generate intermediate reasoning steps (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022). For instance,
common methods like few-shot CoT (Wei et al. 2022b; Figure 1, middle) make LLMs generate reasoning
steps by offering a few exemplars of question-rationale-answer triplets; 0-shot CoT (Kojima et al. 2022;
Figure 1, left) aims for the same objective by offering instructions like “think step by step.” These studies
highlight the importance of devising effective methods to guide LLMs to reason.
However, the existing CoT paradigm faces two key challenges: providing relevant guidance or exemplars
of reasoning, and minimizing the need for manual labeling. Specifically, 0-shot CoT offers generic
reasoning guidance, which may not suffice for complex tasks like code generation (§6). Few-shot CoT
provides more detailed guidance but demands labeled exemplars of the reasoning process, which can be
costly to obtain for every task. This raises a research question: can we achieve the best of both worlds
and automate the generation of relevant exemplars to guide LLMs’ reasoning process?
In this work, we propose analogical prompting, a new prompting approach that automatically guides
the reasoning process of LLMs. Our inspiration comes from analogical reasoning in psychology, a concept
where humans draw from relevant past experiences to tackle new problems (Vosniadou & Ortony, 1989).
For instance, when given a new math problem (e.g., finding the area of a square given four points in a
coordinate system; Figure 1), humans often think about “Do I know a related problem?” (Polya, 2004)
and recall how they solved related problems in the past (e.g., finding the area of a square with a known
side length) to derive insights for solving the new problem. They also recall high-level knowledge, such
as the need to find the side length to calculate a square’s area. Our idea is to prompt LLM generation
to mimic this reasoning process to effectively solve new problems.
Concretely, given a problem to solve, we prompt LLMs to self-generate relevant exemplars in the context,
using instructions like “# Recall relevant problems and solutions:...”, and then proceed to
solve the original problem (Figure 1, 2). We can also prompt the LLM to generate high-level knowledge
that complements specific exemplars, using instructions like “# Provide a tutorial:...” (Figure
3). This turns out to be particularly useful for complex tasks like code generation (see §6). Notably, our
method can operate in a single prompt, generating knowledge, exemplars, and a solution to the initial


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                  0-shot                               Few-shot CoT                               Analogical Prompting (Ours)
       Model Input                                  Model Input                              Model Input
    Q: What is the area of the square          Q: Roger has 5 tennis balls. He          Q: What is the area of the square with the four vertices at
    with the four vertices at (-2, 2), (2,     buys 2 more cans of tennis balls.        (-2, 2), (2, -2), (-2, -6), and (-6, -2)?
    -2), (-2, -6), and (-6, -2)?               Each can has 3 tennis balls. How
                                                                                        # Instruction:
                                               many tennis balls does he have?
                                                                                        ## Recall relevant exemplars:
                                               A: Roger started with 5 balls. 2
              0-shot CoT                       cans of 3 balls each is 6 balls.
                                                                                        ## Solve the initial problem:

                                               The answer is 5 + 6 = 11.
       Model Input
                                               …                                            Model Output
    Q: What is the area of the square
                                                                                        # Relevant exemplars:
    with the four vertices at (-2, 2), (2,     Q: What is the area of the square        Q: What is the area of the square with a side length of 5?
    -2), (-2, -6), and (-6, -2)?               with the four vertices at (-2, 2), (2,   A: The area of a square is found by squaring the length of its
    Think step by step.                        -2), (-2, -6), and (-6, -2)?             side. So, the area of this square is 5^2 = 25. …

                                                                                        # Solve the initial problem:
                                                                                        To find the area of the square, we need to find the side
    ● Generic guidance of reasoning          ● Need labeled exemplars of reasoning
                                                                                        length. The length is … \sqrt{(2 - (-2))^2 + (-2 - 2)^2} =
                                                                                        \sqrt{32}. So, the area of the square is (\sqrt{32})^2 = 32.


                                                                                        ● Exemplars are automatically generated
                                                                                           and tailored to each problem                           ✓
Figure 1: Overview of our approach, analogical prompting. Left: Existing methods for prompting
LLM to reason are either generic (0-shot CoT) or demand labeled exemplars (few-shot CoT). Right: Given
a problem, our method prompts LLMs to self-generate relevant exemplars before solving the problem.
This eliminates the need for labeling and also tailors the exemplars to each individual problem. See Figure 3
for a sample prompt where the LLM self-generates both knowledge and exemplars.


problem end-to-end in one pass. The underlying idea here is that modern LLMs have already acquired
knowledge of various problems during training. Explicitly prompting them to recall relevant problems
and solutions in the context guides LLMs to perform in-context learning to solve new problems.
 Our proposed approach offers several advantages. It self-generates exemplars and obviates the need for
 manually labeling reasoning exemplars for each task, addressing the challenges faced by 0-shot and few-shot
 CoT. Furthermore, the self-generated exemplars are tailored to individual problems, such as ‘geometry’ or
‘probability’, rather than generic ‘math problems’. This can simplify the complexity associated with recent
 CoT techniques that retrieve relevant exemplars from external data (Zhang et al., 2022b; Shum et al., 2023).
We evaluate the proposed approach in various reasoning-intensive tasks, including mathematical problem
solving in GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), code generation in
Codeforces, and other reasoning tasks in BIG-Bench (Srivastava et al., 2022). We use several base LLMs:
GPT-3.5, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022), and PaLM2 (Anil et al., 2023). Experimental results
show that our approach outperforms 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT across a range of tasks and base LLMs,
achieving an average accuracy gain of +4%. Notably, our approach improves performance on datasets
involving diverse types of reasoning, such as MATH (including algebra, probability, geometry, etc.) and
Codeforces (involving dynamic programming, graph algorithms, etc.). This result suggests the effectiveness
of generating tailored exemplars for individual problems to guide the reasoning process of LLMs.


2       RELATED WORKS

2.1       LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AND PROMPTING

A language model estimates probabilities over text. Recent research has scaled up these models from
hundreds of millions (Devlin et al., 2019) to hundreds of billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020) and
expanded training data to include web texts and instruction data (Gao et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022;
Chung et al., 2022). These advances have made large language models proficient in various NLP tasks.
LLMs with hundreds of billions of parameters demonstrate in-context learning and few-shot learning
abilities (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Su et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a; Yasunaga
et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023). They use input prompts (instructions or a few exemplars) to guide LLMs
to generate desired responses for tasks, marking the advent of the prompting era. Our approach harnesses
the in-context learning abilities of LLMs to guide their reasoning process using self-generated exemplars.
Closely related to ours are works that perform self-generation in LLM prompting (Sun et al., 2022; He et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a). For instance, Sun et al. (2022) prompts LLMs to recite relevant
facts in context for open-domain question answering. Our idea of self-generating exemplars is related to
recitation, but focuses on recalling problem-solving and reasoning processes rather than factual knowledge.


                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2     CHAIN-OF-THOUGHT PROMPTING

Chain-of-thought (CoT; Wei et al. 2022b) is a prompting strategy that guides LLMs to produce intermediate
reasoning steps towards a final answer, enhancing problem-solving performance. Common instances of
CoT include 0-shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) and few-shot CoT Wei et al. (2022b).
0-shot CoT prompts LLMs with a general instruction like “think step by step” to produce intermediate rea-
soning steps. Few-shot CoT achieves stronger performance by providing multiple exemplars of reasoning
process (question–rationale–answer), leveraging LLMs’ in-context learning abilities. However, it requires
labeled exemplars. Our approach tackles this challenge by prompting LLMs to self-generate exemplars.
Within few-shot CoT, the original approach employs a fixed set of labeled exemplars for all test problems.
Recent work explores retrieval-based CoT, which aims to obtain more relevant exemplars from external
data for each problem (Zhang et al., 2022b; Shum et al., 2023). While our work shares the goal of
providing relevant exemplars, instead of retrieval, we make LLMs self-generate exemplars. Self-generation
offers several advantages: it is simpler, as it does not require external data retrieval, and it is more versatile,
as it can produce not only specific exemplars but also broader insights or knowledge that complement
them. Empirically, our generation-based CoT outperforms retrieval-based CoT, especially with larger
base LLMs, while retrieval-based CoT excels with smaller base LLMs (§6).
Finally, there are other techniques for enhancing CoT, such as self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022) and
least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2022). Our work can complement and integrate with these efforts (Table 8).
Please see §A for additional related works.

3     PRELIMINARIES
We focus on problem-solving tasks, where the objective is to produce a solution y for a given problem
statement x, such as mathematical questions or code generation specifications. The solution may include
both the intermediate reasoning steps or rationale r and the final answer a.
A prompting method φ is a function that maps a problem statement x into a specific textual input φ(x)
for an LLM, which then generates a solution ŷ = LLM(φ(x)). For instance,
    • In 0-shot prompting, φ directly yields x.
    • In 0-shot CoT, φ supplements x with a general instruction, such as “[x] think step by step”.
    • In few-shot CoT, φ supplements x with several labeled exemplars, {(xi,ri,ai)}K i=1 , such as “[x1 ]
      [r1] [a1]...[xK ] [rK ] [aK ] [x]”.
Our aim is to design a prompting method φ that enhances the accuracy of solutions LLMs generate.

4     APPROACH
We introduce analogical prompting, a new prompting approach that automatically provides exemplars
to guide LLMs’ reasoning process. Inspired by how humans recall relevant past experiences when tackling
new problems, our approach makes LLMs self-generate relevant exemplars or knowledge in context,
before proceeding to solve the problem (Figure 1, right). We present two techniques to achieve this:
self-generated exemplars (§4.1) and self-generated knowledge + exemplars (§4.2).

4.1     SELF-GENERATED EXEMPLARS

Our approach is based on the idea that modern LLMs possess a broad range of problem-solving knowledge
acquired during training. Explicitly prompting them to recall or generate relevant problems and solutions
in context aids LLMs to perform in-context learning to solve new problems.
Specifically, given a target problem to solve x, our prompt augments it with instructions like:
      # Problem: [x]
      # Relevant problems: Recall three relevant and distinct problems. For each
      problem, describe it and explain the solution.
      # Solve the initial problem:


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For a concrete example, see Figure 2. The LLM first generates several (K) relevant exemplars in the form of
question-rationale-answer sequences (“# Relevant problems:” part of the instruction). Then the model
proceeds to solve the initial problem, leveraging the recalled exemplars in the context (“# Solve the ini-
tial problem:” part of the instruction). Note that all these instructions are provided within a single prompt,
allowing the LLM to generate relevant problems and solution to the initial problem in one continuous pass.
Using ‘#’ symbols in the prompt (e.g., ‘# Relevant Problems’) helps LLMs structure the response better.
Below are key technical decisions we made:
    • Generating relevant and diverse exemplars is important: To achieve this, we explicitly include an
      instruction in the prompt, such as “generate problems that are distinct from each other” (e.g., Figure
      2). This step is crucial as some LLMs have a tendency to repetitively generate identical problems,
      which can be misleading when solving the target problem.
    • Single-pass vs. independent exemplar generation: An alternative approach is to independently generate
      exemplars by separately sampling them from the LLM and then re-prompting the LLM with all
      the exemplars. While this method does work, our current single-pass prompt approach achieves
      comparable performance and offers greater convenience, eliminating the need for multiple prompts.
      Consequently, we have chosen to adopt the single-pass method.
    • The number of exemplars to generate (K): Through experimentation, we have found that generating
      K = 3 to 5 exemplars works the best (more details in §6.5).
Our approach offers two advantages. It offers detailed exemplars of reasoning without manual labeling,
addressing the challenges in 0-shot and few-shot CoT. The generated exemplars are tailored to individual
problems (e.g., ‘geometry’ or ‘probability’), offering more relevant guidance than traditional few-shot
CoT, which uses fixed exemplars (e.g., general math problems; Figure 1, middle).

4.2     SELF-GENERATED KNOWLEDGE + EXEMPLARS

While generating exemplars is useful, in complex tasks like code generation, LLMs may overly rely on
the low-level exemplars and fail to generalize when solving the target problems. To address this challenge,
we also allow LLMs to self-generate high-level takeaways that complements the exemplars, which we refer
to as “knowledge.” Specifically, we enhance the prompt with an additional instruction like the following.
For a concrete example, see Figure 3.
      # Tutorial: Identify core concepts in the problem and provide a tutorial.
One technical consideration is whether to generate knowledge before or after exemplars. We found that
generating knowledge before exemplars yields superior results (Table 7). By generating knowledge first,
LLMs identify the core concepts of the problem. This, in turn, helps LLMs generate exemplars that align
more closely in terms of the fundamental problem-solving approaches rather than surface-level lexical
similarities. For further discussion, please refer to §6.2.

5     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
5.1     TASKS

We evaluate the proposed approach in diverse reasoning-intensive tasks, including mathematical problem
solving, code generation, and other reasoning tasks like logical and temporal reasoning.
Mathematical problem solving. We use popular benchmarks, GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), comprising
elementary math word problems, and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), consisting of advanced math
problems from high school math competitions. For each problem, we obtain an output from LLMs using
a temperature of 0, and report the accuracy.
Code generation. Code generation involves synthesizing programs to solve algorithmic problems.
Competitive programming is especially challenging, requiring reasoning about various algorithms like
dynamic programming and graphs (Li et al., 2022b; Kulal et al., 2019; Yasunaga & Liang, 2020).
As a benchmark, we collected competitive programming problems from codeforces.com (details in §B).
We focus on level-A problems published in 2023 to prevent test set contamination (Magar & Schwartz,
2022). Each problem comprises a problem statement, which serves as input to LLMs, and a set of test
cases to assess generated code. The correctness of code is determined by whether it passes all test cases.


                                                      4
                                Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                       Our Prompt: Self-generate Exemplars
 about the core concepts in      Your task is to tackle mathematical problems. When presented with a math problem, recall relevant problems as examples. Afterward,
                                 proceed to solve the initial problem.

                                 # Problem:
 the following conditions are    An airline serves a dinner to all the passengers on an airplane. They get their choice of steak or fish. Three steak meals and three
on, print the smallest.          fish meals are set aside for the six-member crew. If the meals are distributed to the crew members randomly, what is the probability
                                 that both pilots get the fish?

                                 # Instructions:
                                 ## Relevant Problems:
                                 Recall three examples of math problems that are relevant to the initial problem. Your problems should be distinct from each other and
                                 from the initial problem (e.g., involving different numbers and names). For each problem:
                                 - After "Q: ", describe the problem
                                 - After "A: ", explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \boxed{}.

blem, describe the problem,      ## Solve the Initial Problem:
                                 Q: Copy and paste the initial problem here.
                                 A: Explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \boxed{} here.



                                       Output by GPT3.5-turbo
                                 Relevant Problems:                                                                                  Self-generated Exemplars
                                 Q: In a bag, there are 5 red balls and 3 blue balls. If two balls are drawn at random without replacement, what is the probability
                                 that both balls are red?
elf-generated Lessons            A: The total number of balls is 8. The probability of drawing a red ball on the first draw is 5/8. After one red ball is drawn, there
                                 are 4 red balls left out of 7 total balls. Therefore, the probability of drawing a second red ball is 4/7. The probability of both
n array. The algorithm works     events happening is the product of the individual probabilities, so the probability of drawing two red balls is (5/8) * (4/7) =
ation, the current element is    \boxed{\frac{5}{14}}.
s track of the product of all
the input array. ......          Q: A box contains 10 red marbles and 5 blue marbles. If three marbles are drawn at random without replacement, what is the probability
                                 that all three marbles are red?
f-generated Exemplars            A: The total number of marbles is 15. The probability of drawing a red marble on the first draw is 10/15. After one red marble is
                                 drawn, there are 9 red marbles left out of 14 total marbles. Therefore, the probability of drawing a second red marble is 9/14. After
1, and then iterate through      two red marbles are drawn, there are 8 red marbles left out of 13 total marbles. Therefore, the probability of drawing a third red
                                 marble is 8/13. The probability of all three events happening is the product of the individual probabilities, so the probability of
                                 drawing three red marbles is (10/15) * (9/14) * (8/13) = \boxed{\frac{24}{91}}.

                                 Q: A bag contains 4 green marbles, 3 red marbles, and 2 blue marbles. If two marbles are drawn at random without replacement, what is
                                 the probability that both marbles are green?
                                 A: The total number of marbles is 9. The probability of drawing a green marble on the first draw is 4/9. After one green marble is
                                 drawn, there are 3 green marbles left out of 8 total marbles. Therefore, the probability of drawing a second green marble is 3/8. The
                                 probability of both events happening is the product of the individual probabilities, so the probability of drawing two green marbles
                                 is (4/9) * (3/8) = \boxed{\frac{1}{6}}.

                                 Let's solve the following math problem:
                                 An airline serves a dinner to all the passengers on an airplane. They get their choice of steak or fish. Three steak meals and three
target.                          fish meals are set aside for the six-member crew. If the meals are distributed to the crew members randomly, what is the probability
                                 that both pilots get the fish?
                                 A: There are a total of 6 crew members, so the probability of the first pilot getting the fish is 3/6. After one fish meal is given to
efix of the array is equal to    the first pilot, there are 2 fish meals left out of 5 total meals. Therefore, the probability of the second pilot getting the fish is
                                 2/5. The probability of both events happening is the product of the individual probabilities, so the probability that both pilots get
                                 the fish is (3/6) * (2/5) = \boxed{\frac{1}{5}}.



                                Figure 2: Actual example of our prompt (top) and LLM output (bottom) for MATH task. Top: Our prompt
                                supplements the problem statement with instructions to generate relevant exemplars and then solve the
                                problem. Bottom: Exemplars generated by GPT3.5-turbo are indeed relevant to the problem, focusing on
                                probability. It then accurately solves the problem. See §D.1 for the complete prompt and output. Using ‘#’
                                symbols in the prompt (e.g., ‘# Relevant Problems’) helps LLMs structure the response better.

                                In line with existing work on code generation (Li et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2023), we report the Acc@1
                                and Acc@10 metrics. Acc@k measures whether at least one of the k sampled model outputs is correct.
                                For each problem, we sample 10 outputs from LLMs, using a temperature of 0.7.
                                Other reasoning tasks. We further evaluate on various reasoning tasks in BIG-Bench (Srivastava et al.,
                                2022; Suzgun et al., 2022): word sorting, logical deduction five objects, temporal sequences, reasoning
                                about colored objects, and formal fallacies. These tasks are diverse and may not have dedicated training
                                data, so they align well with our approach of self-generating custom exemplars. For each problem, we
                                obtain an output from LLMs using a temperature of 0, and report the accuracy.

                                5.2   MODELS

                                We experiment with several base LLMs: GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022)
                                (version 0613, accessed in June–September 2023), and PaLM 2-L (Anil et al., 2023).

                                5.3   METHODS TO COMPARE

                                We compare the following prompting methods, including ours.
                                0-shot and 0-shot CoT. These methods, like ours, do not use labeled exemplars. We aim to show that
                                our method offers more tailored guidance for LLM reasoning and yields superior task performance.


                                                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

        Our Prompt: Self-generate Exemplars + Knowledge                                                                                                Our Prompt: Self-generate Ex
  Your goal is to write Python3 code to solve competitive programming problems. Given a problem, explain the core concepts in it and provide     Your task is to tackle mathemati
  other relevant problems. Then solve the original problem.                                                                                      proceed to solve the initial pro

  # Problem:                                                                                                                                     # Problem:
  You are given a sequence a_1, a_2, …, a_n. Each element of a is 1 or 2. Find out if an integer k exists so that the following conditions are   An airline serves a dinner to al
  met. 1 ≤ k ≤ n-1, and a_1 ⋅ a_2 … a_k = a_{k+1} … a_n. If there exist multiple k that satisfy the given condition, print the smallest.         fish meals are set aside for the
                                                                                                                                                 that both pilots get the fish?
  # Instruction:
  ## Algorithms:                                                                                                                                 # Instructions:
  Identify the core concepts or algorithms used to solve the problem.                                                                            ## Relevant Problems:
                                                                                                                                                 Recall three examples of math pr
  ## Tutorial:                                                                                                                                   from the initial problem (e.g.,
  Write a tutorial about these algorithms.                                                                                                       - After "Q: ", describe the prob
                                                                                                                                                 - After "A: ", explain the solut
  ## Example Problems:
  Provide three examples of relevant competitive programming problems that involve these algorithms. For each problem, describe the problem,     ## Solve the Initial Problem:
  explain the solution in detail, and then write the correct Python3 code.                                                                       Q: Copy and paste the initial pr
                                                                                                                                                 A: Explain the solution and encl
  ## Python3 code to solve the original problem:
  - Explanation of the solution:
  - Python3 code to solve the problem:
                                                                                                                                                       Output by GPT3.5-turbo
                                                                                                                                                 Relevant Problems:
        Output by GPT3.5-turbo                                                                                                                   Q: In a bag, there are 5 red bal
                                                                                                                                                 that both balls are red?
  ## Algorithms: The core algorithm for solving this problem is the prefix product algorithm.
                                                                                                            Self-generated Knowledge             A: The total number of balls is
                                                                                                                                                 are 4 red balls left out of 7 to
  ## Tutorial: The prefix product algorithm is used to calculate the product of all the elements in a prefix of an array. The algorithm works    events happening is the product
  by initializing a variable "prefix" to 1, and then iterating through the array from left to right. At each iteration, the current element is   \boxed{\frac{5}{14}}.
  multiplied with the prefix, and the result is stored in the prefix variable. This way, the prefix variable keeps track of the product of all
  the elements in the prefix of the array. The time complexity of this algorithm is O(n), where n is the size of the input array. ......         Q: A box contains 10 red marbles
                                                                                                                                                 that all three marbles are red?
  ## Example Problems:                                                                                        Self-generated Exemplars           A: The total number of marbles i
  1. Problem: Given an array of integers, find the product of all the elements in each subarray of size k.                                       drawn, there are 9 red marbles l
     Solution: We can use the prefix product algorithm to solve this problem. We initialize a prefix variable to 1, and then iterate through     two red marbles are drawn, there
  the array from left to right. At each iteration, we multiply the current element with the prefix, ......                                       marble is 8/13. The probability
                                                                                                                                                 drawing three red marbles is (10
  def product_of_subarrays(arr, k):
      prefix = 1                                                                                                                                 Q: A bag contains 4 green marble
      result = []                                                                                                                                the probability that both marble
      for i in range(len(arr)):                                                                                                                  A: The total number of marbles i
          prefix = prefix * arr[i]                                                                                                               drawn, there are 3 green marbles
          if i >= k-1:                                                                                                                           probability of both events happe
              result.append(prefix)                                                                                                              is (4/9) * (3/8) = \boxed{\frac{
              prefix = prefix // arr[i-k+1]
      return result                                                                                                                              Let's solve the following math p
                                                                                                                                                 An airline serves a dinner to al
  2. Problem: Given an array of integers, find the longest subarray with a product less than or equal to a given target.                         fish meals are set aside for the
     Solution: ......                                                                                                                            that both pilots get the fish?
                                                                                                                                                 A: There are a total of 6 crew m
  3. Problem: Given an array of integers, find the smallest k such that the product of all the elements in the prefix of the array is equal to   the first pilot, there are 2 fis
  the product of all the elements in the suffix of the array.                                                                                    2/5. The probability of both eve
     Solution: ......                                                                                                                            the fish is (3/6) * (2/5) = \box

  ## Python3 code to solve the original problem:
  Explanation of the solution:
    - Initialize prefix and suffix variables to 1, and k to -1.
    - Calculate the product of all the elements in the sequence using the prefix product algorithm.
    - Iterate through the sequence from right to left.
      - Update the prefix and suffix variables.
      - If the prefix is equal to the suffix, update k to the current index.
    - Print the value of k.

  t = int(input())
  for _ in range(t):
      n = int(input())
      arr = list(map(int, input().split()))
      prefix, suffix = 1, 1
      k = -1
      for i in range(n):
          prefix = prefix * arr[i]
      for i in range(n-1, 0, -1):
          prefix = prefix // arr[i]
          suffix = suffix * arr[i]
          if prefix == suffix:
               k = i
      print(k)


Figure 3: Actual example of our prompt (top) and LLM output (bottom) for the Codeforces task. Top: Our
prompt supplements the problem statement with instructions to generate knowledge (e.g., tutorials on core
concepts) and relevant exemplars, followed by solving the original problem. Bottom: The knowledge
and exemplars generated by GPT3.5-turbo are indeed relevant to the problem to solve, focusing on the
prefix product algorithm. The final code generated by the LLM effectively applies the algorithm to solve
the problem. See §D.3 for the complete prompt and output.

Few-shot CoT. This is the standard few-shot CoT, using a fixed set of reasoning exemplars across all
test problems within a dataset. For the GSM8K and MATH datasets, as their training sets include solutions
labeled with reasoning steps, we use K = 5 exemplars from these training sets. For the other datasets,
we use K = 3 manually-annotated exemplars. We aim to show that our method, which self -generates
exemplars, can match or surpass this baseline, which uses labeled exemplars.
Few-shot retrieved CoT. Instead of using a fixed set of exemplars, for each test problem, we dynamically
retrieve relevant labeled problem-solution pairs from the train set for each test problem. Specifically, we


                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                      GSM8K Accuracy                       MATH Accuracy
       Prompting Method
                                          GPT3.5-turbo text-davinci-003 PaLM2           GPT3.5-turbo     PaLM2
       0-shot                                 75.0%            14.8%        60.8%          33.0%         27.1%
       0-shot CoT                             75.8%            50.3%        78.2%          33.9%         29.8%
       5-shot CoT                             76.7%            54.0%        80.7%          34.9%         34.3%
       Ours: Self-generated Exemplars         77.8%            61.0%†      81.7%           37.3%         34.8%

Table 1: Performance on mathematical tasks, GSM8K and MATH. Our prompting method, which self-generates
exemplars, outperforms baselines such as 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT. † For text-davinci models, we use an in-context
demonstration of how to generate exemplars. For the other models, we do not.

                                                                GPT3.5-turbo-16k              GPT4
            Prompting Method
                                                               Acc@1      Acc@10        Acc@1      Acc@10
            0-shot                                                  8%        24%          16%          30%
            0-shot CoT                                              9%        27%          16%          29%
            3-shot CoT                                             11%        27%          17%          31%
            Ours: Self-generated Exemplars                         13%        25%          17%          32%
            Ours: Self-generated Knowledge + Exemplars             15%        29%          19%          37%

Table 2: Performance on Codeforces code generation task. Our prompting method outperforms baselines such as
0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT. Moreover, self-generating knowledge provides additional gains over self-generating
exemplars, demonstrating its usefulness for the challenging Codeforces task.

                                          Word        Logical deduction   Temporal    Reasoning about    Formal
       Prompting Method
                                          sorting     five objects        sequences   colored objects    fallacies
       0-shot                              66.8%           30.0%           40.4%          50.4%          53.6%
       0-shot CoT                          67.6%           35.2%           44.8%          61.6%          55.6%
       3-shot CoT                          68.4%           36.4%           58.0%          62.0%          55.6%
       Ours: Self-generated Exemplars     75.2%            41.6%           57.6%          68.0%          58.8%

Table 3: Performance on BIG-Bench reasoning tasks in accuracy. GPT3.5-turbo is used as the base LLM. Across
diverse tasks, our method outperforms baselines (0-shot CoT) and is competitive with manual 3-shot CoT.

use Sentence-BERT (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) to encode each problem statement. For each problem
in the test set, we retrieve the top K =5 similar problems from the training set based on cosine similarity.
Our method. We let LLMs self-generate K = 5 exemplars for GSM8K and K = 3 exemplars for
MATH and BIG-Bench tasks. For Codeforces, we self-generate both knowledge and K =3 exemplars.

6     RESULTS
6.1   MAIN RESULTS

Mathematical problem solving. Table 1 presents results for GSM8K and MATH tasks. Our prompting
method, which self-generates exemplars, outperforms baselines such as 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT.
The improvement over few-shot CoT is notable for the MATH task, which involves a range of reasoning
types, including algebra, probability, and geometry. This aligns with our approach of crafting tailored
exemplars for each problem.
Figure 1 and 2 provide qualitative examples of GPT3.5-turbo outputs generated using our prompt. In
both examples, the LLM indeed generates relevant exemplars (geometry problems in Figure 1. probability
problems in Figure 2), and subsequently produces correct solutions. In contrast, in the standard few-shot
CoT (Figure 1, middle), the exemplars are math-related (e.g., algebra) but may not always match the test
problem (e.g., geometry), as the dataset contains diverse test problems.
Code generation. Table 2 presents results for Codeforces task. Our prompting method outperforms
baselines such as 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT in both GPT3.5-turbo and GPT4. Moreover, self-generating
knowledge provides additional performance boost over self-generating exemplars, demonstrating its
usefulness for the challenging Codeforces task. With our prompting method, GPT3.5-turbo achieves
competitive performance with GPT4, with a 15% Acc@1 compared to GPT4’s 16% Acc@1.
Figure 3 (more complete version in §D.3) provides a qualitative example of GPT3.5-turbo output generated
using our prompt. The knowledge and exemplars generated by GPT3.5-turbo are indeed relevant to


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                             (← scale down)                                             (scale up →)
            Prompting Method
                                             text-curie-001   text-davinci-001   text-davinci-002   text-davinci-003
            0-shot                                     2%                 6%                13%                14%
            0-shot CoT                                 2%                 6%                22%                50%
            5-shot (fixed) CoT                         2%                10%                43%                54%
            5-shot retrieved CoT                       3%                11%                47%                57%
            Ours: Self-generated Exemplars             2%                 9%                48%                61%

Table 4: Performance analysis using GSM8K task. Across varied scales / strengths of base LLMs (increasing
from left to right), our prompting method outperforms 0-shot CoT and standard few-shot CoT with fixed exemplars.
Self-generated exemplars vs. retrieved exemplars: our method, with self-generated exemplars, performs better with
larger-scale LLMs, while few-shot CoT with retrieved exemplars performs better with smaller-scale LLMs.


the problem to solve, focusing on the prefix product algorithm. The final code generated by the LLM
effectively applies the algorithm to solve the problem. In contrast, in the 0-shot CoT baseline, the LLM
output does not recall relevant exemplars and fails to employ the prefix product algorithm, resulting in
an incorrect solution (§D.3).
BIG-Bench reasoning tasks. Table 3 presents results for BIG-Bench tasks. Our prompting method
outperforms baselines like 0-shot CoT, confirming its effectiveness across a wide range of tasks. Our
method is also competitive with manual few-shot CoT. §D.4 offers GPT3.5-turbo output examples for
the deductive reasoning task (“BIG-Bench formal fallacies”). Using our prompting method, the LLM
generates relevant deductive reasoning exemplars. Conversely, 0-shot CoT, with no relevant exemplars,
tends to adopt an incorrect approach to address the deductive reasoning problem.

6.2   KNOWLEDGE CAN COMPLEMENT EXEMPLARS

Generating knowledge alongside exemplars is particularly useful in Codeforces task (Table 2), where
LLMs need to apply nontrivial algorithms for code generation. In our qualitative analysis, we observe two
concrete advantages of generating knowledge: (1) knowledge act as high-level takeaways that complement
low-level exemplars, which prevents LLMs from overly relying on specific exemplars and helps to
generalize to new problems; (2) when generating knowledge, LLMs identify the core concepts of the
problem and produce exemplars that align more closely in fundamental problem-solving approaches
(e.g., the prefix product algorithm in Figure 3), rather than surface-level lexical similarities (e.g., without
knowledge, LLMs tend to produce exemplars on palindromic sequences).
The performance gains achieved by generating knowledge are less significant in other tasks like GSM8K
and BIG-Bench, however, likely because these tasks are less complex.

6.3   GENERATING VS RETRIEVING EXEMPLARS

A key motivation behind our idea of self-generating exemplars is its ability to offer relevant exemplars
for problem solving. An alternative approach is to retrieve relevant exemplars from external data, provided
there is a labeled dataset of exemplars (e.g., the training set of GSM8K, which includes solutions labeled
with reasoning steps). What trade-offs exist between these two approaches?
The advantage of retrieval lies in its reliability. Exemplars retrieved from a labeled dataset are inherently
valid and correct, unlike generated exemplars, which lack this guarantee. Nevertheless, retrieval typically
needs labeled exemplars and involves the complexity of an additional retrieval step. The performance
may also depend on the specific retriever used.
In contrast, generation is more self-contained and convenient, as it does not rely on external labeled data
or retrieval steps. Additionally, generation may yield exemplars better tailored to specific test problems
because it can draw upon the entire (pre-)training data the LLM has been exposed to. The downside
of generation is that it may fail to produce valid exemplars if the LLMs are weak or have not learned
problems related to the ones to be solved.
Table 4 shows empirical results for GSM8K task, comparing our self-generated exemplars method (“Ours”)
and the few-shot CoT method using exemplars retrieved from the GSM8K train set (“5-shot retrieved CoT”).
We conducted experiments using base LLMs of various scales, from text-curie-001 to text-davinci-003,
where scale broadly indicates the amount of training data and parameter count used by the LLM.
Our method outperforms the retrieved CoT with larger-scale LLMs, such as text-davinci-003. This is
likely because the LLM has effectively learned related tasks during training and can generate useful


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


exemplars. Conversely, with smaller-scale LLMs, the retrieved CoT performs better, and self-generation
fails to produce useful or valid exemplars.

6.4     SCALE OF BASE LLMS: ANALOGICAL PROMPTING EXCELS WITH LARGER MODELS

Table 4 presents the result of using varying scales and strengths of base LLMs, ranging from text-curie-001
to text-davinci-001 to text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003 (more parameters and training data). Our
prompting method surpasses vanilla 0-shot and 0-shot CoT across all scales. When using smaller-scale
LLMs (text-curie-001 and text-davinci-001), few-shot CoT leveraging labeled exemplars exhibits
superior performance compared to ours. However, as the LLMs are scaled up to text-davinci-002 and
text-davinci-003, our method outperforms few-shot CoT. This is due to the LLMs’ enhanced ability to
self-generate more relevant and useful exemplars.

                                                                       # Exemplars to
6.5     NUMBER OF EXEMPLARS TO GENERATE                                  self-generate
                                                                                         GSM8K     MATH

                                                                        K =1              76.1      34.8
In Table 5, we analyze the effect of varying the number of              K =2              77.0      36.7
self-generated exemplars (K) in our approach. When K =1,                K =3              77.5      37.3
the LLM underperforms due to excessive reliance on a single             K =4              77.3      37.0
                                                                        K =5              77.8      37.1
exemplar generated. When K ≥3, the LLM demonstrates con-
sistent performance. This observation aligns with the findings     Table 5: Analyzing the effect of varying the
in the standard few-shot in-context learning in LLMs (Brown        number of self-generated exemplars (K) in
et al., 2020).                                                     our approach. We assess performance on
                                                                   GSM8K and MATH tasks using GPT3.5-
                                                                   turbo as the base LLM.
6.6     QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS

We manually analyzed the performance of our prompting approach, based on a random sample of 50
correctly and 50 incorrectly solved problems from GSM8K + MATH (50%, 50%).
50 correctly solved problems:
    • (6/50) Generated exemplars are irrelevant
    • (9/50) Generated exemplars are relevant but contain incorrect solutions
    • (35/50) Generated exemplars are relevant and correct
50 incorrectly solved problems:

    • (10/50) Generated exemplars are irrelevant
    • (12/50) Generated exemplars are relevant but contain incorrect solutions
    • (28/50) Generated exemplars are relevant and correct, but LLM fails to solve the new problem:
        – (12/50) A generalization gap between the exemplars and the new problem
        – (8/50) Overreliance on specific exemplars, leading to misdirection
        – (8/50) Other issues, such as calculation errors

The generated exemplars were often relevant or correct. A common failure occurred when the LLM could
not solve the new problem due to a generalization gap (e.g., the new problem is harder than the exemplars).
This observation motivates future research to generate exemplars that not only possess relevance but also
facilitate generalization for solving new problems.


7     CONCLUSION

We introduced analogical prompting, a new language model prompting approach that self-generates
relevant reasoning exemplars for solving problems. This approach provides detailed, customized exemplars
for individual problems without requiring labeled data, effectively addressing the challenges faced by
existing 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT prompting methods. Experimental results show that our approach
outperforms 0-shot CoT and few-shot CoT in various reasoning tasks, including math problem solving,
code generation, and other logical/temporal reasoning tasks.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8    LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

One limitation of our approach is increased inference computation, as our approach generates more tokens
than vanilla 0-shot and 0-shot CoT prompting. Compared to few-shot CoT, we use fewer input tokens and
more output tokens, as exemplars are counted as input in few-shot CoT and as output in our approach.
Another limitation is that self-generation can fail if the LLM lacks sufficient strength or has not learned
relevant knowledge to the new problems to solve. Conversely, with a stronger LLM, it can draw upon
relevant prior knowledge to tackle slightly more complex problems. Therefore, our approach is better
suited for stronger or larger-scale LLMs.
Finally, it is known that LLM performance can be influenced by specific prompt phrases used to query the
model (Jiang et al., 2020), and our work is also subject to this prompt sensitivity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Qian Huang, Chen Liang, Andrew Dai and other colleagues at Google DeepMind, Stanford
SNAP and P-Lambda groups for valuable feedback on this work.

REFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak
  Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen
   Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Jiang Bian, Bin Gao, and Tie-Yan Liu. Knowledge-powered deep learning for word embedding. In
   Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2014,
   Nancy, France, September 15-19, 2014. Proceedings, Part I 14, pp. 132–148. Springer, 2014.

Léon Bottou. From machine learning to machine reasoning: An essay. Machine learning, 94:133–149,
   2014.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
  Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
  Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
  Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
  Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia
  Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.

Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as tool
  makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.

Jaime G Carbonell. Learning by analogy: Formulating and generalizing plans from past experience. In
   Machine learning, pp. 137–161. Elsevier, 1983.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan,
 Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models
 trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting: Disen-
 tangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12588,
 2022.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Xinyun Chen, Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu, Denny Zhou, Dawn Song, and Quoc V Le. Neural symbolic
  reader: Scalable integration of distributed and symbolic representations for reading comprehension. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.

Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, Chengzu Li, Rahul Nadkarni, Yushi Hu, Caiming Xiong, Dragomir
  Radev, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, et al. Binding language models in symbolic languages. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.02875, 2022.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
  Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
  Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vin-
  odkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
  Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
  Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
  Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
  David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana
  Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
  Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei,
  Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language
  modeling with pathways, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi Wang,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
  Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
  Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
   bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
   the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.
   org/N19-1423.

Andrew Drozdov, Nathanael Schärli, Ekin Akyürek, Nathan Scales, Xinying Song, Xinyun Chen, Olivier
  Bousquet, and Denny Zhou. Compositional semantic parsing with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.15003, 2022.

Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Drop:
  A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1903.00161, 2019.

Kevin Dunbar. The analogical paradox: Why analogy is so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the
  psychological laboratory. The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science, pp. 313–334, 2001.

Yanlin Feng, Xinyue Chen, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peifeng Wang, Jun Yan, and Xiang Ren. Scalable multi-
  hop relational reasoning for knowledge-aware question answering. In Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile: An 800gb
  dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2101.00027, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/Arxiv-2101.00027.


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dedre Gentner. Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2):155–170,
  1983.
Dedre Gentner and Keith J Holyoak. Reasoning and learning by analogy: Introduction. American
  psychologist, 52(1):32, 1997.
Dedre Gentner and Arthur B Markman. Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American psycholo-
  gist, 52(1):45, 1997.
Kavi Gupta, Peter Ebert Christensen, Xinyun Chen, and Dawn Song. Synthesize, execute and debug:
  Learning to repair for neural program synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:17685–17695, 2020.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992, 2023.
Zhiwei He, Tian Liang, Wenxiang Jiao, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Rui Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Shuming
  Shi, and Xing Wang. Exploring human-like translation strategy with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.04118, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin Burns,
  Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, et al. Measuring coding challenge competence with apps. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2105.09938, 2021a.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.03874, 2021b.
Keith J Holyoak. Analogy and relational reasoning. The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning, pp.
  234–259, 2012.
Xiaoyang Hu, Shane Storks, Richard L Lewis, and Joyce Chai. In-context analogical reasoning with
  pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17626, 2023.
Ziqi Huang, Hongyuan Zhu, Ying Sun, Dongkyu Choi, Cheston Tan, and Joo-Hwee Lim. A diagnostic
  study of visual question answering with analogical reasoning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference
  on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2463–2467. IEEE, 2021.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language models
  know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.
Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin
   Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2205.11822, 2022.
Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and Matei
 Zaharia. Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive
 nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024, 2022.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02406, 2022.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.
Hyuhng Joon Kim, Hyunsoo Cho, Junyeob Kim, Taeuk Kim, Kang Min Yoo, and Sang-goo Lee. Self-
  generated in-context learning: Leveraging auto-regressive language models as a demonstration generator.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08082, 2022.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large language
  models are zero-shot reasoners. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS 2022), 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11916.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy S Liang.
  Spoc: Search-based pseudocode to code. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Junlong Li, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Hai Zhao. Self-prompting large language models for open-domain qa.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08635, 2022a.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles,
  James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with
  alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022b.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy
  Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, and Ilya Sutskever.     Improving mathematical rea-
  soning with process supervision.     2023.     URL https://openai.com/research/
  improving-mathematical-reasoning-with-process-supervision.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Xinyue Chen, Jamin Chen, and Xiang Ren. Kagnet: Knowledge-aware graph networks
  for commonsense reasoning. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2019.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, William B Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO
   2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning Architectures,
   pp. 100–114, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.deelio-1.10. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   deelio-1.10.
Inbal Magar and Roy Schwartz. Data contamination: From memorization to exploitation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.08242, 2022.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, 2022. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.244. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.
Tom M Mitchell, Jaime G Carbonell, Ryszard S Michalski, and Rogers Hall. Analogical reasoning in the
  context of acquiring problem solving expertise. Machine Learning: A Guide to Current Research, pp.
  85–88, 1986.
Michael Moor, Qian Huang, Shirley Wu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yash Dalmia, Jure Leskovec, Cyril Zakka,
  Eduardo Pontes Reis, and Pranav Rajpurkar. Med-flamingo: a multimodal medical few-shot learner. In
 Machine Learning for Health (ML4H), pp. 353–367. PMLR, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions
  with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03442,
  2023.
George Polya. How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method, volume 85. Princeton university
  press, 2004.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring and
  narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350, 2022.
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Diyi Yang. Is
  chatgpt a general-purpose natural language processing task solver? arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06476,
  2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
  9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3982–3992,
  Hong Kong, China, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1410. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.
Hongyu Ren, Hanjun Dai, Bo Dai, Xinyun Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, Haitian Sun, Dale Schuurmans, Jure
  Leskovec, and Denny Zhou. Lego: Latent execution-guided reasoning for multi-hop question answering
  on knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
  Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Rich James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettle-
 moyer, and Wen-tau Yih. Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2301.12652, 2023.
KaShun Shum, Shizhe Diao, and Tong Zhang. Automatic prompt augmentation and selection with
  chain-of-thought from labeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12822, 2023.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch,
  Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the imitation game:
  Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615,
  2022.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi, Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari Ostendorf,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. Selective annotation makes language models better few-shot
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.01975.
Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. Recitation-augmented language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01296, 2022.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks and
 whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa: A question
  answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00937, 2018.
Stella Vosniadou and Andrew Ortony. Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge University Press,
  1989.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
  and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Thomas B Ward, Steven M Smith, and Jyotsna Ed Vaid. Creative thought: An investigation of conceptual
  structures and processes. American Psychological Association, 1997.
Taylor Webb, Keith J Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. Emergent analogical reasoning in large language models.
  Nature Human Behaviour, pp. 1–16, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M.
   Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain
   of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural
   Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022), 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Yuhuai Wu, Markus N Rabe, Wenda Li, Jimmy Ba, Roger B Grosse, and Christian Szegedy. Lime:
  Learning inductive bias for primitives of mathematical reasoning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 11251–11262. PMLR, 2021.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianbao Xie, Chen Henry Wu, Peng Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Torsten Scholak, Michihiro Yasunaga, Chien-Sheng
  Wu, Ming Zhong, Pengcheng Yin, Sida I Wang, et al. Unifiedskg: Unifying and multi-tasking structured
   knowledge grounding with text-to-text language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05966, 2022.

Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600, 2018.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
  Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.

Michihiro Yasunaga and Percy Liang. Graph-based, self-supervised program repair from diagnostic
  feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 10799–10808. PMLR, 2020.

Michihiro Yasunaga and Percy Liang. Break-it-fix-it: Unsupervised learning for program repair. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11941–11952. PMLR, 2021.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Hongyu Ren, Antoine Bosselut, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. QA-GNN:
  Reasoning with language models and knowledge graphs for question answering. In North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2021.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Antoine Bosselut, Hongyu Ren, Xikun Zhang, Christopher D Manning, Percy S
  Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Deep bidirectional language-knowledge graph pretraining. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37309–37323, 2022a.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Jure Leskovec, and Percy Liang. LinkBERT: Pretraining language models with
  document links. In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2022b.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Armen Aghajanyan, Weijia Shi, Rich James, Jure Leskovec, Percy Liang, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. Retrieval-augmented multimodal language modeling. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.

Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingning
  Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain
  semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.08887, 2018.

Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D Goodman, and Nick Haber. Parsel: A unified natural
   language framework for algorithmic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10561, 2022.

Hanlin Zhang, Jiani Huang, Ziyang Li, Mayur Naik, and Eric Xing. Improved logical reasoning of language
  models via differentiable symbolic programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03742, 2023.

Xikun Zhang, Antoine Bosselut, Michihiro Yasunaga, Hongyu Ren, Percy Liang, Christopher D Manning,
  and Jure Leskovec. Greaselm: Graph reasoning enhanced language models for question answering. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022a.

Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03493, 2022b.

Wenting Zhao, Mor Geva, Bill Yuchen Lin, Michihiro Yasunaga, Aman Madaan, and Tao Yu. Complex
 reasoning in natural language. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (Volume 6: Tutorial Abstracts), pp. 11–20, Toronto, Canada, July 2023.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-tutorials.2. URL https://
 aclanthology.org/2023.acl-tutorials.2.

Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Zimu Lu, Weikang Shi, Sichun Luo, Zipeng Qin, Shaoqing Lu, Anya Jia, Linqi
  Song, Mingjie Zhan, et al. Solving challenging math word problems using gpt-4 code interpreter with
  code-based self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07921, 2023.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  10625.


A     ADDITIONAL RELATED WORKS

A.1    LANGUAGE MODELS AND REASONING

Reasoning involves the application of knowledge to derive solutions for new problems, often through a
series of steps. Teaching language models to reason has been a long-standing area of research (Bottou,
2014; Zhao et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022b).
To assess the reasoning capabilities of language models, researchers have created datasets for various tasks
that demand reasoning skills. These tasks include multi-step question answering (Yang et al., 2018; Dua
et al., 2019; Talmor et al., 2018), mathematical problem-solving (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al.,
2021b), and code generation (Yu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Austin et al.,
2021). In this study, we evaluate our methods using these diverse datasets.
To teach language models to reason effectively, one line of approaches involve training or fine-tuning
them. This can include using reasoning-intensive data during training (Wu et al., 2021; Yasunaga et al.,
2022b; Lightman et al., 2023; Moor et al., 2023), retrieving structured knowledge (Lin et al., 2019; Feng
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022a; Yasunaga et al., 2021; 2022a; Xie et al., 2022), and incorporating external
modules for reasoning such as logic and program execution (Chen et al., 2018; 2019; Yasunaga & Liang,
2020; Gupta et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023).
Recently, with the rise of large language models (LLMs), prompting them to engage in reasoning has
proven effective and gained attention. A common approach is prompting LLMs to generate intermediate
reasoning steps, as demonstrated by the chain-of-thought method (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), which assists LLMs in tackling complex reasoning tasks. Several
studies have extended this approach with more structured algorithms and search methods (Khot et al.,
2022; Drozdov et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Press et al., 2022; Khattab et al., 2022;
Jung et al., 2022), as well as longer-horizon action and planning (Yao et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Park
et al., 2023). Another line of work incorporates tools and programs into the prompting process to facilitate
reasoning (Chen et al., 2023; 2022; Cai et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023;
Schick et al., 2023).
Our work complements these efforts to enhance LLM reasoning and is the first to draw inspiration from
human analogical reasoning to improve LLM prompting.


A.2    ANALOGICAL REASONING

Analogical reasoning is a cognitive process in which humans recall relevant past experiences when facing
new challenges (Gentner & Holyoak, 1997; Gentner, 1983; Holyoak, 2012). This phenomenon has been
studied extensively in psychology, revealing its significance in various cognitive tasks such as problem-
solving (Gentner & Markman, 1997) and creativity (Ward et al., 1997). It is rooted in the capacity to
identify structural and relational similarities between past and current situations, facilitating knowledge
transfer (Dunbar, 2001).
Analogical reasoning has also influenced the development of artificial intelligence and machine learning
algorithms (Carbonell, 1983; Mitchell et al., 1986) and has been employed as a reasoning benchmark for
assessing machine learning models (Bian et al., 2014; Huang et al., 2021). A recent work also evaluates the
ability of language models to identify analogies (Webb et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023).
Our work makes a pioneering effort of applying analogical reasoning principles to enhance language model
inference.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      CODEFORCES DATA COLLECTION
We scraped data from codeforces.com, following the procedure in prior works (Li et al., 2022b; Kulal et al.,
2019; Yasunaga & Liang, 2021). We use Level-A problems that were published between January 2023 and
August 2023. Each problem includes the full problem descriptions and test cases accessible on the website.
The test cases include the public test cases found on the problem page and hidden test cases made available
on the evaluation result pages once a contest is finished. Some of the hidden test cases were truncated
on the website due to excessive input/output length, and we skipped those. We retained problems whose
problem descriptions were within the length of 2000 tokens in GPT3.5-turbo, resulting in 50 problems.
Because this dataset is relatively small, we conduct the evaluation twice and then report the average results.

C      ADDITIONAL RESULTS

                                  Prompting Method                 GSM8K     MATH
                                  Ours: Non-diverse exemplars       75.9%    35.2%
                                  Ours: Diverse exemplars           77.8%    37.3%

         Table 6: Ablation study on the effect of encouraging diversity in self-generating exemplars (§4.1).

                         Prompting Method                                   Acc@1    Acc@10
                         Ours: Self-generate knowledge after exemplars        14%       27%
                         Ours: Self-generate knowledge before exemplars       15%       29%

Table 7: Ablation study on the Codeforces task using GPT3.5-turbo. Self-generating knowledge before exemplars
performs slightly better than self-generating knowledge after exemplars (§4.2).


                                     Prompting Method           GSM8K       MATH
                                     Ours                        77.8%      37.3%
                                     Ours + Self-consistency     85.3%      46.0%

    Table 8: Self-consistency can be used to further boost the performance of our analogical prompting approach.


D      FULL EXAMPLES
D.1     MATH

Our prompt (self-generate exemplars):
Your task is to tackle mathematical problems . When presented with a math
    problem , recall relevant problems as examples . Afterward , proceed to
    solve the initial problem .

# Initial Problem :
An airline serves a dinner to all the passengers on an airplane . They get
     their choice of steak or fish . Three steak meals and three fish
    meals are set aside for the six - member crew . If the meals are
    distributed to the crew members randomly , what is the probability
    that both pilots get the fish ?

# Instructions :
Make sure to include all of the following points :

## Relevant Problems :
Recall three examples of math problems that are relevant to the initial
    problem . Note that your problems should be distinct from each other
    and from the initial problem (e.g., involving different numbers and
    names ). For each problem :
- After "Q: ", describe the problem


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


- After "A: ", explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \
    boxed {}.

## Solve the Initial Problem :
Say " Let ' s solve the following math problem ." Then formulate your
     response in the following format :
Q : Copy and paste the initial problem here .
A : Explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \ boxed {} here .



Output by GPT3.5-turbo:

Relevant Problems :
Q : In a bag , there are 5 red balls and 3 blue balls . If two balls are
     drawn at random without replacement , what is the probability that
     both balls are red ?
A : The total number of balls is 8. The probability of drawing a red ball
     on the first draw is 5/8. After one red ball is drawn , there are 4
     red balls left out of 7 total balls . Therefore , the probability of
     drawing a second red ball is 4/7. The probability of both events
     happening is the product of the individual probabilities , so the
     probability of drawing two red balls is (5/8) * (4/7) = \ boxed {\ frac
     {5}{14}}.

Q : A box contains 10 red marbles and 5 blue marbles . If three marbles are
      drawn at random without replacement , what is the probability that
     all three marbles are red ?
A : The total number of marbles is 15. The probability of drawing a red
     marble on the first draw is 10/15. After one red marble is drawn ,
     there are 9 red marbles left out of 14 total marbles . Therefore , the
     probability of drawing a second red marble is 9/14. After two red
     marbles are drawn , there are 8 red marbles left out of 13 total
     marbles . Therefore , the probability of drawing a third red marble is
     8/13. The probability of all three events happening is the product of
      the individual probabilities , so the probability of drawing three
     red marbles is (10/15) * (9/14) * (8/13) = \ boxed {\ frac {24}{91}}.

Q : A bag contains 4 green marbles , 3 red marbles , and 2 blue marbles . If
     two marbles are drawn at random without replacement , what is the
     probability that both marbles are green ?
A : The total number of marbles is 9. The probability of drawing a green
     marble on the first draw is 4/9. After one green marble is drawn ,
     there are 3 green marbles left out of 8 total marbles . Therefore , the
      probability of drawing a second green marble is 3/8. The probability
      of both events happening is the product of the individual
     probabilities , so the probability of drawing two green marbles is
     (4/9) * (3/8) = \ boxed {\ frac {1}{6}}.

Let ' s solve the following math problem :
An airline serves a dinner to all the passengers on an airplane . They get
       their choice of steak or fish . Three steak meals and three fish
     meals are set aside for the six - member crew . If the meals are
     distributed to the crew members randomly , what is the probability
     that both pilots get the fish ?
A : There are a total of 6 crew members , so the probability of the first
     pilot getting the fish is 3/6. After one fish meal is given to the
     first pilot , there are 2 fish meals left out of 5 total meals .
     Therefore , the probability of the second pilot getting the fish is
     2/5. The probability of both events happening is the product of the
     individual probabilities , so the probability that both pilots get the
       fish is (3/6) * (2/5) = \ boxed {\ frac {1}{5}}.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   GSM8K

Our prompt (self-generate exemplars):
Your task is to tackle mathematical problems . When presented with a math
    problem , recall relevant problems as examples . Afterward , proceed to
    solve the initial problem .

# Initial Problem :
Kyle bought last year ' s best - selling book for $19 .50. This is with a 25%
    discount from the original price . What was the original price of the
    book ?

# Instructions :
Make sure that your response follows the instructions below .

## Analogous Problems :
Offer five diverse examples of math problems that are relevant or
    analogous to the initial problem . For each problem , elaborate on the
    solution and conclude with the ultimate answer ( enclosed in \ boxed {})
    . For each problem :
- After "Q: ", describe the problem
- After "A: ", explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \
    boxed {}.

## Solve the Initial Problem :
Q : Copy and paste the initial problem here .
A : Explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \ boxed {} here .

Output by GPT3.5-turbo:
Analogous Problems :

Q1 : A shirt is on sale for 20% off the original price of $40 . What is the
      sale price of the shirt ?
A : The original price of the shirt is $40 . With a 20% discount , the
     discount amount is 20% of $40 , which is 0.20 * $40 = $8 . Therefore ,
     the sale price of the shirt is $40 - $8 = $32 . The answer is $ \ boxed
     {32} $ .

Q2 : A store is offering a 15% discount on all items . If a customer buys a
      pair of shoes for $85 , what was the original price of the shoes ?
A : Let 's assume the original price of the shoes is $x . With a 15%
     discount , the discount amount is 15% of $x , which is 0.15 * $x = $0
     .15 x. The sale price of the shoes is $85 , so we can set up the
     equation : $x - $0 .15 x = $85 . Simplifying the equation , we get 0.85 x =
      $85 . Dividing both sides by 0.85 , we find that x = $100 . Therefore ,
     the original price of the shoes was $ \ boxed {100} $ .

Q3 : A restaurant offers a 10% discount on all meals . If a customer pays
     $45 for a meal , what was the original price of the meal ?
A : Let 's assume the original price of the meal is $x . With a 10% discount
     , the discount amount is 10% of $x , which is 0.10 * $x = $0 .10 x. The
     sale price of the meal is $45 , so we can set up the equation : $x - $0
     .10 x = $45 . Simplifying the equation , we get 0.90 x = $45 . Dividing
     both sides by 0.90 , we find that x = $50 . Therefore , the original
     price of the meal was $ \ boxed {50} $ .

Q4 : A laptop is on sale for 30% off the original price of $800 . What is
     the sale price of the laptop ?
A : The original price of the laptop is $800 . With a 30% discount , the
     discount amount is 30% of $800 , which is 0.30 * $800 = $240 .
     Therefore , the sale price of the laptop is $800 - $240 = $560 . The
     answer is $ \ boxed {560} $ .



                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q5 : A toy store is offering a 12% discount on all toys . If a customer
     buys a toy for $22 , what was the original price of the toy ?
A : Let 's assume the original price of the toy is $x . With a 12% discount ,
      the discount amount is 12% of $x , which is 0.12 * $x = $0 .12 x. The
     sale price of the toy is $22 , so we can set up the equation : $x - $0
     .12 x = $22 . Simplifying the equation , we get 0.88 x = $22 . Dividing
     both sides by 0.88 , we find that x = $25 . Therefore , the original
     price of the toy was $ \ boxed {25} $ .

Solve the Initial Problem :

Q : Kyle bought last year ' s best - selling book for $19 .50. This is with a
     25% discount from the original price . What was the original price of
     the book ?
A : Let 's assume the original price of the book is $x . With a 25% discount
     , the discount amount is 25% of $x , which is 0.25 * $x = $0 .25 x. The
     sale price of the book is $19 .50 , so we can set up the equation : $x -
      $0 .25 x = $19 .50. Simplifying the equation , we get 0.75 x = $19 .50.
     Dividing both sides by 0.75 , we find that x = $26 . Therefore , the
     original price of the book was $ \ boxed {26} $ .


Our prompt (self-generate exemplars) with in-context demonstration, used by text-davinci models:

Your task is to solve math problems .

For example ,

# Problem :
Q : A pet shelter spends $30 on grooming for each cat , $60 for each adult
     dog , and $90 for each puppy to prepare them for adoption . If they
     prepare 3 cats , 2 adult dogs , and 4 puppies for adoption , what is the
      total cost of getting them ready ?

# Relevant problems :
Q : In a bakery , there is a sale of baked goods . Every muffin costs $2 ,
     every cookie $1 , and a loaf of bread $3 . How much do you need to pay
     for five muffins , six cookies , and two loaves of bread ?
A : Let 's calculate the cost for each type of item :
Five muffins cost : 5 * $2 = $10 .
Six cookies cost : 6 * $1 = $6 .
Two loaves of bread cost : 2 * $3 = $6 .
Now , add up the costs for each item to find the total cost :
Total cost = $10 ( muffins ) + $6 ( cookies ) + $6 ( bread ) = $22 .
So , for five muffins , six cookies , and two loaves of bread , you would
     need to pay \\ boxed {{ $22 }}.

Q : In a garden , there are four different types of fruit trees . The first
     type of tree has 15 apples , the second type has 10 oranges , the third
      type has 24 pears , and the fourth type has 30 plums . Sarah decides
     to pick fruit from these trees for making a fruit salad . She picks
     40% of the apples , 60% of the oranges , 75% of the pears , and 50% of
     the plums . How many pieces of fruit are in her fruit salad ?
A : Number of apples Sarah picks : 15 x 40% = 6 apples .
Number of oranges Sarah picks : 10 x 60% = 6 oranges .
Number of pears Sarah picks : 24 x 75% = 18 pears .
Number of plums Sarah picks : 30 x 50% = 15 plums .
Now , let ' s calculate the total number of pieces of fruit in her fruit
     salad :
Total = 6 apples + 6 oranges + 18 pears + 15 plums = 6 + 6 + 18 + 15 = 45
      pieces of fruit .
So , there are \\ boxed {{45}} pieces of fruit in Sarah ' s fruit salad .



                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q : Sarah runs a small jewelry business and sells necklaces for 25% more
     than it costs to make them . If she sold 40 necklaces and earned $400 ,
       how much does each necklace cost to make ?
A : To find out how much each necklace costs to make , we can start by
     determining the selling price per necklace .
First , we need to calculate the selling price per necklace . Since Sarah
     sold 40 necklaces and earned $400 , we can use the formula :
Selling Price per Necklace = $400 / 40 = $10
Now that we know each necklace was sold for $10 , we can find out the cost
       to make each necklace . Sarah sells them for 25% more than their cost
     .
Cost to Make each Necklace = $10 / (1 + 0.25) = $10 / 1.25 = $8
So , each necklace costs \\ boxed {{ $8 }} to make .

Q : A machine at a coffee shop can usually brew a pot of coffee in 6
     minutes . However , this morning a malfunction occurred , and it took 10
      minutes to brew one pot of coffee . If the malfunction remains
     unresolved , how much longer will it take to brew 8 pots of coffee
     than on a normal day when the machine works fine ?
A : On a regular day , it would take 6 * 8 = 48 minutes to brew 8 pots of
     coffee .
With the malfunction , it will take 10 * 8 = 80 minutes to brew 8 pots of
     coffee .
It will take 80 - 48 = \\ boxed {{32}} more minutes if the malfunction goes
      unresolved .

Q : In a jar , there were 800 candies . Sarah took 3/8 of the total number
     of candies , while David ate 2/5 of the remaining candies . What
     percentage of the original candies remained ?
A : Sarah took 3/8 of the total candies , which is 3/8 * 800 = 300 candies .
After Sarah ' s candy - taking , there were 800 - 300 = 500 candies left .
David then ate 2/5 of the remaining candies , which is 2/5 * 500 = 200
     candies .
After David ' s candy - eating , there were 500 - 200 = 300 candies left .
The percentage of candies that remained out of the original amount is
     (300 / 800) * 100% = \\ boxed {{37.5}}%.

# Solve the initial problem step by step :
Q : A pet shelter spends $30 on grooming for each cat , $60 for each adult
     dog , and $90 for each puppy to prepare them for adoption . If they
     prepare 3 cats , 2 adult dogs , and 4 puppies for adoption , what is the
       total cost of getting them ready ?
A : To find the total cost of getting these animals ready for adoption , we
     ' ll multiply the cost of each type of animal by the number of that
     type being prepared :
Cost for 3 cats = 3 * $30 = $90
Cost for 2 adult dogs = 2 * $60 = $120
Cost for 4 puppies = 4 * $90 = $360
Now , add up the costs for each type :
Total cost = $90 + $120 + $360 = $570
So , the total cost to get 3 cats , 2 adult dogs , and 4 puppies ready for
     adoption is \\ boxed {{ $570 }}.


Solve the following math problem step by step .

# Problem :
Q : Kyle bought last year ' s best - selling book for $19 .50. This is with a
     25% discount from the original price . What was the original price of
     the book ?

# Relevant problems :


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   CODEFORCES

Our prompt (self-generate exemplars and knowledge):
Your goal is to write Python3 code to solve competitive programming
    problems . Given a problem , explain the core concepts in it and
    provide other relevant problems . Then solve the original problem .

# Problem :
You are given a sequence a_1 , a_2 , \ ldots , a_n . Each element of a is 1 or
     2. Find out if an integer k exists so that the following conditions
    are met .
  1 \ leq k \ leq n -1 , and a_1 \ cdot a_2 \ cdot \ ldots \ cdot a_k = a_ {k +1}
       \ cdot a_ {k +2} \ cdot \ ldots \ cdot a_n , where \ cdot denotes a product
       .
If there exist multiple k that satisfy the given condition , print the
    smallest .

Input
Each test contains multiple test cases . The first line contains the
    number of test cases t (1 \ le t \ le 100) . Description of the test
    cases follows .
The first line of each test case contains one integer n (2 \ leq n \ leq
    1000) .
The second line of each test case contains n integers a_1 , a_2 , \ ldots ,
    a_n (1 \ leq a_i \ leq 2) .

Output
For each test case , if there is no such k , print -1.
Otherwise , print the smallest possible k.


# Instruction :

## Algorithms :
Identify the core concepts or algorithms used to solve the problem .

## Tutorial :
Write a useful tutorial about these algorithms .

## Example Problems :
Provide three examples of relevant competitive programming problems that
    involve these algorithms . For each problem , describe the problem ,
    explain the solution in detail , and then write the correct Python3
    code .

## Python3 code to solve the original problem :
Include the following points in your response :
- Explanation of the solution :
- Python3 code to solve the problem :

Output by GPT3.5-turbo-16k:
## Algorithms :
The core algorithm for solving this problem is the prefix product
    algorithm .

## Tutorial :
The prefix product algorithm is used to calculate the product of all the
    elements in a prefix of an array . It is a useful algorithm for
    solving problems that involve calculating the product of all the
    elements in a subarray .

The algorithm works by initializing a variable " prefix " to 1, and then
    iterating through the array from left to right . At each iteration ,


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      the current element is multiplied with the prefix , and the result is
      stored in the prefix variable . This way , the prefix variable keeps
      track of the product of all the elements in the prefix of the array .

Here is the pseudocode for the prefix product algorithm :

```
prefix = 1
for i in range (n):
    prefix = prefix * arr [i ]
```

The time complexity of this algorithm is O(n) , where n is the size of the
     input array .

## Example Problems :
1. Problem : Given an array of integers , find the product of all the
    elements in each subarray of size k.
   Solution : We can use the prefix product algorithm to solve this
       problem . We initialize a prefix variable to 1, and then iterate
       through the array from left to right . At each iteration , we
       multiply the current element with the prefix , and store the result
        in the prefix variable . If the index i is greater than or equal
       to k -1 , we divide the prefix by the element arr [i -k +1] , which
       represents the first element of the subarray of size k starting at
        index i -k +1. The result is the product of all the elements in the
        subarray of size k starting at index i -k +1. We can store these
       results in a new array and return it as the output .

``` python
def product_of_subarrays ( arr , k):
     n = len ( arr )
     prefix = 1
     result = []

      for i in range (n):
          prefix = prefix * arr [i]

          if i >= k -1:
              result . append ( prefix )
              prefix = prefix // arr [i -k +1]

      return result
```

2. Problem : Given an array of integers , find the longest subarray with a
    product less than or equal to a given target .
   Solution : We can use the prefix product algorithm to solve this
       problem . We initialize a prefix variable to 1, and then iterate
       through the array from left to right . At each iteration , we
       multiply the current element with the prefix , and store the result
        in the prefix variable . If the prefix becomes greater than the
       target , we divide the prefix by the first element of the subarray ,
        and move the start pointer of the subarray one step forward . We
       update the maximum length of the subarray if necessary .

``` python
def longest_subarray_with_product_less_than_target ( arr , target ):
     n = len ( arr )
     prefix = 1
     start = 0
     max_length = 0

      for i in range (n):
          prefix = prefix * arr [i]


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          while prefix > target and start <= i:
              prefix = prefix // arr [ start ]
              start += 1

           max_length = max ( max_length , i - start +1)

      return max_length
```

3. Problem : Given an array of integers , find the smallest k such that the
     product of all the elements in the prefix of the array is equal to
    the product of all the elements in the suffix of the array .
   Solution : We can use the prefix product algorithm to solve this
       problem . We initialize a prefix variable to 1, and then iterate
       through the array from left to right . At each iteration , we
       multiply the current element with the prefix , and store the result
        in the prefix variable . We also initialize a suffix variable to
       1, and then iterate through the array from right to left . At each
       iteration , we multiply the current element with the suffix , and
       store the result in the suffix variable . If the prefix is equal to
        the suffix , we return the current index as the smallest k. If no
       such index is found , we return -1.

``` python
def smallest_k_with_equal_product ( arr ):
     n = len ( arr )
     prefix = 1
     suffix = 1

      for i in range (n):
          prefix = prefix * arr [i]
          suffix = suffix * arr [n -i -1]

          if prefix == suffix :
              return i +1

      return -1
```

## Python3 code to solve the original problem :
Explanation of the solution :
- Read the number of test cases .
- Iterate through each test case .
  - Read the number of elements in the sequence and the sequence itself .
  - Initialize prefix and suffix variables to 1, and k to -1.
  - Calculate the product of all the elements in the sequence using the
      prefix product algorithm .
  - Iterate through the sequence from right to left .
    - Update the prefix and suffix variables .
    - If the prefix is equal to the suffix , update k to the current index
        .
  - Print the value of k.

``` python
# Read the number of test cases
t = int ( input () )

# Process each test case
for _ in range (t):
    # Read the test case input
    n = int ( input () )
    arr = list ( map ( int , input () . split () ))

      # Initialize prefix and suffix variables


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      prefix = 1
      suffix = 1
      k = -1

      # Calculate prefix product
      for i in range (n):
          prefix = prefix * arr [i]

      # Calculate suffix product and find smallest k
      for i in range (n -1 , 0, -1) :
          prefix = prefix // arr [i]
          suffix = suffix * arr [i]

            if prefix == suffix :
                k = i

      # Print the result
      print (k)
```

Below is a baseline output generated by GPT3.5-turbo-16k using vanilla 0-shot prompt. This output does
not recall any relevant exemplars and fails to employ the prefix product algorithm, resulting in an incorrect
solution.
def smallest_k (t , test_cases ):
    results = []
    for i in range (t):
        n = test_cases [i ][0]
        a = test_cases [i ][1:]
        k = -1
        for j in range (1 , n):
            if a [: j] == a[j :]:
                  k = j
                  break
        results . append (k)
    return results

t = int ( input () )
test_cases = []
for _ in range (t):
    n = int ( input () )
    a = list ( map ( int , input () . split () ))
    test_cases . append ([ n] + a)

output = smallest_k (t , test_cases )
for o in output :
    print (o)


D.4    BIG-BENCH: FORMAL FALLACIES

Our prompt (self-generate exemplars):
Your task is to tackle reasoning problems . When presented with a problem ,
     recall relevant problems as examples . Afterward , proceed to solve
    the initial problem .

# Initial Problem :
" Is Siri a stepsister of Mary ? Is Susan related to Kate ? In large
     families , it is sometimes difficult to keep track of all one ' s
     relatives . The following argument seeks to clarify some such
     relations : To start with , everyone who is a schoolmate of Mildred is
     a daughter of Jeanette , too . Now , being a daughter of Jeanette is
     sufficient for not being a cousin of Cristi . Therefore , no schoolmate


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      of Mildred is a cousin of Cristi ." Is the argument , given the
     explicitly stated premises , deductively valid or invalid ? Options : -
     valid - invalid

# Instructions :
Make sure to include all of the following points :

## Relevant Problems :
Recall three examples of problems that are relevant to the initial
    problem . Note that your problems must be distinct from each other and
     from the initial problem . For each problem :
- After "Q: ", describe the problem
- After "A: ", explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \
    boxed {}.

## Solve the Initial Problem :
Say " Let ' s solve the following reasoning problem ." Then formulate your
     response in the following format :
Q : Copy and paste the initial problem here .
A : Explain the solution and enclose the ultimate answer in \ boxed {} here .


Output by GPT3.5-turbo:
Relevant Problems :
Q : In a certain town , all doctors are required to have a medical degree .
     John is a doctor . Therefore , John must have a medical degree . Is this
       argument valid or invalid ?
A : This argument is valid because it follows the logical form of a
     categorical syllogism , where the first premise establishes a
     universal statement and the second premise applies that statement to
     a specific case . Therefore , the conclusion can be logically deduced .
     \ boxed { valid }

Q : All cats have fur . Fluffy is a cat . Therefore , Fluffy has fur . Is this
       argument valid or invalid ?
A : This argument is valid because it follows the logical form of a
     categorical syllogism , where the first premise establishes a
     universal statement and the second premise applies that statement to
     a specific case . Therefore , the conclusion can be logically deduced .
     \ boxed { valid }

Q : If it is raining , then the ground is wet . The ground is wet . Therefore
     , it must be raining . Is this argument valid or invalid ?
A : This argument is invalid because it commits the fallacy of affirming
     the consequent . Just because the ground is wet does not necessarily
     mean that it is raining , as there could be other factors that caused
     the ground to become wet . \ boxed { invalid }

Solve the Initial Problem :
Let ' s solve the following reasoning problem :

Q : " Is Siri a stepsister of Mary ? Is Susan related to Kate ? In large
     families , it is sometimes difficult to keep track of all one ' s
     relatives . The following argument seeks to clarify some such
     relations : To start with , everyone who is a schoolmate of Mildred is
     a daughter of Jeanette , too . Now , being a daughter of Jeanette is
     sufficient for not being a cousin of Cristi . Therefore , no schoolmate
       of Mildred is a cousin of Cristi ." Is the argument , given the
     explicitly stated premises , deductively valid or invalid ?
A : The argument is deductively valid . The premises state that everyone
     who is a schoolmate of Mildred is a daughter of Jeanette , and being a
       daughter of Jeanette is sufficient for not being a cousin of Cristi .
       Therefore , it logically follows that no schoolmate of Mildred is a
     cousin of Cristi . \ boxed { valid }


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Below is a baseline output generated by GPT3.5-turbo using 0-shot CoT prompt. This output does not
recall any relevant exemplars and adopts an incorrect approach to address the deductive reasoning problem.
The argument is deductively invalid .

To determine the validity of the argument , we need to analyze the logical
     structure and see if the conclusion necessarily follows from the
    premises .

Let ' s break down the argument :

1. Everyone who is a schoolmate of Mildred is a daughter of Jeanette .
2. Being a daughter of Jeanette is sufficient for not being a cousin of
    Cristi .

Conclusion : No schoolmate of Mildred is a cousin of Cristi .

The first premise establishes a relationship between being a schoolmate
    of Mildred and being a daughter of Jeanette . However , it does not
    provide any information about the relationship between being a
    schoolmate of Mildred and being a cousin of Cristi .

The second premise establishes a relationship between being a daughter of
     Jeanette and not being a cousin of Cristi . However , it does not
    provide any information about the relationship between being a
    schoolmate of Mildred and being a cousin of Cristi .

Therefore , the conclusion that no schoolmate of Mildred is a cousin of
    Cristi cannot be logically derived from the given premises . The
    argument is deductively invalid .

\ boxed { invalid }


                                                   27
