Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S INKHORN                   D ISTRIBUTIONAL                           R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The empirical success of distributional reinforcement learning (RL) highly de-
         pends on the distribution representation and the choice of distribution divergence.
         In this paper, we propose Sinkhorn distributional RL (SinkhornDRL) that learns
         unrestricted statistics from each return distribution and then leverages Sinkhorn
         divergence to minimize the difference between current and target Bellman return
         distributions. Theoretically, we prove the convergence properties of SinkhornDRL
         in the tabular setting, consistent with the interpolation nature of Sinkhorn diver-
         gence between Wasserstein distance and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD).
         We also establish the equivalence between Sinkhorn divergence and a regularized
         MMD, contributing to interpreting the superiority of SinkhornDRL. Empirically,
         we show that SinkhornDRL is consistently better or comparable to existing algo-
         rithms on the suite of 55 Atari games.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The design of classical reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms is mainly based on the expecta-
tion of cumulative rewards that an agent observes while interacting with the environment. Re-
cently, a new class of RL algorithms called distributional RL estimates the full distribution of total
returns and has exhibited state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of environments, such as
C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a), Quantile-Regression DQN (QR-DQN) (Dabney et al., 2018b; Row-
land et al., 2023), Implicit Quantile Networks (IQN) (Dabney et al., 2018a), Fully Parameterized
Quantile Function (FQF) (Yang et al., 2019), Non-Crossing QR-DQN (Zhou et al., 2020), MMD-
DRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), Spline DQN (SPL-DQN) (Luo et al., 2021) and Bayesian distributional
policy gradients (Li & Faisal, 2021). Meanwhile, distributional RL has also enjoyed other benefits
in risk-sensitive control (Ma et al., 2020; Dabney et al., 2018a), policy exploration (Mavrin et al.,
2019; Rowland et al., 2019), offline setting (Ma et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023), robustness (Sun et al.,
2023) and optimization (Sun et al., 2022). In this work, we propose a new distributional RL family
via Sinkhorn divergence (Sinkhorn, 1967) motivated by its advantages over existing algorithms.
Advantages over Quantile-based / Wasserstein Distance Distributional RL. 1) Finer Approxi-
mation and Adaptability. By adding regularization, Sinkhorn divergence can directly approximate
(high-dimensional) Wasserstein distance via tractable computation instead of using quantile regres-
sion in Quantile-based algorithms (Dabney et al., 2018b). Quantile-based algorithms suffer from not
only the curse of dimensionality, when the reward function is multi-dimensional (Zhang et al., 2021)
in many cases, but also the non-crossing issue (Zhou et al., 2020), i.e., the learned quantile curves
may not be non-decreasing. 2) Flexibility. SinkhornDRL uses samples to depict the return distri-
bution. The sample representation offers greater flexibility than quantiles, which need to specify a
fixed number of quantiles and may not capture the full data complexity (Rowland et al., 2019).
Advantages over MMDDRL. Richer Data Geometry. The optimal transport-based Sinkhorn di-
vergence can inherently capture the spatial or geometric layout of the distributions. In contrast, the
geometry captured by MMD is highly dependent on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) and
the choice of kernels. The mean embedding nature of MMD and linearity in RHKS also overlook
finer geometric properties of distributions, e.g., higher moment characteristics and nonlinear shapes.
Contributions. While Sinkhorn divergence interpolates Wasserstein distance and MMD, the distri-
butional RL community has yet to investigate a Sinkhorn divergence-based distributional RL fam-
ily comprehensively. Therefore, our proposed SinkhornDRL algorithm is not only theoretically


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


grounded but also timely, contributing significantly to the fast-evolving landscape of distributional
RL research. Our research also paves the way for a deeper understanding of different behaviors
across existing distributional RL algorithms. Below we summarize our contributions in this study:
Methodologically, we propose a Sinkhorn distributional RL algorithm that interpolates Quantile
Regression-based and MMD distributional RL families. SinkhornDRL inherits the advantage of
learning unrestricted statistics and can be easily implemented based on existing model architectures.
Theoretically, we prove the convergence property of SinkhornDRL in the tabular setting (introduced
in Section 4.2). Beyond the existing optimal transport literature, we reveal its new equivalent form
to a special regularized MMDDRL algorithm, contributing to explaining its empirical success.
Experimentally, we compare SinkhornDRL with typical distributional RL algorithms across 55
Atari games with a rigorous sensitivity analysis to allow its deployment.

2     P RELIMINARY K NOWLEDGE
2.1   D ISTRIBUTIONAL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

In classical RL, an agent interacts with an environment via a Markov decision process (MDP), a 5-
tuple (S, A, R, P, γ), where S and A are the state and action spaces. P is the environment transition
dynamics, R is the reward function and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
                                                                π                            π
P∞ atpolicy π, the discounted sum of future rewards Z is a random variable with Z (s, a) =
Given
   t=0 γ R(st , at ), where s0 = s, a0 = a, st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ), and at ∼ π(·|st ). In expectation-
based RL, the action-value function Qπ is defined as Qπ (s, a) = E [Z π (s, a)], which is iteratively
updated via Bellman operator T π through T π Q(s, a) = E[R(s, a)] + γEs′ ∼p,π [Q (s′ , a′ )], where
s′ ∼ P (·|s, a) and a′ ∼ π (·|s′ ). In contrast, distributional RL focuses on the action-value distribu-
tion, the full distribution of Z π (s, a), which is updated via the distributional Bellman operator Tπ
                       D
through Tπ Z(s, a) := R(s, a) + γZ (s′ , a′ ), where the equality implies random variables of both
sides are equal in distribution and D denotes the distribution. The distributional Bellman operator
Tπ is contractive under certain distribution divergence metrics (Elie & Arthur, 2020).

2.2   D IVERGENCES BETWEEN M EASURES

Optimal Transport (OT) and Wasserstein Distance. The optimal transport (OT) metric Wc
between twoR probability measures (µ, ν) is defined as the solution of the linear program Wc =
inf Π∈Π(µ,ν) c(x, y)dΠ(x, y), where c is the cost function and Π is the joint distribution with
marginals (µ, ν). The p-Wasserstein distance Wp = (inf Π∈Π(µ,ν) ∥x − y∥p dΠ(x, y))1/p is a spe-
                                                                    R
cial case of optimal transport with the Euclidean norm as the cost function. The desirable geometric
property of Wasserstein distance allows it to recover full support of measures, but it suffers from the
curse of dimension and computational inefficiency (Genevay et al., 2019; Arjovsky et al., 2017).
Maximum Mean Discrepancy. The squared Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) MMD2k with
the kernel k is formulated as MMD2k = E [k (X, X ′ )] + E [k (Y, Y ′ )] − 2E [k(X, Y )], where k(·, ·)
is a continuous kernel on X . X ′ (resp. Y ′ ) is a random variable independent of X (resp. Y ). Mathe-
matically, the “flat” geometry that MMD induces on the space of probability measures does not faith-
fully lift the ground distance (Feydy et al., 2019), but MMD is cheaper to compute than OT and has
a smaller sample complexity, i.e., approximating the distance with samples of measures (Genevay
et al., 2019). We provide more detailed definitions of various distribution divergences, their rela-
tionships, and related contraction results under Tπ in distributional RL in Appendix A.
Notations. We constantly use the unrectified kernel kα = −∥x − y∥α in the MMDDRL and
SinkhornDRL algorithm analysis. With a slight abuse of notations, we also use Zθ to denote θ
parameterized return distribution, and dp as the distribution divergence.

3     R ELATED W ORK
According to the choice of distribution divergences and the distribution representation ways, distri-
butional RL algorithms can be mainly categorized into three classes.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Categorical Distributional RL. As the first successful distributional RL, categorical distributional
RL (Bellemare et al., 2017a), e.g., C51, represents the return distribution by the categorical distribu-
tion defined on discrete fixed supports within a pre-specified interval. C51 performs favorably on the
suite of Atari games, but it is inferior to Quantile Regression distributional RL proposed afterward
mainly due to the expressive restriction of its pre-defining fixed supports (Dabney et al., 2018b).
Quantile Regression (Wasserstein Distance) Distributional RL. QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b)
was proposed to use quantile regression to approximate Wasserstein distance, under which the con-
traction property of distributional Bellman operator can be guaranteed. Given a series of fixed quan-
tiles, QR-DQN learns the quantile values with a more flexible support range to represent a continu-
ous distribution. IQN (Dabney et al., 2018a) utilizes an implicit model to output quantile values more
expressively, instead of the fixed ones in QR-DQN, while FQF (Yang et al., 2019) further improves
IQN by proposing a more expressive quantile network. However, Quantile Regression distributional
RL suffers from the non-crossing issue raised in (Zhou et al., 2020), and needs to be carefully ad-
dressed, for example, by a monotonic splines (Luo et al., 2021). By contrast, SinkhornDRL aims at
approximating an entropy regularized Wasserstein distance via Sinkhorn iterations (Sinkhorn, 1967)
instead of quantile regression, while naturally circumventing the non-crossing issue.
MMD Distributional RL. Orthogonal to Quantile Regression distributional RL, MMD distribu-
tional RL (MMDDRL) (Nguyen et al., 2020) learns samples to represent the return distribution and
then optimizes with MMD. The less limited statistical budget via learning samples (Rowland et al.,
2019) allows MMDDRL to outperform other algorithms with predefined statistical principles, e.g.,
quantiles and categorical distribution. Similarly, the sample-based SinkhornDRL preserves this ad-
vantage, although Sinkhorn divergence is directly based on optimal transport. It is worthwhile to
mention that SinkhornDRL tends to “interpolate” between Wasserstein and MMD distributional RL.

4     S INKHORN D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL (S INKHORN DRL)
The algorithmic evolution of distributional RL can be primarily viewed along two dimen-
sions (Nguyen et al., 2020). 1) Proposing new distributional RL families beyond the aforementioned
three ones based on other distribution divergences with the density estimation techniques. 2) extend-
ing existing algorithms within one family by increasing the model capacity, e.g., IQN and FQF. In
contrast, SinkhornDRL aims to expand algorithm families along the first dimension.

4.1   S INKHORN D IVERGENCE AND A LGORITHM

Sinkhorn divergence (Sinkhorn, 1967) is a tractable loss to approximate the optimal transport prob-
lem by leveraging an entropic regularization. It allows us to find a sweet trade-off that simultane-
ously leverages the geometry property of Wasserstein distance on the one hand, and the favorable
sample complexity advantage and unbiased gradient estimates of MMD (Genevay et al., 2018; Feydy
et al., 2019). We introduce the entropic regularized Wasserstein distance Wc,ε (µ, ν) as
                                            Z
                    Wc,ε (µ, ν) = min          c(x, y)dΠ(x, y) + εKL(Π|µ ⊗ ν),                   (1)
                                   Π∈Π(µ,ν)

                        R          Π(x,y)
where KL(Π|µ ⊗ ν) = log dµ(x)dν(y)            dΠ(x, y) is a strongly convex regularization. The impact
of this entropy regularization is similar to ℓ2 ridge regularization in linear regression that contributes
to the optimization. Next, the Sinkhorn divergence between two measures µ and ν is defined as
                       W c,ε (µ, ν) = 2Wc,ε (µ, ν) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν).                       (2)

Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν) is convex, smooth and positive definite that metricizes the conver-
gence in law (Feydy et al., 2019). In statistical physics, Wc,ε (µ, ν) can be re-factored as a projection
problem:
                                Wc,ε (µ, ν) := min KL (Π|K) ,                                         (3)
                                                  Π∈Π(µ,ν)
                                                                                      c(x,y)
where K is the Gibbs distribution and its density function satisfies dK(x, y) = e− ε dµ(x)dν(y).
This problem is often referred to as the “static Schrödinger problem” (Léonard, 2013; Rüschendorf
& Thomsen, 1998) as it was initially considered in statistical physics.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Distributional RL with Sinkhorn Divergence and Particle Representation. The key to applying
Sinkhorn divergence in distributional RL is to leverage the Sinkhorn loss W c,ε to measure the dis-
tance between the current action-value distribution Zθ (s, a) and the target distribution Tπ Zθ (s, a),
yielding W c,ε (Zθ (s, a), Tπ Zθ (s, a)) for each s, a pair. In terms of the representation for Zθ (s, a),
we employ the unrestricted statistics, i.e., deterministic samples, due to its superiority in MMD-
DRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), instead of using predefined statistic functionals, e.g., quantiles in QR-
DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) or categorical distribution in C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a). More con-
cretely, we use neural networks to generate samples to approximate the return distribution. This can
be expressed as Zθ (s, a) := {Zθ (s, a)i }Ni=1 , where N is the number of generated samples.      We refer
                                                                                     1
                                                                                       PN
to the samples {Zθ (s, a)i }N
                            i=1 as particles.  Then  we leverage  the Dirac mixture N     i=1 δ Zθ (s,a)i
                                                                                                          to
approximate the true density function of Z π (s, a), thus minimizing the Sinkhorn divergence between
the approximate distribution and its distributional Bellman target. A generic Sinkhorn distributional
RL algorithm with particle representation is provided in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Generic Sinkhorn distributional RL Update
Require: Number of generated samples N , the cost function c, hyperparameter ε and the target
network Zθ∗ .
Input: Sample transition (s, a, r′ , s′ )
                                                                     PN
 1: Policy evaluation: a∗ ∼ π(·|s′ ) or Control: a∗ ← arg maxa′ ∈A N
                                                                   1            ′ ′
                                                                       i=1 Zθ (s , a )i
                        ′  ∗
 2: TZi ← r + γZθ∗ (s , a )i , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ N

                           N              N                      N         N
Output: W c,ε {Zθ (s, a)i }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 (MMD2k {Zθ (s, a)i }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 )


Relationship with Quantile Regression DRL and MMDDRL. Although SinkhornDRL is closely
linked with Quantile Regression DRL and MMDDRL branches, we view SinkhornDRL as a new
distributional RL class. As suggested in the general algorithm framework in Algorithm 1, Sinkhorn-
DRL generally modifies the distribution divergence and still relies on sample representation com-
pared with MMDDRL in the gray color. However, SinkhornDRL is fundamentally OT-based,
which approximates a regularized Wasserstein distance in stark contrast to MMD. On the other
hand, SinkhornDRL leverages Sinkhorn iterations to approximately evaluate the regularized Wasser-
stein distance, while Quantile Regression DRL utilizes quantile regression to directly approximate
a Wasserstein distance. We will dive deeper to clarify their theoretical relationships in Section 4.2,
including the interpolation behavior in the limiting cases and an equivalent form of SinkhornDRL
with a regularized MMDDRL.
Relationship with IQN and FQF. One may ask that IQN and FQF have improved QR-DQN signif-
icantly and already achieved almost state-of-the-art performance, so why bother to design Sinkhorn-
DRL? As mentioned earlier, QR-DQN and MMDDRL are direct counterparts for SinkhornDRL in
the first statistic dimension of algorithmic evolution, while IQN and FQF along the second model-
ing dimension are orthogonal to our work. As discussed in (Nguyen et al., 2020), the techniques
from IQN and FQF can extend both MMDDRL and SinkhornDRL naturally. For example, we can
implicitly generate {Zθ (s, a)i }Ni=1 via applying a neural network function to N samples of a base
sampling distribution as in IQN, or additionally use a proposal network to learn the weights of each
generated sample as in FQF. We leave these related modeling extensions as future works and study
the simplest modeling choice via Sinkhorn divergence as rigorously as possible in this work.


  Algorithm    dp Distribution Divergence     Representation Zθ        Convergence Rate of Tπ   Sample Complexity of dp
                                                                                √
     C51             Cramér distance       Categorical Distribution               γ
                                                                                                               1
  QR-DQN          Wasserstein distance            Quantiles                      γ                     O(n− d )
  MMDDRL                 MMD                       Samples                   γ α/2 (kα )               O(1/n)
                                                                                                         κ
                                                                                                        eε √
 SinkhornDRL                                                                   γ (ε → 0)         O(n ε⌊d/2⌋ n ) (ε → 0)
                  Sinkhorn divergence              Samples
     (ours)                                                               γ α/2 (kα , ε → ∞)             1
                                                                                                  O(n− 2 ) (ε → ∞)


Table 1: Properties of different distribution divergences in typical distributional RL algorithms. d
is the sample dimension and κ = 2βd + ∥c∥∞ , where the cost function c is β-Lipschitz (Genevay
et al., 2019). Sample complexity is improved to O(1/n) using the kernel herding technique (Chen
et al., 2012) in MMD.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS UNDER S INKHORN D IVERGENCE

In Table 1, we first summarize some properties of distribution divergences in typical distributional
RL algorithms, including the convergence rate of Tπ and sample complexity, i.e., the convergence
rate of a given metric between a measure and its empirical counterpart, as a function of the number
of samples n. Our results with related convergence proof are provided in Appendix A.
                                                                                   ∞
Convergence. We denote the supremal form of Sinkhorn divergence as W c,ε (µ, ν):
                             ∞
                          W c,ε (µ, ν) =     sup       W c,ε (µ(x, a), ν(x, a)).                      (4)
                                           (x,a)∈S×A
               ∞
We will use W c,ε (µ, ν) to establish the convergence of Tπ in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. We apply Tπ under Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν) with the unrectified kernel kα :=
−∥x − y∥α as −c (α > 0), where µ, ν ∈ {Z π (s, a)} for s ∈ S, a ∈ A in a finite MDP. Denote
Π∗ as the minimizer of Wc,ε (µ, ν) and define the ratio λ(µ, ν) ∈ (0, 1] that satisfies W c,ϵ (µ, ν) −
εKL(Π∗ |µ ⊗ ν) = λ(µ, ν)W c,ϵ (µ, ν). Then, we have:
                                                                                          ∞
(1) (ε → 0) W c,ε (µ, ν) → 2Wαα (µ, ν). When ε = 0, Tπ is a γ α -contraction under W c,ε .
                                                                                                  ∞
(2) (ε → +∞) W c,ε (µ, ν) → MMD2kα (µ, ν). When ε = +∞, Tπ is γ α -contractive under W c,ε .
                                                                         ∞
(3) (ε ∈ (0, +∞)), Tπ is at least ∆(γ, α)-contractive under W c,ε , where the MDP-dependent
constant ∆(γ, α) = γ α inf µ,ν λ(µ, ν) + (1 − inf µ,ν λ(µ, ν)) ∈ [γ α , 1) with inf µ,ν λ(µ, ν) > 0.

We provide the detailed proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix B. Theorem 1 (1) and (2) are follow-up
conclusions in terms of the convergence behavior of Tπ based on the interpolation relationship be-
tween Sinkhorn divergence with Wasserstein distance and MMD (Genevay et al., 2018), but we also
give a rigorous analysis in the context of distributional RL for completeness. Our key theoretical
contribution is the non-trivial proof for the general ε ∈ (0, ∞), in which we conclude that Tπ is
at least a ∆(γ, α)-contractive operator and ∆(γ, α) ∈ [γ α , 1) is a function of γ and α. ∆(γ, α)
serves as a tight upper bound and can be interpreted as the interpolation between γ α and 1 with
the coefficient inf U,V λ(µ, ν). For interpretation, Rthe ratio λ(µ, ν) is defined to measure the propor-
tion of optimal transport-based distances, i.e., 2 (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν),
regardless of the KL regularization term over W c,ε , which further determines the contraction speed.
Concretely, inf U,V λ(µ, ν) is evaluated over the return distribution set {Z π (s, a)} and is thus MDP-
dependent. A key observation is that as the set {Z π (s, a)} is finite considering a finite MDP, the set
{λ(µ, ν)}, with each positive element, is also finite. Therefore, we immediately have inf U,V λ(µ, ν)
is strictly positive, leading to ∆(γ, α) < 1 strictly. The crux of the proof is that we show a variant
of scale sensitive property of Sinkhorn divergence when c = −κα , where the resulting non-constant
                     µ,ν
scaling factor is ∆ (γ, α) ∈ [γ α , 1). Thanks to the finite MDP, we can always find a positive lower
                                                                                          µ,ν
bound of λ(µ, ν), corresponding to a uniformly upper bound ∆(γ, α) = supµ,ν ∆ (γ, α) < 1.
                                                                     ∞
We eventually arrive at the ∆(γ, α)-contraction of Tπ under W c,ε . Note that when ε → 0 or +∞,
inf µ,ν λ(µ, ν) → 1 (details in the proof), leading to γ α -contraction. This coincides with (1) and (2).
Consistency with Related Theoretical Contraction Conclusions. As Sinkhorn divergence inter-
polates between Wasserstein distance and MMD, its contraction property for ε ∈ [0, ∞] also aligns
well with them when c = −kα . Note that if we choose Gaussian kernels as the cost function, there
will be no concise and consistent contraction results as Theorem 1 (3). This conclusion is also con-
sistent with MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020) (ε → +∞), where Tπ is generally not a contraction
operator under MMD equipped with Gaussian kernels owing to the existence of counterexamples
mentioned in (Nguyen et al., 2020). Guided by our theoretical results, we employ the rectified ker-
nel kα as the cost function and set α = 2 in our experiments, under which Tπ holds the contraction
property guaranteed by Theorem 1 (3). Empirically, SinkhornDRL in this case suggests almost
state-of-the-art performance in Section 5.
Regularized Moment Matching under Sinkhorn Divergence Associated with Gaussian Ker-
nels. We further examine the potential connection between SinkhornDRL with existing distribu-
tional RL families. Inspired by the similar manner in MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), we find
that Sinkhorn divergence with the Gaussian kernel can also promote matching all moments between


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


two distributions. More specifically, Sinkhorn divergence can be rewritten as a regularized moment
matching form as revealed in Proposition 1.
                                  i.i.d.           i.i.d.
Proposition 1. Let X, X ′ ∼ µ, Y, Y ′ ∼ ν and X, X ′ , Y, Y ′ are mutually independent. For
ε ∈ (0, +∞), we denote Π∗ε (X, Y ), Π∗ (X, X ′ ), Π∗ (Y, Y ′ ) as the optimal joint distribution Π of
evaluating W c,ε (µ, ν), W c,ε (µ, µ) and W c,ε (ν, ν), respectively. Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν)
associated with Gaussian kernels k(x, y) = exp(−(x − y)2 /(2σ 2 )) as −c, is equivalent to
                       ∞
                                                                          Π∗ε (X, Y )2
                                                       2
                      X      1
      W c,ε (µ, ν) ∝                 M̃n (µ) − M̃n (ν) + εE log ∗                              ,   (5)
                      n=0
                          σ 2n n!                                    Π (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )
                        h    2      2
                                          i
where M̃n (µ) = Ex∼µ e−x /(2σ ) xn , and similarly for M̃n (ν).

We provide the proof of Proposition 1 in Appendix C. In summary, akin to MMDDRL associated
with a Gaussian kernel (Nguyen et al., 2020), Sinkhorn divergence approximately performs a regu-
                                        2   2
larized moment matching scaled by e−x /(2σ ) .
Equivalence to Regularized MMD Distributional RL for General Kernels. For the general ker-
nel function not necessarily the Gaussian one, we can still establish a connection between Sinkhorn
divergence and MMD in Corollary 1. It indicates that minimizing Sinkhorn divergence between two
distributions is equivalent to minimizing a regularized squared MMD.
Corollary 1. For ε ∈ (0, +∞),
                                                               Π∗ε (X, Y )2

                                     2
                  W c,ε (µ, ν) ∝ MMD−c (µ, ν) + εE log ∗                            .           (6)
                                                          Π (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )

Proof of Corollary 1 is provided in Appendix C. It is worthy of noting that this equivalence is
established for the general case when ε ∈ (0, +∞), and it does not hold in the limiting cases when
ε = 0 or ∞. For example, when ε → +∞, the second part including ε in Eq. 6 is not expected to
dominate. This is because the regularization term would tend to 0 as Π∗ε → µ⊗ν when ε → +∞. In
summary, even though Sinkhorn divergence was initially proposed to serve as an entropy regularized
Wasserterin distance when the cost function c = −κα , it turns out that it is equivalent to a regularized
MMD for the general kernels, as revealed in Corollary 1.

4.3   D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL VIA S INKHORN I TERATIONS

The theoretical analysis in Section 4.2 sheds light on the behavior of Sinkhorn distributional RL, but
another crucial issue we need to address is how to evaluate the Sinkhorn loss effectively. Due to the
Sinkhorn divergence that enjoys the geometry property of optimal transport and the computational
effectiveness of MMD, we can utilize Sinkhorn’s algorithm, i.e., Sinkhorn Iterations (Sinkhorn,
1967; Genevay et al., 2018), to evaluate the Sinkhorn loss. Notably, Sinkhorn iteration with L steps
yields a differentiable and solvable efficient loss function as the main burden involved in it is the
matrix-vector multiplication, which streams well on the GPU by simply adding extra differentiable
layers on the typical deep neural network, such as a DQN architecture.
                                               N            N
Given two sample sequences {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 in the distributional RL algorithm, the optimal
transport distance is equivalent to the form minP ∈RN ×N ⟨P, ĉ⟩; P 1N = 1N , P ⊤ 1N = 1N , where

                                                                    +


                                                          N           N
Algorithm 2 Sinkhorn Iterations to Approximate W c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1
                                               N             N
Input: Two samples sequences {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 , number of iterations L and hyperparameter ε.
 1: Initialization. ĉi,j = c(Zi , TZj ), Ki,j = exp(−ĉi,j /ε) for ∀i, j = 1, ..., N ; b0 ← 1N
 2: Iteration. al ← Kb1N , bl ← Ka   1N
                                          for l = 1, 2, ..., L
                            l−1                l

                                    N              N
 3: Evaluation. W c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1                  = ⟨(K ⊙ ĉ)b, a⟩
                   c

                       N                   N
Return: W
        c
          c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the empirical cost function is ĉi,j = c(Zi , TZj ). By adding entropic regularization on optimal trans-
port distance, Sinkhorn divergence can be viewed to restrict the search space of P in the following
scaling form: Pi,j = ai Ki,j bj , where Ki,j = e−ĉi,j /ε is the Gibbs kernel defined in Eq. 3. This al-
lows us to leverage iterations regarding the vectors a and b. More specifically, we initialize b0 = 1N ,
and then the Sinkhorn iterations are expressed as
                                       1N                          1N
                              al+1 ←           and       bl+1 ←           ,                         (7)
                                       Kbl                        K⊤ al+1
where ·· indicates an entry-wise division. It has been proven that Sinkhorn iteration asymptotically
converges to the true loss in a linear rate (Genevay et al., 2018; Franklin & Lorenz, 1989; Cuturi,
2013; Jason Altschuler, 2017). We provide a detailed algorithm description of Sinkhorn iterations
in Algorithm 2 and a full version in Algorithm 3 of Appendix I. With the efficient and differentiable
Sinkhorn iterations, we can easily evaluate the Sinkhorn divergence. In practice, we need to choose
L and ε, and we conduct a rigorous sensitivity analysis in Section 5.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We demonstrate the effectiveness of SinkhornDRL as described in Algorithm 1 on the full 55 Atari
2600 games. Without increasing model capacity for a fair comparison, we leverage the same archi-
tecture as QR-DQN and MMDDRL, and replace the quantiles output with N particles (samples).
In contrast to MMDDRL, SinkhornDRL only changes the distribution divergence from MMD to
Sinkhorn divergence, and therefore the potential superiority in the performance can be directly at-
tributed to the advantages of Sinkhorn divergence.
Baselines. We choose DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and three typical distributional RL algorithms as
classic baselines, including C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a), QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) and
MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020). For a fair comparison, we build SinkhornDRL and all base-
lines based on a well-accepted PyTorch implementation1 of distributional RL algorithms. We re-
implement MMDDRL based on its original TensorFlow implementation2 , and keep the same setting.
For example, we leverage Gaussian kernels kh (x, y) = exp(−(x−y)2 /h) with the same kernel mix-
ture trick covering a range of bandwidths h as adopted in the original MMDDRL (Nguyen et al.,


Figure 1: Learning curves of SinkhornDRL algorithm compared with DQN, C51, QR-DQN and
MMD, on 12 typical Atari games averaged over 3 seeds. Games are randomly picked.
    1
        https://github.com/ShangtongZhang/DeepRL
    2
        https://github.com/thanhnguyentang/mmdrl


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2020). We deploy all algorithms on 55 Atari 2600 games, and reported results are averaged over
3 seeds with the shade indicating the standard deviation. We run 40M frames for computational
convenience and report learning curves across all games in Appendix D for trustworthy results.
Hyperparameter settings. For a fair comparison with QR-DQN, C51 and MMDDRL, we used
the same hyperparameters: the number of generated samples N = 200, Adam optimizer with lr =
0.00005, ϵAdam = 0.01/32. In SinkhornDRL, we choose the number of Sinkhorn iterations L = 10
and smoothing hyperparameter ε = 10.0 in Section 5.1 after conducting sensitivity analysis in
Section 5.2. Guided by the contraction guarantee analyzed in Theorem 1, we choose the unrectified
kernel as the cost function, i.e.,−c = kα , and select α = 2 in kα .

5.1   P ERFORMANCE OF S INKHORN DRL

Learning Curves. Figure 1 illustrates that SinkhornDRL can achieve competitive performance
across 55 Atari games compared with other baselines. Notably, SinkhornDRL significantly outper-
forms other distributional RL algorithms on a large number of games, e.g., the first row in Figure 1.
For example, SinkhornDRL performs favorably on Tennis, while other algorithms even fail to con-
verge. Since SinkhornDRL only modifies the distribution distance compared with MMMDRL, its
empirical superiority over MMDDRL verifies the key role that the derived regularization term plays
in Eq. 6 as analyzed in Corollary 1. On some games, e.g., the last row of Figure 1, SinkhornDRL is
on par with MMDDRL and other baselines. We provide learning curves of all considered distribu-
tional RL algorithms on all 55 Atari games in Figure 4 of Appendix D, based on which we conclude
that SinkhornDRL performs better or is comparable to existing algorithms in general.
Human Normalized Scores (HMS).
We also compare the mean, In-                            Mean IQM (5%) Median > Human >DQN
terquartile Mean (IQM) (Agarwal              DQN       438.7 %   157.7%   43.6 %  17    0
                                             C51      1043.4 %   240.7 % 103.7 %  26   42
et al., 2021) and median of best          QR-DQN-1    1286.4 %   298.8% 108.6 %   31   47
HMS in Table 2 averaged over 55           MMDDRL       924.6 %   248.4% 117.5 %   27   43
Atari games, where IQM (x%) com-         SinkhornDRL 1435.8 %    365.5%  113.0 %  27   42
putes the mean from x% to (1-x)% of
HMS, is robust to outlier scores and Table 2: Evaluation of best human-normalized scores across
more statistically efficient than Me- 55 Atari games. Results are run on 3 seeds.
dian. We evaluate our scores of algorithms after 40M frames for computational convenience. It
suggests that SinkhornDRL achieves state-of-the-art mean and IQM (5%) HMS compared with other
baselines. We also report raw scores across all games in Table 3 of Appendix F.
A Ratio Improvement Analysis: On Which Environments Does SinkhornDRL Perform Bet-
ter? Owing to the interpolation nature of Sinkhorn divergence between Wasserstein distance and
MMD as analyzed in Theorem 1, one may ask on which environments does SinkhornDRL perform
better or worse? To answer this question, we conduct a ratio improvement comparison between
SinkhornDRL and QRDQN / MMDDRL, respectively. In Figure 2, we sort all games by the ratio
improvement of SinkhornDRL over QR-DQN (MMDDRL), and select the top 10 games. It turns
out that all selected games tend to have a larger action space and more complex dynamics. In par-


                                                                                                6LQNKRUQ   45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6LQNKRUQ   00'
        5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW


                                                                                                                         7HQQLV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7HQQLV
                                                            9HQWXUH
                                                                             6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                'HPRQ$WWDFN


                                                                                                                                        3KRHQL[
                                                                                                                                                         =D[[RQ
                                                                                                                                                                        $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                           *RSKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                          HQGXUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %HU]HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5LYHUUDLG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6RODULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7LPH3LORW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *UDYLWDU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9HQWXUH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3ULYDWH(\H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =D[[RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *RSKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *UDYLWDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5RERWDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5RDG5XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <DUV5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )LVKLQJ'HUE\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %DWWOH=RQH


                                                            (a) SinkhornDRL vs QR-DQN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) SinkhornDRL vs MMDDRL

Figure 2: Ratio improvement of return for SinkhornDRL over QRDQN (left) and MMDDRL (right)
averaged over 3 seeds. The ratio improvement is calculated by (SinkhornDRL - QR-DQN) / QR-
DQN in (a) and (SinkhornDRL - MMDDRL) / MMDDRL in (b), respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ticular, within the top 5 games for each group, including Venture, Seaquest, DemonAttack, Tennis,
Phoenix, Atlantis, Privateye, and Zaxxon, all of these games have an 18-dimensional action space as
well as complex dynamics, except Atlantis with 6-dimensional action space and simpler dynamics,
on which MMDDRL is substantially inferior to SinkhornDRL. We provide features of all 55 games,
including the number of action space, and difficulty of environment dynamics in Table 4 of Ap-
pendix G for a detailed comparison. In summary, these empirical results in the ratio improvement
analysis demonstrate that SinkhornDRL is more likely to present significant superiority over QR-
DQN and MMDDRL on more complicated environments. The empirical success of SinkhornDRL
can be attributed to the interpolation advantage of Sinkhorn divergence that simultaneously makes
full use of the data geometry from Wasserstein distance and the favorable sample complexity and
unbiased gradient estimate property from MMD as revealed in Section 4. We also provide a ratio
improvement of SinkhornDRL over all 55 Atari games in Figure 5 of Appendix E as a reference.

5.2                                          S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

Sensitivity Analysis. In practice, a proper ε is preferable as an overly large or small ε will lead to
numerical instability of Sinkhorn iterations in Algorithm 2, worsening its performance, as shown
in Figure 3 (a). This implies that the potential interpolation nature of limiting behaviors between
SinkhornDRL with QR-DQN and MMDDRL revealed in Theorem 1 may not be able to be rigor-
ously verified in numerical experiments. SinkhornDRL also requires a proper number of iterations
L and samples N . For example, a small N , e.g., N = 2 in Seaquest in Figure 3 (b) leads to the
divergence of algorithms, while an overly large N can degrade the performance and meanwhile
increases the computational burden (Appendix H). We conjecture that using larger networks to rep-
resent more samples is more likely to suffer from the overfitting issue, yielding the instability in the
RL training (Bjorck et al., 2021). Therefore, we choose N = 200 to attain favorable performance
and guarantee computational effectiveness at the same time. We provide more sensitivity analysis,
including results on StarGunner and Zaxxon, in Appendix H.
Computation Cost. We compare the computation cost between SinkhornDRL and other baselines.
It suggests SinkhornDRL increases around 50% computation cost compared with QR-DQN and
C51, but only slightly increases the overhead (by around 20%) in contrast to MMDDRL. Due to the
space limit, we provide more computation cost comparison in terms of L and N in Appendix H.

                                                                    6HDTXHVW                                                                                     6HDTXHVW                                                                                           %UHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                           6DPSOHV                                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /
                                                                                                                                                          6DPSOHV                                                                                    /
                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                        6DPSOHV                                                                                   /
$YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                   45'41                                                                                                6DPSOHV
                                              00'                                                                                               6DPSOHV


                                                                                                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                 (a) Hyper-parameter ε                                                                                  (b) Number of Samples                                                                                 (c) Sinkhorn Iterations L

Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis of SinkhornDRL on Breakout and Seaquest in terms of ε, number of
samples, and number of iteration L. Learning curves are reported over 3 seeds.


6                                     D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONCLUSION
Along the two dimensions of distributional RL algorithm evolution, we can further improve
Sinkhorn distributional RL by incorporating implicit generative models, including parameterizing
the cost function in Sinkhorn loss and increasing model capacity, which we leave as future works.
In this paper, a novel family of distributional RL algorithms based on Sinkhorn divergence is pro-
posed that accomplishes competitive performance compared with the state-of-the-art distributional
RL algorithms on the suite of Atari games. Theoretical results about the convergence guarantee and
an equivalent form with a regularized MMD are provided along with rigorous empirical verification.
Sinkhorn distributional RL contributes to distributional RL algorithm evolution and opens a door for
new applications of Sinkhorn divergence and more optimal transport approaches.


                                                                                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017a.
Marc G Bellemare, Ivo Danihelka, Will Dabney, Shakir Mohamed, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
 Stephan Hoyer, and Rémi Munos. The cramer distance as a solution to biased wasserstein gradi-
 ents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10743, 2017b.
Nils Bjorck, Carla P. Gomes, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Towards deeper deep reinforcement learning
  with spectral normalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34, 2021.
Yutian Chen, Max Welling, and Alex Smola. Super-samples from kernel herding. UAI, 109–116.
  AUAI Press, 2012.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2018a.
Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc G Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
 learning with quantile regression. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2018b.
Stephan Eckstein and Marcel Nutz. Quantitative stability of regularized optimal transport and con-
  vergence of sinkhorn’s algorithm. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 54(6):5922–5948,
  2022.
Odin Elie and Charpentier Arthur. Dynamic Programming in Distributional Reinforcement Learn-
  ing. PhD thesis, Université du Québec à Montréal, 2020.
Jean Feydy, Thibault Séjourné, François-Xavier Vialard, Shun-ichi Amari, Alain Trouvé, and
  Gabriel Peyré. Interpolating between optimal transport and mmd using sinkhorn divergences.
  In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2681–2690.
  PMLR, 2019.
Joel Franklin and Jens Lorenz. On the scaling of multidimensional matrices. Linear Algebra and its
  applications, 114:717–735, 1989.
Aude Genevay, Gabriel Peyré, and Marco Cuturi. Learning generative models with sinkhorn di-
  vergences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1608–1617.
  PMLR, 2018.
Aude Genevay, Lénaic Chizat, Francis Bach, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Sample complexity
  of sinkhorn divergences. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1574–1583. PMLR, 2019.
Philippe Rigollet Jason Altschuler, Jonathan Weed. Near-linear time approximation algorithms for
  optimal transport via sinkhorn iteration, 2017.
Christian Léonard. A survey of the schr\” odinger problem and some of its connections with optimal
  transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0215, 2013.
Luchen Li and A Aldo Faisal. Bayesian distributional policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8429–8437, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yudong Luo, Guiliang Liu, Haonan Duan, Oliver Schulte, and Pascal Poupart. Distributional rein-
  forcement learning with monotonic splines. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.
Xiaoteng Ma, Li Xia, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jun Yang, and Qianchuan Zhao. Dsac: Distributional soft
  actor critic for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14547, 2020.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. Conservative offline distributional rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06106, 2021.
Borislav Mavrin, Shangtong Zhang, Hengshuai Yao, Linglong Kong, Kaiwen Wu, and Yaoliang
  Yu. Distributional reinforcement learning for efficient exploration. International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Thanh Tang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh. Distributional reinforcement learning with
  maximum mean discrepancy. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  2020.
Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Aaditya Ramdas, Nicolás Garcı́a Trillos, and Marco Cuturi. On wasserstein two-sample testing and
  related families of nonparametric tests. Entropy, 19(2):47, 2017.
Mark Rowland, Robert Dadashi, Saurabh Kumar, Rémi Munos, Marc G Bellemare, and Will Dab-
 ney. Statistics and samples in distributional reinforcement learning. International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Mark Rowland, Rémi Munos, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Yunhao Tang, Georg Ostrovski, Anna
 Harutyunyan, Karl Tuyls, Marc G Bellemare, and Will Dabney. An analysis of quantile temporal-
 difference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04462, 2023.
Ludger Rüschendorf and Wolfgang Thomsen. Closedness of sum spaces andthe generalized
  schrödinger problem. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 42(3):483–494, 1998.
Richard Sinkhorn. Diagonal equivalence to matrices with prescribed row and column sums. The
  American Mathematical Monthly, 74(4):402–405, 1967.
Ke Sun, Bei Jiang, and Linglong Kong. How does value distribution in distributional reinforcement
  learning help optimization? arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14513, 2022.
Ke Sun, Yingnan Zhao, Shangling Jui, and Linglong Kong. Exploring the training robustness of
  distributional reinforcement learning against noisy state observations. European Conference on
  Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML-
  PKDD), 2023.
Gábor J Székely. E-statistics: The energy of statistical samples. Bowling Green State University,
  Department of Mathematics and Statistics Technical Report, 3(05):1–18, 2003.
Runzhe Wu, Masatoshi Uehara, and Wen Sun. Distributional offline policy evaluation with predic-
  tive error guarantees. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Derek Yang, Li Zhao, Zichuan Lin, Tao Qin, Jiang Bian, and Tie-Yan Liu. Fully parameterized quan-
  tile function for distributional reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32:6193–6202, 2019.
Pushi Zhang, Xiaoyu Chen, Li Zhao, Wei Xiong, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. Distributional re-
  inforcement learning for multi-dimensional reward functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:1519–1529, 2021.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fan Zhou, Jianing Wang, and Xingdong Feng. Non-crossing quantile regression for distributional
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Florian Ziel. The energy distance for ensemble and scenario reduction.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.14670, 2020.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D EFINITION OF D ISTRIBUTION D IVERGENCES AND C ONTRACTION
     P ROPERTIES
Definition of distances. Given two random variables X and Y , p-Wasserstein metric Wp between
the distributions of X and Y is defined as
                             Z 1                           1/p
                                     −1               p
               Wp (X, Y ) =         FX  (ω) − FY−1 (ω) dω          −1
                                                               = ∥FX  − FY−1 ∥p ,          (8)
                                0
        −1
which F is the inverse cumulative distribution function of a random variable with the cumulative
distribution function as F . Further, ℓp distance (Elie & Arthur, 2020) is defined as
                                Z ∞                             1/p
                                                          p                                  (9)
                 ℓp (X, Y ) :=          |FX (ω) − FY (ω)| dω         = ∥FX − FY ∥p
                                    −∞

The ℓp distance and Wasserstein metric are identical at p = 1, but are otherwise distinct. Note that
when p = 2, ℓp distance is also called Cramér distance (Bellemare et al., 2017b) dC (X, Y ). Also,
Cramér distance has a different representation given by
                                             1              1
                     dC (X, Y ) = E|X − Y | − E |X − X ′ | − E |Y − Y ′ | ,                      (10)
                                             2              2
where X ′ and Y ′ are the i.i.d. copies of X and Y . Energy distance (Székely, 2003; Ziel, 2020) is a
natural extension of Cramér distance to the multivariate case, which is defined as
                                             1               1
                  dE (X, Y) = E∥X − Y∥ − E∥X − X′ ∥ − E∥Y − Y′ ∥,                           (11)
                                             2               2
where X and Y are multivariate. Moreover, the energy distance is a special case of the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD), which is formulated as
                                                                                    1/2
              MMD(X, Y; k) = (E [k (X, X′ )] + E [k (Y, Y′ )] − 2E[k(X, Y)])                     (12)
where k(·, ·) is a continuous kernel on X . In particular, if k is a trivial kernel, MMD degener-
ates to energy distance. Additionally, we further define the supreme MMD, which is a functional
P(X )S×A × P(X )S×A → R defined as
                       MMD∞ (µ, ν) =        sup      MMD∞ (µ(x, a), ν(x, a))                     (13)
                                         (x,a)∈S×A


We further summarize the convergence rates of the distributional Bellman operator under different
distribution divergences.

       • T π is γ-contractive under the supreme form of Wassertein distance Wp .
       • T π is γ 1/p -contractive under the supreme form of ℓp distance.
       • T π is γ α/2 -contractive under MMD∞ with the kernel kα (x, y) = −∥x − y∥α , ∀α > 0.

Proof of Contraction.

       • Contraction under the supreme form of Wasserstein distance is provided in Lemma
         3 (Bellemare et al., 2017a).
       • Contraction under supreme form of ℓp distance can refer to Theorem 3.4 (Elie & Arthur,
         2020).
       • Contraction under MMD∞ is provided in Lemma 6 (Nguyen et al., 2020).

B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Proof. 1. ε → 0 and c = −kα . We study the uniform convergence when ε → 0. The proof is sum-
marized from the optimal transport literature (Genevay et al., 2018; Feydy
                                                                       R et al., 2019) and we here
provide the detailed proof for completeness. On the one hand, Wc,ε ≥ (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)dxdy ≥


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wαα as KL ≥ 0. We want to provide the inequality on the other side. Denote Π′ as the minimizer in
the Wasserstein distance Wαα . For any δ > 0, there always exists a joint distribution Πδ such that
                        Z                        Z
                                        ′
                       | (x − y) dΠ (x, y) − (x − y)α dΠδ (x, y)| ≤ δ
                                   α


and KL(Πδ |µ ⊗ ν) < +∞, i.e., (x − y)α dΠδ (x, y) − (x − y)α dΠ′ (x, y) ≤ δ. One possible way
                                  R                    R

to find Πδ is provided in notes of Lecture 6 in Optimal Transport Course3 and we invite interested
readers for reference. It follows that
                 Z                                       Z
Wαα ≤ Wc,ε ≤ (x−y)α dΠδ (x, y)+εKL(Πδ |µ⊗ν) ≤ (x−y)α dΠ′ (x, y)+δ+εKL(Πδ |µ⊗ν),

where the RHS (x − y)α dΠ′ (x, y) + δ + εKL(Πδ |µ ⊗ ν) → (x − y)α dΠ′ (x, y) + δ = Wαα + δ
               R                                               R
as ε → 0. As δ > 0 is arbitrary, combing the two sides, it shows that Wc,ϵ → Wαα as ε → 0. Thus,
Sinkhorn divergence maintains the properties of Wasserstein distance when ε → 0.
When ε = 0, it has been shown that Wα can guarantee a γ-contraction property for distributional
Bellman operator (Bellemare et al., 2017a). The crux of proof is that Wα is γ-scale sensitive:
                             Z                         1/p                   Z                   1/p
                                   α        p                                          p
Wα (aU, aV ) =        inf        a (x − y) dΠ(x, y)        ≤a         inf       (x − y) dΠ(x, y)
                       Π∈Π(aU,aV)                                   Π∈Π(U,V)

where the inequality comes from the change of optimal joint distribution. Therefore, Wα (aU, aV ) ≤
aWα (U, V ) guarantees a γ-contraction property for the distributional Bellman operator. As such,
for Wαα , when ε = 0, it suggest that W c,0 = Wαα corresponds to a γ α -contraction.
2. ε → ∞ and c = −kα . Our complete proof is inspired by (Ramdas et al., 2017; Genevay et al.,
2018). Recap the definition of squared MMD is
                             E [k (X, X′ )] + E [k (Y, Y′ )] − 2E[k(X, Y)]
When the kernel function k degenerates to an unrectified kα (x, y) := −∥x − y∥α for α ∈ (0, 2), the
squared MMD would degenerate to
                             2E∥X − Y∥α − E∥X − X′ ∥α − E∥Y − Y′ ∥α
              i.i.d.           i.i.d.
where X, X ′ ∼ µ, Y, Y ′ ∼ ν and X, X ′ , Y, Y ′ are mutually independent. On the other hand,
by definition, we have the Sinkhorn loss as
                        W c,∞ (µ, ν) = 2Wc,∞ (µ, ν) − Wc,∞ (µ, µ) − Wc,∞ (ν, ν)
Denoting Πε be the unique minimizer for W c,ε , it holds that Πε → µ ⊗ Rν as ε → ∞, which is
the product of two marginal distributions. That being said, Wc,∞ (µ, ν) → c(x, y)dµ(x)dν(y) +
             y)dµ(x)dν(y). If c = −kα = ∥x − y∥α , we eventually have W−kα ,∞ (µ, ν) →
      R
0  =    c(x,
  ∥x − y∥ dµ(x)dν(y) = E∥X − Y∥α , where µ and ν can be inherently correlated, although the
          α
R
minimizer degenerates to the product of the two marginal distributions. Finally, we can have
                       W −kα ,∞ → 2E∥X − Y∥α − E∥X − X′ ∥α − E∥Y − Y′ ∥α
which is exactly the form of squared MMD with the unrectified kernel kα . Now the key is to prove
that Πε → µ ⊗ ν as ε → ∞. We give the detailed proof as follows.
                                          R
Firstly, it is apparent that Wc,ε (µ, ν) ≤ c(x, y)dµ(x)dν(y) as µ⊗ν ∈ Π(µ, ν). Let {εk } be a pos-
itive sequence that diverges to ∞, and Πk be the corresponding sequence
                                                                      R   of unique minimizers for
Wc,ε .RAccording to the optimality condition, it must be the case that c(x, y)dΠk + εk KL(Πk , µ ⊗
ν) ≤ c(x, y)dµ ⊗ ν + 0 (when Π(µ, ν) = µ ⊗ ν). Thus,
                                                Z              Z
                                            1
                         KL (Πk , µ ⊗ ν) ⩽        c dµ ⊗ ν − c dΠk → 0.
                                            εk

Besides, by the compactness of Π(µ, ν), we can extract a converging subsequence Πnk → Π∞ .
Since KL is weakly lower-semicontinuous, it holds that
                           KL (Π∞ , µ ⊗ ν) ⩽ lim inf KL (Πnk , µ ⊗ ν) = 0
                                              k→∞
   3
       https://lchizat.github.io/ot2021orsay.html


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence Π∞ = µ⊗ν. That being said that the optimal coupling is simply the product of the marginals,
indicating that Πε → µ ⊗ ν as ε → ∞. As a special case, when α = 1, W −k1 ,∞ (u, v) is equivalent
to the energy distance
                     dE (X, Y) := 2E∥X − Y∥ − E∥X − X′ ∥ − E∥Y − Y′ ∥.                             (14)

In summary, if the cost function is the rectified kernel kα , it is the case that W −kα ,ε converges to
the squared MMD as ε → ∞. According to (Nguyen et al., 2020), Tπ is γ α/2 -contractive in the
supremal form of MMD with the unrectified kernel kα . As W c,ε (µ, ν) → MMD2kα (µ, ν), which is
a squared MMD instead of MMD, it implies that Tπ is γ α -contractive under the squared MMD /
W c,+∞ .
3. For ε ∈ (0, +∞). The proof is organized as follows. Firstly, we show the three properties of
Sinkhorn divergence, especially the scale-sensitive property, and then we analyze the contraction of
the distributional Bellman operator under Sinkhorn divergence based on its properties. Most im-
portantly, we derive the new non-constant contraction factor of the distributional Bellman operator,
whose supremum can be strictly less than 1 in a finite MDP.
3.1 Properties of Sinkhorn Divergence. We recap three crucial properties of a divergence metric.
The first is scale sensitive (S) (of order β, β > 0), i.e., dp (cX, cY ) ≤ |c|β dp (X, Y ). The second
property is shift invariant (I), i.e., dp (A + X, A + Y ) ≤ dp (X, Y ). The last one is unbiased
gradient (U). A key observation is Sinkhorn divergence would degenerate to a two-dimensional KL
divergence, and therefore embraces similar properties to KL divergence. Concretely, according to
the equivalent form of Wc,ε (µ, ν) in Eq. 3, it can be expressed as the KL divergence between an
optimal joint distribution and a Gibbs distribution associated with the cost function:
                               Wc,ε (µ, ν) := KL (Π∗ (µ, ν)|K(µ, ν)) ,                             (15)
         ∗
where Π is the optimal joint distribution. Thus, the total Sinkhorn divergence is expressed as
   W c,ε (µ, ν) := 2KL (Π∗ (µ, ν)|K(µ, ν)) − KL (Π∗ (µ, µ)|K(µ, µ)) − KL (Π∗ (ν, ν)|K(ν, ν)) .
                                                                                            (16)
Due to the form of W c,ε (µ, ν), the convergence behavior is determined by Wc,ε (µ, ν), which is
similar to the behavior of KL divergence. According to the fact that KL divergence has unbiased
gradient estimates (U) and shift invariant (I) (Dabney et al., 2018b), and Sinkhorn divergence can be
viewed as a two-dimensional KL divergence, both properties of U and I can be extended to Sinkhorn
divergence naturally. However, we find the scale sensitive (S) property of KL divergence can
not directly apply to Sinkhorn divergence due to the minimum nature of Wc,ε (µ, ν) and the
difference between optimal joint distributions of Π∗ (µ, ν) and Π0 (aµ, aν) where a is the scale
factor. On the contrary, we find Sinkhorn divergence satisfies a variant of scale-sensitive property
under certain conditions, which is crucial for the convergence of the distributional Bellman operator
under Sinkhorn divergence. As such, we provide a new rigorous proof of scale-sensitive property as
follows.
3.2 A New Variant of Scale Sensitive Property of Sinkhorn Divergence. We begin our proof from
Wc,ε , the the key part of Sinkhorn divergence by showing Wc,ε satisfies a variant of scale sensitive
                                                                                                ∗
       R when cα= −k
property
                     ∗
                        α .We define a ratio λ0 (U, V ) ∈ (0, 1] in Wc,ε as Wc,ε (U, V ) − εKL(Π |µ ⊗
                                                                            π
ν) = (x − y) dΠ (x, y) = λ0 (U, V )Wc,ε (U, V ) for all µ, ν ∈ {Z (s, a)} for any s ∈ S and
a ∈ A in the current MDP, we have the following result:
                              Wc,ε (aU, aV ) ≤ ∆(a, α)Wc,ε (U, V ),                                (17)
                                     α                  α
where ∆(a, α) = 1 − inf U,V (1 − |a| )λ0 (U, V ) = |a| inf U,V λ0 (U, V ) + (1 − inf U,V λ0 (U, V )) ∈
[|a|α , 1) with inf U,V λ0 (U, V ) > 0.
Proof. For inf U,V λ0 (U, V ) > 0, a key observation is we consider a finite MDP where the return
distribution set {Z(s, a)}would be finite as well due to the finite state and action space. This implies
that the ratio set {λ0 (U, V )} with each elment λ0 (U, V ) > 0 would also be finite. Based on the
fact that the real set is dense, we can directly find a positive lower bound for {λ0 (U, V )}. How-
ever, a more convenient way is to use the inf U,V , which would degenerate to minU,V and therefore
inf U,V λ0 (U, V ) would be strictly positive. Note that this key observation avoids the extreme case
that can only lead to a non-expansive distribution Bellman operator, which we will provide more
details in the following proof.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By definition of Sinkhorn divergence (Eckstein & Nutz, 2022; Peyré et al., 2019), the pdf
of Gibbs kernel in the equivalent form of Sinkrhon divergence is K(U, V ), which satisfies
              −c(x,y)
                                                                                dK
K(U, V ) ∝ e ε µ(x)ν(y). In particular, the pdf of Gibbs kernel is defined as d(µ⊗ν) (x) =
    exp(−c/ε)
R
 exp(−c/ε)d(µ⊗ν)
                 , where the denominator is the normalization factor. After a scaling transfor-
mation, the pdf of aU and aV with respect to x and y would be a1 µ( xa ) and a1 ν( ay ). Thus
               −c(x,y)
K(aU, aV ) ∝ e ε a1 µ( xa ) a1 ν( ay ). In the following proof, we use the change variable formula
(multivariate version) constantly, while changing the joint pdf π(x, y) and keep the cost function
term c(x, y). In particular, we denote Π∗ and Π0 as the optimal joint distribution of Wc,ε (µ, ν) and
Wc,ε (aµ, aν). Then we have:
                     Z
Wc,ε (aU, aV ) =         c(x, y)dΠ0 (x, y) + εKL(Π0 |aµ ⊗ aν)
                     Z
                 ≤    c(x, y)dΠ∗ (x, y) + εKL(Π∗ |aµ ⊗ aν)
                                                                                  1 ∗ x y
                                                                                 a2 π ( a , a )
                       Z                                Z
                 c=−kα            α 1 ∗ x y                 1 ∗ x y
                   =      (x − y) 2 π ( , )dxdy + ε           π   (  ,   ) log   1    x     y dxdy
                                   a      a a              a2       a a         a2 µ( a )ν( a )
                                                                      π ∗ (x, y)
                        Z                           Z
                 = |a|α (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy + ε π ∗ (x, y) log                dxdy
                                                                     µ(x)ν(y)
                   Z                                                           Z
                 = (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy + εKL(Π∗ |µ ⊗ ν) − (1 − |a|α ) (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy
                                             Z
                 = Wc,ε (U, V ) − (1 − |a|α ) (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)

                 = ∆U,V (a, α)Wc,ε (U, V )
                                                                                                 (18)
                            (1−|a|α ) (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)
                                     R
         U,V                                                         α                  α
where ∆        (a, α) = 1 −         Wc,ε (U,V )        = 1 − (1 − |a| )λ0 (U, V ) ∈ [|a| , 1) for ε ∈
                                                     α         α   ∗                  α     ∗
                                                       R                      R
(0, +∞) and a < 1 due to the fact that 0 < (1−|a| ) (x−y) dΠ (x, y) < (x−y) dΠ (x, y) ≤
Wc,ε (U, V ). The equality in the last inequality (λ0 (U, V ) = |a|α ) holds when U is independent of
V inherently, where the KL regularization term equals zero. ∆U,V (a, α) is a function less than 1,
which depends on the two margin distributions, including their independence and similarity, and the
scale factor a. The ratio λ0 (U, V ) measures the proportion        of the first optimal transport term
                                                        (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)
                                                      R
over the whole divergence term Wc,ε , i.e., λ0 =          Wc,ε (U,V )    ∈ (0, 1] when Wc,ε (U, V ) ̸= 0.
When λ0 (U, V ) = 1, it indicates that the minimizer is the product of two marginal distributions,
which happens when U and V are independent. When Wc,ε (U, V ) = 0, if              R and only if U = V
almost everywhere, the definition also holds Wc,ε (U, V )−εKL(Π∗ |µ⊗ν) = (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) =
λ0 Wc,ε (U, V ) for λ0 (U, V ) ∈ (0, 1]. As such, the definition is valid and we have λ0 (U, V ) ∈ (0, 1]
for any U, V , indicating that ∆U,V (a, α) ∈ [|α|a , 1).
However, the fact that ∆U,V (a, α) < 1 can only guarantee a non-expansive contraction rather than
a desirable contraction of the distributional Bellman operator. This is because there will be extreme
cases in the power of series in general, although it is very unlikely to occur especially in a certain
MDP with finite return distribution set. For example, denote the non-constant factor as qk for the
k-th distributional Bellman update, where qk < 1. We can construct a counterexample as qk =
1 − 1/(k + 2)2 . In this case, Π+∞            2435
                                    k=1 qk = 3 3 4 4 · · · > 0 instead of the convergence to 0 and the
non-zero limit can not guarantee the contraction. It also intuitively implies that iteratively applying
distribution Bellman operator may not lead to convergence in general by considering all possible
return distributions given the non-constant factor ∆U,V (a, α). Although we know these extreme
cases are very unlikely to happen, we have to rule out these extreme cases for a rigorous proof.
Thanks to a finite MDP, where the state and action space are finite. This implies that the return
distribution set is finite as well, meaning that the set of λ0 is also finite. Therefore, due to the fact
that the real set is dense, we can always find a positive constant that can be used as the contraction
factor. Alternatively, we can directly use the inf U,V λ0 (U, V ) as the uniform lower bound.
Under this condition, we can immediately find a universal upper bound of ∆U,V (a, α), which can
be used to prove the contraction of distributional Bellman operator in the following. In particular,


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we have:
                                                 (1 − |a|α ) (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)
                                                            R
                          U,V
                  sup ∆         (a, α) = 1 − inf
                  U,V                        U,V            Wc,ε (U, V )
                                      = 1 − inf (1 − |a|α )λ0 (U, V )                                  (19)
                                             U,V

                                      = |a|α inf λ0 (U, V ) + 1 · (1 − inf λ0 (U, V )),
                                                U,V                      U,V

where the upper bound supU,V ∆U,V (a, α) has a interpretable form eventually, which can be
approximately viewed as the convex combination between |a|α and 1. More importantly,
supU,V ∆U,V (a, α) is strictly less than 1, which is guaranteed by the finite set of {λ0 (U, V )} in
a finite MDP. As further explained, if the proportion of the first optimal transport term in Wc,ε is
universally increasing in a given MDP, the convergence factor would tend to γ α . The extreme case is
we directly apply Wasserstein distance to the power of α without using the KL regularization term,
where coincides with our results analyzed in Sinkhorn divergence.
Following the similar procedure of Wc,ε , we start to prove the scale-sensitive property of the
Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε , i.e.,

                                 W c,ε (aU, aV ) ≤ ∆(a, α)W c,ε (U, V ),                               (20)
                                  (1−|a|α )(2 (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)−Wc,ε (µ,µ)−Wc,ε (ν,ν))
                                            R
where ∆(a, α) = 1 − inf U,V                           W c,ε (U,V )
                                                                                        ∈ (|a|α , 1). Before
the scale sensitive properties proof for W c,ε , we introduce the following Lemma.

LemmaR 1. Denote Π∗ as the minimizer of Wc,ε , based on the dual maximization form of Wc,ε , we
have 2 c(x, y)dΠ∗ (x, y) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν) > 0.

Proof. We firstly show that 2Wc (µ, ν) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν) ≥ 0, where Wc is the optimal
transport metric with the cost function c and the Wasserstein distance Wαa is the special case with
a Euclidean cost function c = −kα . Note that the set of admissible joint distribution/couplings for
the optimal transport metric Wc is:
                                         Z                       Z
    Π(µ, ν) := γ ∈ X × Y | γxy ⩾ 0, γxy dy = µx ∀x ∈ X, γxy dx = νy ∀y ∈ Y ,                   (21)
                                                y                        x

where γxy is the admissible joint distribution. Define the Lagrangian function of the minimization
problem in Wc as:
               ZZ                        Z              Z              Z              Z
L(γ, φ, ψ) : =        c(x, y)γxy dxdy + φ(x)(µx − γxy dy)dx + ψ(y)(νy − γxy dx)dy
                  x,y                      x             y              y              y
               ZZ                                          Z              Z                        (22)
             =        (c(x, y) − φ(x) − ψ(y))γxy dxdy + φ(x)µx dx + ψ(y)νy dy
                  x,y                                            x                 y

We take the derivative of L(γ, φ, ψ) in terms of γxy , we have c(x, y) − φ(x) − ψ(y). Thus, we have
the dual form of Wc as
                                               Z                Z
                   sup min L(γ, φ, ψ) = sup φ(x)µx dx + ψ(y)νy dy                              (23)
                   φ,ψ   γ                      φ,ψ   x              y

Define φ∗ and ψ ∗ as the solutions of Wc,ε (µ, µ) and Wc,ε (ν, ν), respectively. Due to the inde-
pendence, the minimizer of Wc,ε (µ, µ) and Wc,ε (ν, ν) would be the product of Rtheir marginal
distribution and the KL
                      R term   would equal 0. Therefore, we have Wc,ε (µ, µ) = 2 x φ∗ (x)µx dx
and Wc,ε (ν, ν) = 2 y ψ ∗ (y)νy dy. Based on the dual maximization form in Eq. 23, we obtain
2Wc (µ, ν) ≥ 2 x φ∗ (x)µx dx + 2 y ψ ∗ (y)νy dy = Wc,ε (µ, µ) + Wc,ε (ν, ν). For the special case,
                R                  R

when c = −kα , we have 2Wαα (µ, ν) − Eµ ∥X − X ′ ∥α − Eν ∥Y − Y ′ ∥α ≥ 0.
Finally, we have 2 c(x, y)dΠ∗ (x, y) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν) > 2Wαα (µ, ν) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) −
                    R
Wc,ε (ν, ν) due to the infimum nature of Wasserstein distance Wαα with the cost function c(x, y) =
−∥x − y∥α , where the first inequality is strict, resulting from the non-trivial KL term in Wc,ε .


                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  i.i.d.        i.i.d.
We return to the sensitive property of W c,ε . Let X, X ′ ∼ µ, Y, Y ′ ∼ ν and X, X ′ , Y, Y ′ are
mutually independent, the joint distribution Π in Wc,ε is only the multiplication of two marginal
distributions from
                 R two random variables, and would R degenerate to a simpler form. In particular,
Wc,ε (µ, µ) = c(x, x′ )dµ(x)dµ(x′ ) + 0 = − (x − x′ )α dµ ⊗ µ, and Wc,ε (ν, ν) = − (y −
                                                                                            R
y ′ )α dν ⊗ ν. Based on the wisdom in Eq. 18, we immediately have Wc,ε (aµ, aµ) = |a|α Wc,ε (µ, µ)
and Wc,ε (aν, aν) = |a|α Wc,ε (ν, ν) when c = −kα . This is because the KL term is the two
distance would be equal to 0 due to the independence and the remaining Wasserstein distance sat-
isfies the |a|α scale-sensitive. Define the ratio λ(U, V ) in the full form of Sinkhorn divergence
W c,ε (U, V ) as 2 (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)−Wc,ε (µ, µ)−Wc,ε (ν, ν) = W c,ε (U, V )−εKL(Π∗ |µ⊗ν) =
                  R

λ(U, V )W c,ε (U, V ) with λ(U, V ) ∈ (0, 1]. Then, we have

  W c,ε (aU, aV )
   = 2Wc,ε (aU, aV ) − Wc,ε (aU, aU ′ ) − Wc,ε (aV, aV ′ )
   = 2Wc,ε (aU, aV ) − |a|α Wc,ε (µ, µ) − |a|α Wc,ε (ν, ν)
                                  Z
   ≤ 2(Wc,ε (U, V ) − (1 − |a| ) (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)) − |a|α Wc,ε (µ, µ) − |a|α Wc,ε (ν, ν) (24)
                                α

                                  Z
   = W c,ε (U, V ) − (1 − |a|α )(2 (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν))
        U,V
   =∆         (a, α)W c,ε (U, V )
          U,V                 (1−|a|α )(2 (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)−Wc,ε (µ,µ)−Wc,ε (ν,ν))
                                         R
where ∆         (a, α) = 1−                       W c,ε (U,V )
                                                                                  = 1−(1−|a|α )λ(U, V ) ∈
(|a|α , 1). Thanks to Lemma 1, the numerator in λ(U, V ) would be positive, and
                                                                             R thus λ(U, V ) would
be positive as well. λ(U, V ) is typically less than or equal to one as 0 ≤ 2 (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) −
Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν) ≤ W c,ε (U, V ), where the only difference between the numerator and
denominator for λ(U, V ) is the KL regularization term. Thus, λ(U, V ) measures the proportion
of the optimal transport distance regardless of the KL regularization term over the whole Sinkhorn
divergence W c,ε (U, V ).
Still thanks to the finite MDP, the return distribution set would be finite, and thus the set of {λ(U, V )}
for U, V ∈ {Z(s, a)} with s ∈ S and a ∈ A. This leads to λ(U, V ) ∈ [inf U,V λ(U, V ), 1] with
inf U,V λ(U, V ) > 0 strictly. Similarly, we have the following result:

                                 (1 − |a|α )(2 (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν))
                                               R
         U,V
  sup ∆ (a, α) = 1 − inf
  U,V                       U,V                             W c,ε (U, V )
                                        α
                     ≤ 1 − inf (1 − |a| )λ(U, V )
                            U,V                                                                        (25)
                     = |a|α inf λ(U, V ) + 1 · (1 − inf λ(U, V ))
                              U,V                         U,V

                     ∈ [|a|α , 1),
                    U,V
where supU,V ∆ (a, α) = |a|α when all the KL regularization degenerates to 0, which may
happen when the two return distributions are independent. In such case, the contraction factor would
degenerate to γ α , which is the exact case when we apply α-Wasserstein distance to the power of α.
                                           U,V
We next define ∆(a, α) = supU,V ∆                (a, α). Therefore, we have the result:

                                    W c,ε (aU, aV ) ≤ ∆(a, α)W c,ε (U, V ),                           (26)

                                    (1−|a|α )(2 (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)−Wc,ε (µ,µ)−Wc,ε (ν,ν))
                                               R
where ∆(a, α) = 1 − inf U,V                             W c,ε (U,V )
                                                                                        = 1 − (1 −
   α                        α                                                  α
|a| ) inf U,V λ(U, V ) = |a| inf U,V λ(U, V ) + (1 − inf U,V λ(U, V )) ∈ [|a| , 1). This result paves
the crucial path toward the convergence of the distributional Bellman operator under Sinkhorn di-
vergence analyzed in 3.3.
3.3 Contraction of Distributional Bellman Operator under Sinkhorn Divergence. Based on
results in 3.1 and 3.2, we derive the convergence of distributional Bellman operator Tπ under the


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       ∞
supreme form of W c,ε , i.e., W c,ε :
                     ∞
                  W c,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 )
                   = sup W c,ε (Tπ Z1 (s, a), Tπ Z2 (s, a))
                      s,a

                   = W c,ε (R(s, a) + γZ1 (s′ , a′ ), R(s, a) + γZ2 (s′ , a′ ))
                   = W c,ε (γZ1 (s′ , a′ ), γZ2 (s′ , a′ ))
                   c=−kα               ′       ′       ′       ′
                     ≤          ∆Z1 (s ,a ),Z2 (s ,a ) (γ, α)W c,ε (Z1 (s′ , a′ ), Z2 (s′ , a′ ))                    (27)
                                       ′       ′       ′       ′
                                  Z1 (s ,a ),Z2 (s ,a )
                   ≤ sup ∆                                         (γ, α) sup W c,ε (Z1 (s′ , a′ ), Z2 (s′ , a′ ))
                      s′ ,a′                                                s′ ,a′
                                           ′       ′       ′       ′
                                    Z1 (s ,a ),Z2 (s ,a )                        ∞
                   ≤ sup ∆                                             (γ, α)W c,ε (Z1 , Z2 )
                      Z1 ,Z2
                                        ∞
                   = ∆(γ, α)W c,ε (Z1 , Z2 )

where the first inequality comes from the scale-sensitive property proof of Sinkhorn divergence and
the last inequality is based on the fact the range of return distribution Z1 and Z2 can be larger than
that for Z1 (s, a) and Z2 (s, a) for ∀s ∈ |S|, a ∈ |A|. Owing to the fact that ∆(γ, α) ∈ [|γ|α , 1) is
a MDP-dependent constant, which is also determined by γ and α, we conclude that distributional
Bellman operator is at least ∆(γ, α)-contractive. Based on the existing Banach fixed point theorem,
we have a unique optimal return distribution when convergence.



C    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1 AND C OROLLARY 1

Proof. We leverage Π∗ε (µ, ν), Π∗ (µ, µ), Π∗ (ν, ν) to denote the optimal joint distribution Π
while evaluating Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν), W c,ε (µ, µ) and W c,ε (ν, ν), respectively. Let
        i.i.d.         i.i.d.
X, X ′ ∼ µ, Y, Y ′ ∼ ν and X, X ′ , Y, Y ′ are mutually independent. The Sinkhorn divergence
can be composed in the following form:

W c,ε (µ, ν)
 = 2KL (Π∗ε (µ, ν)|K−k (µ, ν)) − KL (Π∗ (µ, µ)|K−k (µ, µ)) − KL (Π∗ (ν, ν)|K−k (ν, ν))
                                 1                                                  1
 ∝ 2(EX,Y [log Π∗ε (X, Y )]) + EX,Y [c(X, Y )]) − (EX,X ′ [log Π∗ (X, X ′ )]) + EX,X ′ [c(X, X ′ )])
                                 ε                                                  ε
                  ∗      ′      1                ′
 − (EY,Y ′ [log Π (Y, Y )]) + EY,Y ′ [c(Y, Y )])
                                ε
                           Π∗ε (X, Y )2

                                                   1
 = EX,X ′ ,Y,Y ′ log ∗                          + (EX,X ′ [k(X, X ′ )] + EY,Y ′ [k(Y, Y ′ )] − 2EX,X ′ [k(X, Y )])
                      Π (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )      ε
                            ∗         2

                           Πε (X, Y )              1
 = EX,X ′ ,Y,Y ′ log ∗                          + MMD2−c (µ, ν)
                      Π (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )      ε
                                                                                                   (28)
where the cost function c in the Gibbs distribution K is minus kernel in MMD. ∝ indicates we
cancel the normalization factor in the probability density function of Gibbs distribution K(x, y) =
 1 −c(x−y)/ε
Ze            . Till now, we have shown the result in Corollary 1.
Next, we use Taylor expansion to prove the moment matching of MMD with the Gaussian kernel.
Firstly, we have the following equation:


 MMD2−c (µ, ν) = EX,X ′ [k(X, X ′ )] + EY,Y ′ [k(Y, Y ′ )] − 2EX,X ′ [k(X, Y )]
               = EX,X ′ ϕ(X)⊤ ϕ(X ′ ) + EY,Y ′ ϕ(Y )⊤ ϕ(Y ′ ) − 2EX,X ′ ϕ(X)⊤ ϕ(Y ) (29)


                  = E∥ϕ(X) − ϕ(Y )∥2

                                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We expand the Gaussian kernel via Taylor expansion, i.e.,
                                                    2        2
                          k(x, y) = e−(x−y) /(2σ )
                                             x2         y2       xy
                                    = e− 2σ2 e− 2σ2 e σ2
                                                      ∞
                                          x2
                                       − 2σ      y2 X
                                            2 − 2σ 2
                                                          1 x    1 y
                                    =e       e           √ ( )n √ ( )n
                                                          n! σ   n! σ                            (30)
                                                     n=0
                                          ∞
                                         X       x2  1 x       y2  1 y
                                    =        e− 2σ2 √ ( )n e− 2σ2 √ ( )n
                                         n=0         n! σ          n! σ
                                    = ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(y)
Therefore, we have
                             ∞                                                            i 2
                                     1               h   2    2
                                                                   i      h   2    2
                                                 Ex∼µ e−x /(2σ ) xn − Ex∼ν e−y /(2σ ) y n
                             X
         MMD2−c (µ, ν) =
                             n=0
                                   σ 2n n!
                              ∞                                    2                             (31)
                             X       1
                         =                       M̃n (µ) − M̃n (ν)
                             n=0
                                   σ 2n n!

              h   2    2
                            i
M̃n (µ) = Ex∼µ e−x /(2σ ) xn , and similarly for M̃n (ν). The conclusion is the same as the
moment matching in (Nguyen et al., 2020). Finally, due to the equivalence of W c,ε (µ, ν) after
multiplying ε, we have
                                                      (Π∗ε (X, Y ))2

        W c,ε (µ, ν; k) ∝ MMD2−c (µ, ν) + εE
                                                 Π∗ (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )
                           ∞                                                                      (32)
                                                                          (Π∗ε (X, Y ))2
                          X 1                              2
                        =             M̃ n (µ) − M̃ n (ν)    +  εE                              ,
                          n=0
                              σ 2n n!                                Π∗ (X, X ′ )Π∗ (Y, Y ′ )

This result is also consistent with Theorem 1, where Π∗ would degenerate to µ ⊗ ν as ε → +∞.
In that case, the regularization term would vanish, and thus the Sinkhorn divergence degrades to an
MMD loss, i.e., MMD2−c (µ, ν).


                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    L EARNING C URVES ON 55 ATARI G AMES


Figure 4: Learning curves of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on 55
Atari games after training 40M frames averaged over 3 seeds.


                                             21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9HQWXUH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'HPRQ$WWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7HQQLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3KRHQL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =D[[RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *RSKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HQGXUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %HU]HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5LYHUUDLG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6RODULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7LPH3LORW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *UDYLWDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6WDU*XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &KRSSHU&RPPDQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $OLHQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SRQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EUHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8S1'RZQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5RDG5XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6NLLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )UHHZD\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %R[LQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VWHUL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .UXOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5RERWDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0V3DFPDQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %HDP5LGHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $PLGDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <DUV5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %DWWOH=RQH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %DQN+HLVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1DPH7KLV*DPH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )LVKLQJ'HUE\


                                                                                                         - QRDQN) / QRDQN in the left.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &HQWLSHGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7XWDQNKDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :L]DUG2I:RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +HUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3ULYDWH(\H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .DQJDURR

                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) Sinkhorn vs QRDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4EHUW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,FH+RFNH\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VVDXOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ   45'41


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &UD]\&OLPEHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )URVWELWH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9LGHR3LQEDOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $VWHURLGV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -DPHVERQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %RZOLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0RQWH]XPD5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'RXEOH'XQN


     large number of games can be easily observed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9HQWXUH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3ULYDWH(\H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7HQQLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =D[[RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *RSKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *UDYLWDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5RERWDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5RDG5XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <DUV5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )LVKLQJ'HUE\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %DWWOH=RQH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7LPH3LORW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5LYHUUDLG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HQGXUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .UXOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0V3DFPDQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -DPHVERQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SRQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )UHHZD\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &KRSSHU&RPPDQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %HU]HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EUHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %R[LQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6WDU*XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,FH+RFNH\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $PLGDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $OLHQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +HUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %DQN+HLVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VVDXOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :L]DUG2I:RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1DPH7KLV*DPH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6NLLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .DQJDURR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &HQWLSHGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3KRHQL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %HDP5LGHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )URVWELWH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9LGHR3LQEDOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $VWHURLGV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ   00'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VWHUL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b) Sinkhorn vs MMDDRL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7XWDQNKDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R ATIO I MPROVEMENT A NALYSIS ACROSS A LL 55 ATARI G AMES


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6RODULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8S1'RZQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4EHUW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'HPRQ$WWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &UD]\&OLPEHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %RZOLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0RQWH]XPD5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'RXEOH'XQN
     smaller proportion of games, but a remarkable performance improvement for SinkhornDRL on a
     DRL, the advantage of SinkhornDRL is reduced with the performance improvement on a slightly
     the effectiveness of smoothing Wasserstein distance in distributional RL. In contrast with MMD-
     of games, including Venture, Seaquest, Tennis and Phoenix. This empirical outperformance verifies
     of the considered games and the superiority of SinkhornDRL is significant across a large number
     that compared with QRDQN (left), SinkhornDRL achieves better performance across almost half
     We provide a ratio improvement analysis across all 55 Atari games in Figure 5. Figure 5 showcases
                                                                                                         and MMDDRL (right) over 3 seeds. For example, the ratio improvement is calculated by (Sinkhorn
                                                                                                         Figure 5: Ratio improvement of return for Sinkhorn distributional RL algorithm over QRDQN (left)
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     R AW S CORE TABLES ACROSS A LL ATARI G AMES

    GAMES              RANDOM      HUMAN         DQN         C51      QRDQN        MMD      Sinkhorn
    Alien                  211.9    7,127.7     1334.0     1946.0      1625.0      2218.0     1873.0
    Amidar                  2.34    1,719.5      400.2      354.5       554.6       706.4      506.7
    Assault                283.5     742.0      5651.8     3368.1      7593.6      6001.5     3771.0
    Asterix                268.5    8,503.3     5490.0    31860.0      7660.0     15890.0     7610.0
    Asteroids            1008.6    47,388.7     1246.0      826.0      1660.0      1095.0      624.0
    Atlantis              22188    29,028.1    18990.0   1490040.0   2520080.0    80920.0   3417430.0
    BankHeist                14      753.1       657.0      948.0      1000.0      1034.0      849.0
    BattleZone             3000    37,187.5    22100.0    28400.0     37800.0     28400.0     27000.0
    BeamRider              414.3   16,926.5     9519.0    13069.2      8043.8     14072.6     9865.6
    Berzerk                165.6    2,630.4      746.0      824.0       928.0       959.0     1029.0
    Bowling                23.48     160.7        29.6      30.3        35.5         60.0       12.6
    Boxing                 -0.69     12.1         96.0      91.8        98.3         96.9       96.7
    Breakout                1.5      30.5        313.4      373.0       361.4       405.9      402.5
    Centipede            2064.77   12,017.0     4548.1     6090.9      5508.0      5152.0     4952.2
    ChopperCommand          794     7,387.8     2780.0     4360.0      5490.0      6760.0     6520.0
    CrazyClimber           8043    35,829.4    15960.0    158070.0    69430.0    112130.0     16000.0
    DemonAttack          162.25     1,971.0    58324.5    41656.5     63889.0    437760.5   195827.0
    DoubleDunk            -18.14     -16.4         0.2        0.6        -0.4        -0.4       -2.2
    Enduro                  0.01     860.5      1961.3     1507.5      2832.5      3248.2     4272.0
    FishingDerby          -93.06     -38.7        15.8      26.0        33.4         24.5       24.6
    Freeway                 0.01     29.6         30.9      32.6        34.0         33.6       34.0
    Frostbite               73.2    4,334.7     1767.0     3317.0      4487.0      2874.0     2632.0
    Gopher                  364     2,412.5     7058.0     9314.0      6466.0      6412.0     15168.0
    Gravitar               226.5    3,351.4      110.0      325.0       565.0       345.0      470.0
    Hero                    551    30,826.4     4657.5     8098.0     11673.5      7215.0     7476.0
    IceHockey              -10.3       0.9       -13.0      -11.4        -3.6        -4.5       -4.6
    Jamesbond                27      302.8       320.0      625.0      1995.0       480.0      450.0
    Kangaroo                 54     3,035.0      660.0     9870.0     13440.0     14720.0     10680.0
    Krull               1,566.59    2,665.5     9191.1     9366.9      9918.7      8732.7     9549.0
    KungFuMaster            451    22,736.3    62800.0    55060.0     36020.0     36940.0     42600.0
    MontezumaRevenge        0.0     4,753.3        1.0        1.0         1.0         1.0       0.0
    MsPacman               242.6    6,951.6     3230.0     2168.0      2673.0      2568.0     2568.0
    NameThisGame         2404.9     8,049.0     4702.0     6278.0     11739.0     12394.0     9200.0
    Phoenix                757.2    7,242.6     5398.0    12043.0     12324.0     32086.0     18558.0
    Pitfall                -265     6,463.7        1.0        1.0         1.0         1.0       0.0
    Pong                  -20.34     14.6         20.0      20.7        20.8         20.9       21.0
    PrivateEye             34.49   69,571.3      100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0      100.0
    Qbert                188.75    13,455.0     8150.0    16575.0     13830.0     15782.5     6530.0
    RiverRaid            1575.4    17,118.0     8350.0    10232.0      8714.0      9350.0     11998.0
    RoadRunner               7      7,845.0    44950.0    54490.0     54620.0     42530.0     52600.0
    Robotank                2.24     11.9         13.2      22.5        48.1         34.4       48.1
    Seaquest                88.2   42,054.7     1444.0    10666.0      2640.0     11685.0     14795.0
    Skiing              -16267.9   -4,336.9   -13340.4    -19040.3    -29970.3    -8983.3    -29970.3
    Solaris              2346.6    12,326.7      582.0      192.0       956.0      3336.0      792.0
    SpaceInvaders        136.15     1,668.7     1005.0     1725.5      1826.5      1216.0     2302.5
    StarGunner              631    10,250.0     1270.0    22600.0     38380.0     52050.0     43820.0
    Tennis                -23.92      -8.3        -5.7       -1.5       -11.9        -1.5       13.3
    TimePilot              3682     5,229.2     1420.0     3260.0      6030.0      7900.0     7060.0
    Tutankham              15.56     167.6       206.6      186.0       178.3       205.2      202.8
    UpNDown                604.7   11,693.2    19145.0    16046.0     17074.0     44746.0     20063.0
    Venture                 0.0     1,187.5        1.0        1.0         1.0         1.0     1370.0
    VideoPinball        15720.98   17,667.9   270050.9    477206.8    388106.7   288137.2   164597.3
    WizardOfWor             534     4,756.5     1440.0     1620.0      4890.0      4480.0     3250.0
    YarsRevenge          3271.42   54,576.9    12507.9    15954.4     17593.8      8516.8     13507.3
    Zaxxon                   8      9,173.3        1.0     5910.0      7410.0      4640.0     10320.0

Table 3: Scores of all algorithms averaged over 3 seeds across 55 Atari games after training 40M
Frames. All scores are computed based on our own PyTorch implementation, rather than directly
referring to existing ones based on the Dopamine TensorFlow framework with 200M frames.


                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     F EATURES OF ATARI G AMES

                                GAMES           Action Space   Dynamics
                                  Alien              18        Complex
                                 Amidar              6          Simple
                                 Assault             7         Complex
                                 Asterix             18        Complex
                                Asteroids            4          Simple
                                 Atlantis            4          Simple
                               BankHeist             18         Simple
                               BattleZone            18         Simple
                               BeamRider             18        Complex
                                 Berzerk             18        Complex
                                 Bowling         Continuous     Simple
                                 Boxing              6          Simple
                                Breakout             4          Simple
                                Centipede            18        Complex
                           ChopperCommand        Continuous    Complex
                             CrazyClimber            18        Complex
                             DemonAttack             18        Complex
                              DoubleDunk             18         Simple
                                 Enduro              9          Simple
                             FishingDerby            18         Simple
                                Freeway              3          Simple
                                Frostbite            18        Complex
                                 Gopher              18         Simple
                                Gravitar         Continuous    Complex
                                   Hero              18         Simple
                               IceHockey         Continuous     Simple
                               Jamesbond             18        Complex
                                Kangaroo             18        Complex
                                  Krull              18        Complex
                            KungFuMaster             18        Complex
                           MontezumaRevenge          18        Complex
                               MsPacman              9          Simple
                            NameThisGame             18        Complex
                                 Phoenix             18        Complex
                                  Pitfall            18        Complex
                                   Pong              3          Simple
                               PrivateEye            18        Complex
                                  Qbert              6         Complex
                                Riverraid            18        Complex
                              RoadRunner             18         Simple
                                Robotank             9          Simple
                                Seaquest             18        Complex
                                  Skiing             9          Simple
                                 Solaris             18        Complex
                             SpaceInvaders           6          Simple
                              StarGunner             18        Complex
                                  Tennis             18         Simple
                                TimePilot            18        Complex
                              Tutankham              18        Complex
                               UpNDown               18        Complex
                                 Venture             18        Complex
                              VideoPinball           6          Simple
                             WizardOfWor             12        Complex
                              YarsRevenge            18        Complex
                                 Zaxxon              18        Complex

    Table 4: Number of Action space and difficulty of environmental dynamics of 55 Atari games.


                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H                                        S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST
H.1                                               M ORE RESULTS IN S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

Decreasing ε. We argue that the limit behavior connection as stated in Theorem 1 may not be
able to be verified rigorously via numeral experiments due to the numerical instability of Sinkhorn
Iteration in Algorithm 2. From Figure 6 (a), we can observe that if we gradually decline ε to 0,
SinkhornDRL’s performance tends to degrade and approach QR-DQN. Note that an overly small ε
will lead to a trivial almost 0 Ki,j in Sinkhorn iteration in Algorithm 2, and will cause 10 numerical
instability issue for al and bl in Line 5 of Algorithm 2. In addition, we also conducted experiments
on Seaquest, a similar result is also observed in Figure 6 (d). As shown in Figure 6 (d), the per-
formance of SinkhornDRL is robust when ε = 10, 100, 500, but a small ϵ = 1 tends to worsen the
performance.

Increasing ε. Moreover, for breakout, if we increase ε, the performance of SinkhornDRL tends
to degrade and be close to MMDDRL as suggested in Figure 6 (b). It is also noted that an overly
large ε will let the Ki,j explode to ∞. This also leads to the numerical instability issue in Sinkhorn
iteration in Algorithm 2.

Samples N . We find that SinkhornDRL requires a proper number of samples N to perform fa-
vorably, and the sensitivity w.r.t N depends on the environment. As suggested in Figure 7 (a), a
smaller N , e.g., N = 2 on breakout has already achieved favorable performance and even acceler-
ates the convergence in the early phase, while N = 2 on Seaquest will lead to the divergence issue.
Meanwhile, an overly large N worsens the performance across two games. We conjecture that using


                                                                                                   %UHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %UHDNRXW



                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                              45'41                                                                                                                                   00'


                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                    (a) Small ε in SinkrhornDRL vs QRDQN                                                                                        (b) Large ε in SinkrhornDRL vs MMDDRL
                                                                                                 %UHDNRXW                                                                                                      6HDTXHVW



                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                             $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                              00'


                                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                         (c) ε on Breakout                                                                                                (d) ε on Seaquest

Figure 6: (a) Sensitivity analysis w.r.t. a small level of ε SinkhornDRL to compare with QR-DQN
that approximates Wasserstein distance on Breakout. (b) Sensitivity analysis w.r.t. a large level of ε
SinkhornDRL algorithm to compare with MMDDRL on Breakout. All learning curves are reported
over 2 seeds. (c) and (d) are results for a general ε on Breakout and Seaquest, respectively.


                                                                                                                                            25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


larger network networks to generate more samples may suffer from the overfitting issue, yielding
the training instability (Bjorck et al., 2021). In practice, we choose a proper number of samples, i.e.,
N = 200 across all games.


                                                                                 %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                       6HDTXHVW

                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                    6DPSOHV
                                                6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                         6DPSOHV


                                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                   6DPSOHV
                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                   6DPSOHV
  $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                       6DPSOHV
                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                       6DPSOHV


                                                                             7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                          (a) Samples on Breakout                                                                                                                     (b) Samples on Seaquest

Figure 7: Sensitivity analysis of Sinkhorn in terms of the number of samples N on Breakout (a) and
Seaquest (b).



More Games on StarGunner and Zaxxon. Beyond Breakout and Seaquest, we also provide
sensitivity analysis on StarGunner and Zaxxon games in Figure 8. It suggests overly small samples,
e.g., 1 and overall large samples tend to degrade the performance, especially on Zaxxon. Although
the two games are robust to ε, and we find a small or large ε hurts the performance in Seaquest.
Thus, considering all games, we set samples 200, and ε = 10.0 in a moderate range across all
games, although a more careful tuning in each game will improve the performance further.

                                                                                                                                                                                                      StarGunner
                                                                                           StarGunner                                                               60000
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Samples=1
                                                                                               =1                                                                   50000                             Samples=200
                                                                                                                                             Average Return


                                                                 50000
                                                Average Return


                                                                                               =10                                                                                                    Samples=600
                                                                 40000                                                                                              40000
                                                                                               =500
                                                                 30000                                                                                              30000
                                                                 20000                                                                                              20000
                                                                 10000                                                                                              10000
                                                                    0                                                                                                               0
                                                                         0         5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                                                         0         5   10        15      20        25   30       35   40
                                                                                     Millions of Frames (M)                                                                                       Millions of Frames (M)
                                                                                     (a) StarGunner: ε                                                                (b) StarGunner:Number of Samples
                                                                                                Zaxxon                                                           16000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Zaxxon
                                                                16000
                                                                                           =1                                                                    14000                                Samples=1
                                                                14000
                                                                                                                                           Average Return


                                                                                           =10                                                                   12000                                Samples=2
                                               Average Return


                                                                12000
                                                                                           =500                                                                  10000                                Samples=200
                                                                10000
                                                                                                                                                                  8000                                Samples=500
                                                                 8000
                                                                 6000                                                                                             6000
                                                                 4000                                                                                             4000
                                                                 2000                                                                                             2000
                                                                    0                                                                                                0
                                                                        0        5        10    15            20   25     30     35   40                                                0         5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40
                                                                                  Millions of Frames (M)                                                                                          Millions of Frames (M)
                                                                                          (c) Zaxxon: ε                                                                         (d) Zaxxon: Number of Samples

Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis of SinkhornDRL on StarGunner and Zaxxon in terms of ε, and number
of samples. Learning curves are reported over 3 seeds.



                                                                                                                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2   C OMPARISON WITH THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

We evaluate the computational time every 10,000 iterations across the whole training process of
all considered distributional RL algorithms and make a comparison in Figure 9. It suggests that
SinkhornDRL indeed increases around 50% computation cost compared with QR-DQN and C51,
but only slightly increases the cost in contrast to MMDDRL on both Breakout and Qbert games. We
argue that this additional computational burden can be tolerant given the significant outperformance
of SinkhornDRL in a large number of environments.
In addition, we also find that the number of Sinkhorn iterations L is negligible to the computation
cost, while an overly large sample N , e.g., 500, will lead to a large computational burden as il-
lustrated in Figure 10. This can be intuitively explained as the computation complexity of the cost
function ci,j is O(N 2 ) in SinkhornDRL, which is particularly heavy in the computation if N is large
enough.

                                                                                                                       %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                                                                           4EHUW
               $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH


                                                                                                                                                                                                     $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH


                                                                                        '41 45 '41 &   00' 6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                  '41 45 '41 &   00' 6LQNKRUQ

Figure 9: Average computational cost per 10,000 iterations of all considered distributional RL al-
gorithm, where we select ε = 10, L = 10 and the number of samples N = 200 in SinkhornDRL
algorithm.


                                                                                                                          %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                                                                          4EHUW
         $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH  V


                                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH  V


                                                                                         6LQNKRUQ          6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ                                                                                     6LQNKRUQ          6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                     VDPSOHV      VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV                                                                                  VDPSOHV      VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV

Figure 10: Average computational cost per 10,000 iterations of SinkhornDRL algorithm over differ-
ent samples.


                                                                                                                                                                                           27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I        A LGORITHM : S INKHORN D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

Algorithm 3 Sinkhorn Distributional RL
Require: Number of generated samples N , the kernel k (e.g., unrectified kernel), discount factor
    γ ∈ [0, 1], learning rate α, replay buffer M , main network Zθ , target network Zθ∗ , number of
    iterations L, hyperparameter ε, and a behavior policy π based on Zθ following an ϵ-greedy rule
 1: Initialize θ and θ ∗ ← θ
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . do
 3:    Take action at ∼ π(·|st ; θ), receive reward rt ∼ R(·|st , at ), and observe st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at )
 4:    Store (st , at , rt , st+1 ) to the replay buffer M
 5:    Randomly draw a batch of transition samples (s, a, r, s′ ) from the replay buffer M
 6:    Compute a greedy action:
                                                            N
                                                     1 X
                                       a∗ = arg max        Zθ∗ (s′ , a′ )i
                                                a ∈A N
                                                 ′
                                                       i=1

    7:    Compute the target Bellman return distribution:
                                   TZi ← r + γZθ∗ (s′ , a∗ )i , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ N
    8:    Evaluate Sinkhorn divergence via Sinkhorn Iterations in Algorithm 2:

                                                        N           N
                                     W c,ε {Zθ (s, a)i }i=1 , {TZj }j=1

    9:    Update the main network Zθ :

                                                              N           N
                               θ ← θ − α∇θ W c,ε {Zθ (s, a)i }i=1 , {TZj }j=1

10:   Periodically update the target network θ∗ ← θ
11: end for


                                                   28
