Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have shown tremendous success in simu-
         lation environments, but their application to real-world problems faces significant
         challenges, with safety being a major concern. In particular, enforcing state-wise
         constraints is essential for many challenging tasks such as autonomous driving
         and robot manipulation. However, existing safe RL algorithms under the frame-
         work of Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) do not consider state-wise
         constraints. To address this gap, we propose State-wise Constrained Policy Opti-
         mization (SCPO), the first general-purpose policy search algorithm for state-wise
         constrained reinforcement learning. SCPO provides guarantees for state-wise con-
         straint satisfaction in expectation. In particular, we introduce the framework of
         Maximum Markov Decision Process, and prove that the worst-case safety violation
         is bounded under SCPO. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
         training neural network policies for extensive robot locomotion tasks, where the
         agent must satisfy a variety of state-wise safety constraints. Our results show
         that SCPO significantly outperforms existing methods and can handle state-wise
         constraints in high-dimensional robotics tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable progress in games and control tasks (Mnih
et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019; Brown & Sandholm, 2018). However, one major barrier that limits
the application of RL algorithms to real-world problems is the lack of safety assurance Cheng et al.
(2019). RL agents learn to make reward-maximizing decisions, which may violate safety constraints.
For example, an RL agent controlling a self-driving car may receive high rewards by driving at
high speeds but will be exposed to high chances of collision. Although the reward signals can be
designed to penalize risky behaviors, there is no guarantee for safety. In other words, RL agents may
sometimes prioritize maximizing the reward over ensuring safety, which can lead to unsafe or even
catastrophic outcomes (Gu et al., 2022).
Emerging in the literature, safe RL aims to provide safety guarantees during or after training. Early
attempts have been made under the framework of constrained Markov Decision Process, where the
majority of works enforce cumulative constraints or chance constraints (Ray et al., 2019; Achiam
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021). In real-world applications, however, many critical constraints are
instantaneous. For instance, collision avoidance must be enforced at all times for autonomous
cars (Zhao et al., 2023a). Another example is that when a robot holds a glass, the robot can only
release the glass when the glass is on a stable surface. The violation of those constraints will lead to
irreversible failures of the task. In this work, we focus on state-wise (instantaneous) constraints.
The State-wise Constrained Markov Decision Process (SCMDP) is a novel formulation in reinforce-
ment learning that requires policies to satisfy hard state-wise constraints. Unlike cumulative or
probabilistic constraints, state-wise constraints demand full compliance at each time step as for-
malized by Zhao et al. (2023a). Existing state-wise safe RL methods can be categorized based on
whether safety is ensured during training. There is a fundamental limitation that it is impossible to
guarantee hard state-wise safety during training without prior knowledge of the dynamic model (Zhao
et al., 2021; 2022; 2023b). The best we can achieve in a model free setting is to learn to satisfy
the constraints using as few samples as possible, which is the focus of this paper. We aim to pro-
vide theoretical guarantees on state-wise safety violation and worst case reward degredation during
training.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our approach is underpinned by a key insight that constraining the maximum violation is equivalent
to enforcing state-wise safety. This insight leads to a novel formulation of MDP called the Maximum
Markov Decision Process (MMDP). With MMDP, we establish a new theoretical result that provides
a bound on the difference between the maximum cost of two policies for episodic tasks. This result
expands upon the cumulative discounted reward and cost bounds for policy search using trust regions,
as previously documented in literature (Achiam et al., 2017). We leverage this result to design a policy
improvement step that not only guarantees worst-case performance degradation but also ensures
state-wise cost constraints. Our proposed algorithm, State-wise Constrained Policy Optimization
(SCPO), approximates the theoretically-justified update, which achieves a state-of-the-art trade-off
between safety and performance. Through experiments, we demonstrate that SCPO effectively
trains neural network policies with thousands of parameters on high-dimensional simulated robot
locomotion tasks; and is able to optimize rewards while enforcing state-wise safety constraints. This
work represents a significant step towards developing practical safe RL algorithms that can be applied
to many real-world problems.

2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   C UMULATIVE S AFETY

Cumulative safety requires that the expected discounted return with respect to some cost function
is upper-bounded over the entire trajectory. One representative approach is constrained policy opti-
mization (CPO) (Achiam et al., 2017), which builds on a theoretical bound on the difference between
the costs of different policies and derives a policy improvement procedure to ensure constraints
satisfaction. Another approach is interior-point policy optimization (IPO) (Liu et al., 2019), which
augments the reward-maximizing objective with logarithmic barrier functions as penalty functions
to accommodate the constraints. Other methods include Lagrangian methods (Ray et al., 2019)
which use adaptive penalty coefficients to enforce constraints and projection-based constrained
policy optimization (PCPO) (Yang et al., 2020a) which projects trust-region policy updates onto the
constraint set. Although our focus is on a different setting of constraints, existing methods are still
valuable references for illustrating the advantages of our SCPO. By utilizing MMDP, SCPO breaks
the conventional safety-reward trade-off, which results in stronger convergence of state-wise safety
constraints and guaranteed performance degradation bounds.

2.2   S TATE - WISE S AFETY

Hierarchical Policy One way to enforce state-wise safety constraints is to use hierarchical policies,
with an RL policy generating reward-maximizing actions, and a safety monitor (Noren et al., 2021)
modifying the actions to satisfy state-wise safety constraints (Wei et al., 2022). Such an approach
often requires a perfect safety critic to function well. For example, conservative safety critics
(CSC) (Bharadhwaj et al., 2020) propose a safe critic QC (s, a), providing a conservative estimate of
the likelihood of being unsafe given a state-action pair. If the safety violation exceeds a predefined
threshold, a new action is re-sampled from the policy until it passes the safety critic. However, this
approach is time-consuming. On the other hand, optimization-based methods such as gradient descent
or quadratic programming can be used to find a safe action that satisfies the constraint while staying
close to the reference action. Unrolling safety layer (USL) (Zhang et al., 2022b) follows a similar
hierarchical structure as CSC but performs gradient descent on the reference action iteratively until
the constraint is satisfied based on learned safety critic QC (s, a). Finally, instead of using gradient
descent, Lyapunov-based policy gradient (LPG) (Chow et al., 2019) and SafeLayer (Dalal et al.,
2018) directly solve quadratic programming (QP) to project actions to the safe action set induced
by the linearized versions of some learned critic QC (s, a). All these approaches suffer from safety
violations due to imperfect critic QC (s, a), while those solving QPs further suffer from errors due
to the linear approximation of the critic. To avoid those issues, we propose SCPO as an end-to-end
policy which does not explicitly maintain a safety monitor.

End-to-End Policy End-to-end policies maximize task rewards while ensuring safety at the same
time. Related work regarding state-wise safety after convergence has been explored recently. Some
approaches (Liang et al., 2018; Tessler et al., 2018) solve a primal-dual optimization problem to
satisfy the safety constraint in expectation. However, the associated optimization is hard in practice


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


because the optimization problem changes at every learning step. Bohez et al. (2019) approaches
the same setting by augmenting the reward with the sum of the constraint penalty weighted by the
Lagrangian multiplier. Although claimed state-wise safety performance, the aforementioned methods
do not provide theoretical guarantee and fail to achieve near-zero safety violation in practice. He
et al. (2023) proposes AutoCost to automatically find an appropriate cost function using evolutionary
search over the space of cost functions as parameterized by a simple neural network. It is empirically
shown that the evolved cost functions achieve near-zero safety violation, however, no theoretical
guarantee is provided, and extensive computation is required. FAC (Ma et al., 2021) does provide
theoretically guaranteed state-wise safety via parameterized Lagrange functions. However, FAC
replies on strong assumptions and performs poorly in practice. To resolve the above issues, we
propose SCPO as an easy-to-implement and theoretically sound approach with no prior assumptions
on the underlying safety functions.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
3.1   P RELIMINARIES

In this paper, we are especially interested in guaranteeing safety for episodic tasks, which falls within
in the scope of finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP). An MDP is specified by a tuple
(S, A, , R, P, µ), where S is the state space, and A is the control space, R : S ⇥ A 7! R is the
reward function, 0  < 1 is the discount factor, µ : S 7! R is the initial state distribution, and
P : S ⇥A⇥S 7! R is the transition probability function. P (s0 |s, a) is the probability of transitioning
to state s0 given that the previous state was s and the agent took action a at state s. A stationary
policy ⇡ : S 7! P(A) is a map from states to a probability distribution over actions, with ⇡(a|s)
denoting the probability of selecting action a in state s. We denote the set of all stationary policies by
⇧. Subsequently, we denote ⇡✓ as the policy that is parameterized by the parameter ✓.
The standard goal for MDP is to learn a policy ⇡ that maximizes a performance measure J0 (⇡) which
is computed via the discounted sum of reward:
                                              "H                          #
                                               X
                                                      t
                             J0 (⇡) = E⌧ ⇠⇡             R(st , at , st+1 ) ,                   (1)
                                                  t=0

where H 2 N is the horizon, ⌧ = [s0 , a0 , s1 , · · · ], and ⌧ ⇠ ⇡ is shorthand for that the distribution
over trajectories depends on ⇡ : s0 ⇠ µ, at ⇠ ⇡(·|st ), st+1 ⇠ P (·|st , at ).

3.2   S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS

A constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) is an MDP augmented with constraints that restrict
the set of allowable policies. Specifically, CMDP introduces a set of cost functions, C1 , C2 , · · · , Cm ,
where Ci : S ⇥ A ⇥ S 7! R maps the state action transition tuple into a cost value. Analogous to
equation 1, we denote                          "H                            #
                                                X
                                                      t
                               JCi (⇡) = E⌧ ⇠⇡          Ci (st , at , st+1 )                             (2)
                                                   t=0
as the cost measure for policy ⇡ with respect to cost function Ci . Hence, the set of feasible stationary
policies for CMDP is then defined as follows, where di 2 R:
                                   ⇧C = {⇡ 2 ⇧ 8i, JCi (⇡)  di }.                                      (3)

In CMDP, the objective is to select a feasible stationary policy ⇡✓ that maximizes the performance
measure:
                                       max J0 (⇡), s.t. ⇡ 2 ⇧C .                                        (4)
                                         ⇡


In this paper, we are interested in a special type of CMDP where the safety specification is to persis-
tently satisfy a hard cost constraint at every step (as opposed to cumulative costs over trajectories),
which we refer to as State-wise Constrained Markov Decision Process (SCMDP). Like CMDP,
SCMDP uses the set of cost functions C1 , C2 , · · · , Cm to evaluate the instantaneous cost of state


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


action transition tuples. Unlike CMDP, SCMDP requires the cost for every state action transition to
satisfy a hard constraint. Hence, the set of feasible stationary policies for SCMDP is defined as
                                                            ⇥                 ⇤
                   ⇧¯ C = {⇡ 2 ⇧ 8i, E(s ,a ,s )⇠⌧,⌧ ⇠⇡ Ci (st , at , st+1 )  wi }               (5)
                                                t    t   t+1

                                                                                        ¯ C that
where wi 2 R. Then the objective for SCMDP is to find a feasible stationary policy from ⇧
maximizes the performance measure. Formally,
                                                        ¯C
                                   max J0 (⇡), s.t. ⇡ 2 ⇧                                    (6)
                                            ⇡


3.3   M AXIMUM M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS

Note that for equation 6, every state-action transition pair corresponds to a constraint, which is
intractable to solve using conventional reinforement learning algorithms. Our intuition is that, instead
of directly constraining the cost of each possible state-action transition, we can constrain the expected
maximum state-wise cost along the trajectory, which is much easier to solve. Following that intuition,
we define a novel Maximum Markov-Decision Process (MMDP), which further extends CMDP via (i)
                                                        .
a set of up-to-now maximum state-wise costs M = [M1 , M2 , · · · , Mm ] where Mi 2 M ⇢ R, and
(ii) a set of cost increment functions, D1 , D2 , · · · , Dm , where Di : (S, Mm ) ⇥ A ⇥ S 7! [0, R+ ]
maps the augmented state action transition tuple into a non-negative cost increment. We define the
                                            .
augmented state ŝ = (s, M) 2 (S, Mm ) = Ŝ, where Ŝ is the augmented state space. Formally,
                          Di ŝt , at , ŝt+1 = max{Ci (st , at , st+1 ) Mit , 0}.                           (7)
                                                                        Pt 1
By setting Di ŝ0 , a0 , ŝ1 = Ci (s0 , a0 , s1 ), we have Mit =           k=0 Di ŝk , ak , ŝk+1 for t       1.
Hence, we define expected maximum state-wise cost (or Di -return) for ⇡:
                                                   " H                      #
                                                    X
                                JDi (⇡) = E⌧ s⇡         Di ŝt , at , ŝt+1 .                                (8)
                                                           t=0

Importantly, equation 8 is the key component of MMDP and differs our work from existing safe RL
approaches that are based on CMDP cost measure equation 2. With equation 8, equation 6 can be
rewritten as:
                                     maxJ (⇡), s.t. 8i, JDi (⇡)  wi ,                                        (9)
                                      ⇡
                        hP                              i
                            H                                               .
where J (⇡) = E⌧ ⇠⇡         t=0
                                  t
                                    R(ŝt , at , ŝt+1 ) and R(ŝ, a, ŝ0 ) = R(s, a, s0 ). With R(⌧ ) being the
                                                                                             .
discounted return of a trajectory, we define the on-policy value function as V ⇡ (ŝ) = E⌧ ⇠⇡ [R(⌧ )|ŝ0 =
                                                           .
ŝ], the on-policy action-value function as Q (ŝ, a) = E⌧ ⇠⇡ [R(⌧ )|ŝ0 = ŝ, a0 = a], and the advantage
                                                   ⇡
                        .
function as A⇡ (ŝ, a) = Q⇡ (ŝ, a) V ⇡ (ŝ). Lastly, we define on-policy value functions, action-value
functions, and advantage functions for the cost increments in analogy to V ⇡ , Q⇡ , and A⇡ , with Di
replacing R, respectively. We denote those by VD⇡i , Q⇡Di and A⇡Di .

4     S TATE - WISE C ONSTRAINED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
To solve large and continuous MDPs, policy search algorithms search for the optimal policy within a
set ⇧✓ ⇢ ⇧ of parametrized policies. In local policy search (Peters & Schaal, 2008), the policy is
iteratively updated by maximizing J (⇡) over a local neighborhood of the most recent policy T
                                                                                            ⇡k . In
local policy search for SCMDPs, policy iterates must be feasible, so optimization is over ⇧✓ ⇧ ¯C.
The optimization problem is:
                                   ⇡k+1 = argmax J (⇡),                                                     (10)
                                                    ⇡2⇧✓
                                       s.t. Dist(⇡, ⇡k )  ,
                                            JDi (⇡)  wi , i = 1, · · · , m.

where Dist is some distance measure, and > 0 is a step size. For actual implementation, we need
to evaluate the constraints first in order to determine the feasible set. However, it is challenging to
evaluate the constraints using samples during the learning process. In this work, we propose SCPO


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


inspired by recent trust region optimization methods Schulman et al. (2015). SCPO approximates
equation 10 using (i) KL divergence distance metric Dist and (ii) surrogate functions for the objective
and constraints, which can be easily estimated from samples on ⇡k . Mathematically, SCPO requires
the policy update at each iteration is bounded within a trust region, and updates policy via solving
following optimization:
          ⇡k+1 = argmax           E [A⇡k (ŝ, a)]                                                               (11)
                      ⇡2⇧✓   ŝ⇠d⇡k
                               a⇠⇡
             s.t. Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k [DKL (⇡k⇡k )[ŝ]]  ,
                                   "           #                             r
                                                                                   1
                    JDi (⇡k ) +     E⇡      A⇡Dki (ŝ, a)   + 2(H + 1)✏⇡Di            wi , i = 1, · · · , m.
                                  ŝ⇠d¯ k                                          2
                                    a⇠⇡

where DKL (⇡ 0 k⇡)[ŝ] is KL divergence between two policy (⇡ 0 , ⇡) at state ŝ, the set {⇡ 2
                                                                     .        PH
⇧✓ : Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k [DKL (⇡k⇡k )[ŝ]]  } is called trust region, d⇡k = (1         ) t=0 t P (ŝt = ŝ|⇡k ),
      . P H                          .
d¯⇡k = t=0 P (ŝt = ŝ|⇡k ) and ✏⇡Di = maxŝ |Ea⇠⇡ [A⇡Dki (ŝ, a)]|. We then show that SCPO guaran-
tees (i) worst case maximum state-wise cost violation, and (ii) worst case performance degradation
for policy update, by establishing new bounds on the difference in returns between two stochastic
policies ⇡ and ⇡ 0 for MMDPs.

Theoretical Guarantees for SCPO We start with the theoretical foundation for our approach,
i.e. a new bound on the difference in state-wise maximum cost between two arbitrary policies. The
following theorem connects the difference in maximum state-wise cost between two arbitrary policies
to the total variation divergence between them. Here total       Pvariation divergence between discrete
probability distributions p, q is defined as DT V (pkq) = 12 i |pi qi |. This measure can be easily
extended to continuous states and actions by replacing the sums with integrals. Thus, the total variation
divergence between two policy (⇡ 0 , ⇡) at state ŝ is defined as: DT V (⇡ 0 k⇡)[ŝ] = DT V (⇡ 0 (·|ŝ)k⇡(·|ŝ)).
Theorem 1 (Trust Region Update State-wise Maximum Cost Bound). For any policies ⇡ 0 , ⇡, with
   0 .                                                   PH
✏⇡D = maxŝ |Ea⇠⇡0 [A⇡D (ŝ, a)]|, and define d¯⇡ = t=0 P (ŝt = ŝ|⇡) as the non-discounted aug-
mented state distribution using ⇡, then the following bound holds:
                                            h                            0
                                                                                           i
                JD (⇡ 0 ) JD (⇡)  E ⇡ A⇡D (ŝ, a) + 2(H + 1)✏⇡D DT V (⇡ 0 ||⇡)[ŝ] .                      (12)
                                            ŝ⇠d¯
                                            a⇠⇡ 0


The proof for Theorem 1 is summarized in Appendix B. Next, we note the following relationship
between the total variation
                          qdivergence and the KL divergence (Boyd et al., 2003; Achiam et al., 2017):
Eŝ⇠d¯⇡ [DT V (pkq)[ŝ]]      2 Eŝ⇠d¯⇡ [DKL (pkq)[ŝ]]. The following bound then follows directly from
                               1

Theorem 1:

                                            "                                r                            #
                0                                                        0       1
          JD (⇡ )  JD (⇡) + E ⇡                A⇡D (ŝ, a) + 2(H + 1)✏⇡D          E ¯⇡ [DKL (⇡ 0 k⇡)[ŝ]] .    (13)
                                    ŝ⇠d¯                                        2 ŝ⇠d
                                    a⇠⇡ 0

By Equation (13), we have a guarantee for satisfaction of maximum state-wise constraints:
Proposition 1 (SCPO Update Constraint Satisfaction). Suppose ⇡k , ⇡k+1 are related by equation 11,
then Di -return for ⇡k+1 satisfies
                                                  8i, JDi (⇡k+1 )  wi .


Proposition 1 presents the first constraint satisfaction guarantee under MMDP. Unlike trust region
methods such as CPO and TRPO, which assume a discounted sum characteristic, MMDP’s non-
discounted sum characteristic invalidates these theories. As the maximum state-wise cost is calculated
through a summation of non-discounted increments, analysis must be performed on a finite horizon to
upper bound the worst-case summation. In contrast, the theory behind CPO relies on infinite horizon
analysis with discounted constraint assumptions, which is not applicable for MMDP settings.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we provide the performance guarantee of SCPO. Previous analyses of performance guarantees
have focused on infinite-horizon MDP. We generalize the analysis to finite-horizon MDP, inspired by
previous work (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015; Achiam et al., 2017), and prove it
in Appendix C. The infinite-horizon case can be viewed as a special case of the finite-horizon setting.
Proposition 2 (SCPO Update Worst Performance Degradation). Suppose ⇡k , ⇡k+1 are related by
                         .
equation 11, with ✏⇡k+1 = maxŝ |Ea⇠⇡k+1 [A⇡k (ŝ, a)]|, then performance return for ⇡k+1 satisfies
                                                         p
                                                           2 ✏⇡k+1
                               J (⇡k+1 ) J (⇡k ) >                  .
                                                            1

5    P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION
In this section, we show how to (a) implement an efficient approximation to the update equation 11,
(b) encourage learning even when equation 11 becomes infeasible, and (c) handle the difficulty
of fitting augmented value VD⇡i which is unique to our novel MMDP formulation. The full SCPO
pseudocode is given as algorithm 1 in appendix D.

Practical implementation with sample-based estimation We first estimate the objective and
constraints in equation 11 using samples. Note that we can replace the expected advantage on rewards
using an importance sampling estimator with a sampling distribution ⇡k (Achiam et al., 2017) as
                                                                
                                                                  ⇡(a|ŝ) ⇡k
                   Eŝ⇠d⇡k , a⇠⇡ [A⇡k (ŝ, a)] = Eŝ⇠d⇡k , a⇠⇡k             A (ŝ, a) .         (14)
                                                                  ⇡k (a|ŝ)
equation 14 allows us to replace A⇡k with empirical estimates at each state-action pair (ŝ, a) from
rollouts by the previous policy ⇡k . The empirical estimate of reward advantage is given by R(ŝ, a, ŝ0 )+
  V ⇡k (ŝ0 ) V ⇡k (ŝ). V ⇡k (ŝ) can be computed at each augmented state by taking the discounted
future return. The same can be applied to the expected advantage with respect to cost increments,
with the sample estimates given by Di (ŝ, a, ŝ0 ) + VD⇡ik (ŝ0 ) VD⇡ik (ŝ). VD⇡ik (ŝ) is computed by taking
the non-discounted future Di -return. To proceed, we convexify equation 11 by approximating the
objective and cost constraint via first-order expansions, and the trust region constraint via second-order
expansions. Then, equation 11 can be efficiently solved using duality (Achiam et al., 2017).

Infeasible constraints An update to ✓ is computed every time equation 11 is solved. However,
due to approximation errors, sometimes equation 11 can become infeasible. In that case, we follow
(Achiam et al., 2017) to propose an recovery update that only decreases the constraint value within
the trust region. In addition, approximation errors can also cause the proposed policy update (either
feasible or recovery) to violate the original constraints in equation 11. Hence, each policy update is
followed by a backtracking line search to ensure constraint satisfaction. If all these fails, we relax the
search condition by also accepting decreasing expected advantage with respectpto the costs, when the
                                                     .
cost constraints are already violated. Denoting ci = JDi (⇡k ) + 2(H + 1)✏⇡D         /2 wi , the above
criteria can be summarized as
                                             Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k [DKL (⇡k⇡k )[ŝ]]                           (15)
                              ⇥               ⇤           ⇥ ⇡k       ⇤
                Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k ,a⇠⇡ A⇡Dki (ŝ, a)Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k ,a⇠⇡k ADi (ŝ, a)  max( ci , 0).              (16)
                                                         ⇥ ⇡k       ⇤
Note that the previous expected advantage Eŝ⇠d¯⇡k ,a⇠⇡k ADi (ŝ, a) is also estimated from rollouts by
⇡k and converges to zero asymptotically, which recovers the original cost constraints in equation 11.

Imbalanced cost value targets A critical step in solving equation 11 is to fit the cost increment
value functions VD⇡ik (ŝt ). By definition, VD⇡ik (ŝt ) is equal to the maximum cost increment in any
future state over the maximal state-wise cost so far. In other words, the true VD⇡ik will always be
zero for all ŝt:H when the maximal state-wise cost has already occurred before time t. In practice,
this causes the distribution of cost increment value function to be highly zero-skewed and makes
the fitting very hard. To mitigate the problem, we sub-sample the zero-valued targets to match the
population of non-zero values. We provide more analysis on this trick in Q3 in section 6.2.

6    E XPERIMENTS


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In our experiments, we aim to answer these questions:
Q1 How does SCPO compare with other state-of-the-
art methods for safe RL?
Q2 What benefits are demonstrated by constraining
the maximum state-wise cost?
Q3 How do the sub-sampling trick of SCPO impact
its performance?

6.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUPS

New Safety Gym To showcase the effectiveness
of our state-wise constrained policy optimization ap-
proach, we enhance the widely recognized safe rein-
forcement learning benchmark environment, Safety
Gym Ray et al. (2019), by incorporating additional
robots and constraints. Subsequently, we perform a             (a) Ant-Hazard-8          (b) Walker-Hazard-8
series of experiments on this augmented environment.
Our experiments are based on five different robots: (i) Figure 1: Comparison of results from two repre-
Point: Figure 2a A point-mass robot (A ✓ R2 ) that sentative test suites in high dimensional systems
                                                        (Ant and Walker).
can move on the ground. (ii) Swimmer: Figure 2b
A three-link robot (A ✓ R ) that can move on the
                           2

ground. (iii) Walker: Figure 2d A bipedal robot (A ✓ R10 ) that can move on the ground. (iv) Ant:
Figure 2c A quadrupedal robot (A ✓ R8 ) that can move on the ground. (v) Drone: Figure 2e A
quadrotor robot (A ✓ R4 ) that can move in the air.
All of the experiments are based on the goal task where the robot must navigate to a goal. Additionally,
since we are interested in episodic tasks (finite-horizon MDP), the environment will be reset once the
goal is reached. For the robots that can move in 3D spaces (e.g, the Drone robot), we also design a
new 3D goal task with a sphere goal floating in the 3D space. Three different types of constraints are
considered: (i) Hazard: Dangerous areas as shown in Figure 3a. Hazards are trespassable circles on
the ground. The agent is penalized for entering them. (ii) 3D Hazard: 3D Dangerous areas as shown
in Figure 3b. 3D Hazards are trespassable spheres in the air. The agent is penalized for entering them.
(iii) Pillar: Fixed obstacles as shown in Figure 3c. The agent is penalized for hitting them.


                     (a) Point   (b) Swimmer      (c) Ant      (d) Walker    (e) Drone

                    Figure 2: Robots for benchmark problems in upgraded Safety Gym.


                         (a) Hazard            (b) 3D Hazard            (c) Pillar

                  Figure 3: Constraints for benchmark problems in upgraded Safety Gym.


Considering different robots, constraint types, and constraint difficulty levels, we design 14 test suites
with 5 types of robots and 9 types of constraints, which are summarized in Table 1 in Appendix. We
name these test suites as {Robot}-{Constraint Type}-{Constraint Number}.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) Point-Hazard-8         (b) Point-Pillar-4        (c) Swimmer-Hazard-8      (d) Drone-3DHazard-8

Figure 4: Comparison of results from four representative test suites in low dimensional systems (Point, Swimmer,
and Drone).


Comparison Group The methods in the comparison group include: (i) unconstrained RL algorithm
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) (ii) end-to-end constrained safe RL algorithms CPO (Achiam et al.,
2017), TRPO-Lagrangian (Bohez et al., 2019), TRPO-FAC (Ma et al., 2021), TRPO-IPO (Liu et al.,
2020), PCPO (Yang et al., 2020b), and (iii) hierarchical safe RL algorithms TRPO-SL (TRPO-Safety
Layer) (Dalal et al., 2018), TRPO-USL (TRPO-Unrolling Safety Layer) (Zhang et al., 2022a). We
select TRPO as our baseline method since it is state-of-the-art and already has safety-constrained
derivatives that can be tested off-the-shelf. For hierarchical safe RL algorithms, we employ a warm-up
phase (1/3 of the whole epochs) which does unconstrained TRPO training, and the generated data
will be used to pre-train the safety critic for future epochs. For all experiments, the policy ⇡, the value
(V ⇡ , VD⇡ ) are all encoded in feedforward neural networks using two hidden layers of size (64,64)
with tanh activations. More details are provided in Appendix E.

Evaluation Metrics For comparison, we evaluate algorithm performance based on (i) reward
performance, (ii) average episode cost and (iii) cost rate. Comparison metric details are provided
in Appendix E.3. We set the limit of cost to 0 for all the safe RL algorithms since we aim to avoid
any violation of the constraints. For our comparison, we implement the baseline safe RL algorithms
exactly following the policy update / action correction procedure from the original papers. We
emphasize that in order for the comparison to be fair, we give baseline safe RL algorithms every
advantage that is given to SCPO, including equivalent trust region policy updates.

6.2    E VALUATING SCPO AND C OMPARISON A NALYSIS

Low Dimension System We select four representative test suites on low dimensional system
(Point, Swimmer, Drone) and summarize the comparison results on Figure 4, which demonstrate
that SCPO is successful at approximately enforcing zero constraints violation safety performance
in all environments after the policy converges. Specifically, compared with the baseline safe RL
methods, SCPO is able to achieve (i) near zero average episode cost and (ii) significantly lower
cost rate without sacrificing reward performance. The baseline end-to-end safe RL methods (TRPO-
Lagrangian, TRPO-FAC, TRPO-IPO, CPO, PCPO) fail to achieve the near zero cost performance
even when the cost limit is set to be 0. The baseline hierarchical safe RL methods (TRPO-SL,
TRPO-USL) also fail to achieve near zero cost performance even with an explicit safety layer to
correct the unsafe action at every time step. End-to-end safe RL algorithms fail since all methods
rely on CMDP to minimize the discounted cumulative cost while SCPO directly work with MMDP


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to restrict the state-wise maximum cost by Proposition 1. We also observe that TRPO-SL fails to
lower the violation during training, due to the fact that the linear approximation of cost function
C(ŝt , a, ŝt+1 ) (Dalal et al., 2018) becomes inaccurate when the dynamics are highly nonlinear like
the ones we used in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). More detailed metrics for comparison and
experimental results on test suites with low dimension systems are summarized in Appendix E.3.


High Dimension System To demonstrate the scalability and per-
formance of SCPO in high-dimensional systems, we conducted ad-
ditional tests on the Ant-Hazard-8 and Walker-Hazard-8 suites, with
8-dimensional and 10-dimensional control spaces, respectively. The
comparison results for high-dimensional systems are summarized in
Figure 1, which show that SCPO outperforms all other baselines in
enforcing zero safety violation without compromising performance
in terms of return. SCPO rapidly stabilizes the cost return around
zero and significantly reduces the cost rate, while the other baselines
fail to converge to a policy with near-zero cost. The comparison                 Figure 5:
results of both low dimension and high dimension systems answer            Maximum state-wise cost
Q1.


Maximum State-wise Cost As pointed in Section 3.3, the underlying magic for enabling near-zero
safety violation is to restrict the maximum state-wise cost to stay around zero. To have a better
understanding of this process, we visualize the evolution of maximum state-wise cost for SCPO on
the challenging high-dimensional Ant-Hazard-8 and Walker-Hazard-8 test suites in Figure 5 , which
answers Q2.


Ablation on Sub-sampling Imbalanced Cost Incre-
ment Value Targets As pointed in Section 5, fit-
ting VD⇡ik (ŝt ) is a critical step towards solving SCPO,
which is challenging due to zero-skewed distribution
of cost increment value function. To demonstrate
the necessity of sub-sampling for solving this chal-
lenge, we compare the performance of SCPO with
and without sub-sampling trick on the aerial robot Figure 6: SCPO sub-sampling ablation study with
test suite, summarized in Figure 6. It is evident that Drone-3DHazard-8
with sub-sampling, the agent achieves higher rewards
and more importantly, converges to near-zero costs. That is because sub-sampling effectively balances
the cost increment value targets and improves the fitting of VD⇡ik (ŝt ). We also attempted to solve
the imbalance issue via over-sampling non-zero targets, but did not observe promising results. This
ablation study provides insights into Q3.


7   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

This paper proposed SCPO, the first general-purpose policy search algorithm for state-wise con-
strained RL. Our approach provides guarantees for state-wise constraint satisfaction at each iteration,
allows training of high-dimensional neural network policies while ensuring policy behavior, and is
based on a new theoretical result on Maximum Markov Decision Process. We demonstrate SCPO’s
effectiveness on robot locomotion tasks, showing its significant performance improvement compared
to existing methods and ability to handle state-wise constraints.


Limitation and future work One limitation of our work is that, although SCPO satisfies state-wise
constraints, the theoretical results are valid only in expectation, meaning that constraint violations
are still possible during deployment. To address that, we will study absolute state-wise constraint
satisfaction, i.e. bounding the maximal possible state-wise cost, which is even stronger than the
current result (satisfaction in expectation).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aviral Kumar, Nicholas Rhinehart, Sergey Levine, Florian Shkurti, and
 Animesh Garg. Conservative safety critics for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14497, 2020.
Steven Bohez, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Michael Neunert, Jonas Buchli, Nicolas Heess, and Raia Hadsell.
  Value constrained model-free continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04623, 2019.
Stephen Boyd, Lin Xiao, and Almir Mutapcic. Subgradient methods. lecture notes of EE392o,
  Stanford University, Autumn Quarter, 2004:2004–2005, 2003.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats top
  professionals. Science, 359(6374):418–424, 2018.
Yujiao Cheng, Weiye Zhao, Changliu Liu, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Human motion prediction using
  semi-adaptable neural networks. In 2019 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 4884–4890.
  IEEE, 2019.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Aleksandra Faust, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad
  Ghavamzadeh. Lyapunov-based safe policy optimization for continuous control. ICML 2019
  Workshop RL4RealLife, abs/1901.10031, 2019.
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
  Tassa. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. CoRR, abs/1801.08757, 2018.
Shangding Gu, Long Yang, Yali Du, Guang Chen, Florian Walter, Jun Wang, Yaodong Yang, and
  Alois Knoll. A review of safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theory and applications. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.10330, 2022.
Tairan He, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Autocost: Evolving intrinsic cost for zero-violation
  reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274, 2002.
Qingkai Liang, Fanyu Que, and Eytan Modiano. Accelerated primal-dual policy optimization for
  safe reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06480, 2018.
Yongshuai Liu, Jiaxin Ding, and Xin Liu. IPO: interior-point policy optimization under constraints.
  CoRR, abs/1910.09615, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09615.
Yongshuai Liu, Jiaxin Ding, and Xin Liu. Ipo: Interior-point policy optimization under constraints.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4940–4947, 2020.
Yongshuai Liu, Avishai Halev, and Xin Liu. Policy learning with constraints in model-free reinforce-
  ment learning: A survey. In The 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (IJCAI), 2021.
Haitong Ma, Yang Guan, Shegnbo Eben Li, Xiangteng Zhang, Sifa Zheng, and Jianyu Chen. Feasible
  actor-critic: Constrained reinforcement learning for ensuring statewise safety. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.10682, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Charles Noren, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Safe adaptation with multiplicative uncertainties
  using robust safe set algorithm. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 54(20):360–365, 2021.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients. Neural
  networks, 21(4):682–697, 2008.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1910.01708, 2019.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
Chen Tessler, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11074, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Tianhao Wei, Shucheng Kang, Weiye Zhao, and Changliu Liu. Persistently feasible robust safe
  control by safety index synthesis and convex semi-infinite programming. IEEE Control Systems
  Letters, 2022.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian Rosca, Karthik Narasimhan, and Peter J. Ramadge. Projection-based
  constrained policy optimization. CoRR, abs/2010.03152, 2020a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2010.03152.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian Rosca, Karthik Narasimhan, and Peter J Ramadge. Projection-based
  constrained policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03152, 2020b.
Linrui Zhang, Qin Zhang, Li Shen, Bo Yuan, and Xueqian Wang. Saferl-kit: Evaluating efficient
  reinforcement learning methods for safe autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08528,
  2022a.
Linrui Zhang, Qin Zhang, Li Shen, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Evaluating model-free
  reinforcement learning toward safety-critical tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05727, 2022b.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, and Changliu Liu. Model-free safe control for zero-violation reinforcement
 learning. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Tianhao Wei, Simin Liu, and Changliu Liu. Safety index synthesis via
 sum-of-squares programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.09134, 2022.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Rui Chen, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. State-wise safe reinforcement
 learning: A survey. The 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
 2023a.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, and Changliu Liu. Probabilistic safeguard for reinforcement learning using
 safety index guided gaussian process models. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference,
 pp. 783–796. PMLR, 2023b.


                                               11
