Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ETTING A -ROUND G UARANTEES : F LOATING -P OINT
ATTACKS ON C ERTIFIED ROBUSTNESS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Adversarial examples pose a security risk as they can alter decisions of a machine
         learning classifier through slight input perturbations. Certified robustness has been
         proposed as a mitigation where given an input x, a classifier returns a prediction
         and a certified radius R with a provable guarantee that any perturbation to x
         with R-bounded norm will not alter the classifier’s prediction. In this work, we
         show that these guarantees can be invalidated due to limitations of floating-point
         representation that cause rounding errors. We design a rounding search method
         that can efficiently exploit this vulnerability to find adversarial examples against
         state-of-the-art certifications in two threat models, that differ in how the norm of
         the perturbation is computed. We show that the attack can be carried out against
         linear classifiers that have exact certifiable guarantees and against neural networks
         that have conservative certifications. In the weak threat model, our experiments
         demonstrate attack success rates over 50% on random linear classifiers, up to 23%
         on the MNIST dataset for linear SVM, and up to 15% for a neural network. In
         the strong threat model, the success rates are lower but positive. The floating-
         point errors exploited by our attacks can range from small to large (e.g., 10−13
         to 103 ) — showing that even negligible errors can be systematically exploited
         to invalidate guarantees provided by certified robustness. Finally, we propose a
         formal mitigation approach based on bounded interval arithmetic, encouraging
         future implementations of robustness certificates to account for limitations of
         modern computing architecture to provide sound certifiable guarantees.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Robustness of modern image classifiers has come under scrutiny due to a plethora of results demon-
strating adversarial examples—small perturbations to benign inputs that cause models to mispredict,
even when such perturbations are not evident to the human eye Madry et al. (2018); Carlini & Wagner
(2017); Szegedy et al. (2014); Goodfellow et al. (2015). If a learned model is used in critical applica-
tions such as self-driving cars, clinical settings or malware detection, such easily added perturbations
can have severe consequences. As a result, research focus has shifted to training models robust to
adversarial perturbations, that come endowed with certified robustness.
Mechanisms for providing robustness certification aim to bound a model f ’s sensitivity to a certain
level of perturbation. At a high level, such mechanisms return a radius R around a test input x with a
guarantee that for any x0 within R distance from x, f (x) = f (x0 ). How R is computed, whether it
is sound and/or complete depends on the mechanism. For example, bound propagation Zhang et al.
(2018); Wang et al. (2021) transfers the upper and lower bounds from the output layer to the input
layer of a neural network, and gives a lower bound on the perturbation needed to flip the classification.
Given the extensive research on certified robustness, can such mechanisms protect against adversarial
examples in practice? In this paper, we show that the limits posed by floating-point arithmetic
invalidate guarantees of several prominent mechanisms and their implementations. Despite proofs of
robustness guarantees, they all assume real numbers can be represented exactly. Unfortunately, this
critical (implicit) assumption cannot hold on computers with finite number representations. Since
floating-point (FP) numbers can represent only a subset of real values, rounding is likely to occur
when computing robust guarantees and can cause overestimation of the certified radius R. Thus,
adversarial examples may exist within the computed radius despite claims of certification.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We devise a rounding search method that can efficiently discover such adversarial examples in two
threat models, that differ in how the norm of the perturbation is computed. Our method is inspired by
the traditional adversarial example search methods such as PGD Madry et al. (2018) and C&W Carlini
& Wagner (2017). However, we find that such existing methods do not effectively exploit the rounding
of a certified radius as the search space they explore is large (i.e., the number of examples to check
becomes intractable due to the large number of floating-point values) and instances of inappropriate
rounding do not necessarily follow model gradients. To this end, our method is different from these
search methods in two aspects: (1) instead of relying on back propagation, it leverages the piecewise
linear property of ReLU networks to find coarse-level perturbation directions; (2) it then searches
in a much finer scale by sampling floating-point neighbors of a potential adversarial example. The
first aspect allows us to narrow down the search space closer to the certified radius and efficiently
find adversarial examples. The second aspect enables our search method to find adversarial examples
with perturbation norms that are just smaller than the certified radius (e.g., in the 13th decimal place),
which PGD and C&W cannot find. Compared to other works that find robustness violations Jia
& Rinard (2021); Zombori et al. (2020), our attack method is arguably stronger as it works on
unmodified target models with unaltered instances as opposed to specially crafted models or instances.
We discuss the potential impact of our attacks on robustness guarantees in Appendix F.
One’s first intuition to mitigate the overestimation of certified radii exploited by the above attacks
might be to adopt slightly more conservative radii (e.g., using R − γ for some positive constant
γ   1). Unfortunately, such radii are not in general sound and choosing γ is inherently error prone.
That is, we show that the amount of overestimation can depend on the data (e.g., number of features)
and model (e.g., number of operations) and that attacking R − 0.1 is still possible. To this end, we
propose a defense based on rounded interval arithmetic that has theoretical guarantees and can be
easily integrated into mechanisms for computing certified radii. In summary our contributions are:

    • We explore a class of attacks that invalidate the implementations of certified robustness (i.e.,
      find adversarial examples within the certified radius). Our attacks exploit rounding errors due to
      limited floating-point representation of real numbers.
    • We devise a rounding search method that systematically discovers such adversarial examples
      under two threat models. The weak model assumes that attacks need only have floating-point
      norms that violate certifications (e.g., in the case where the norm is computed using common
      software libraries). The strong model makes no such assumption: the true (real-valued) norm of
      attacks must violate certifications (e.g., in the case where the library that computes the square
      root for the norm can represent a real value or its range).
    • We show that our attacks work against exact certifications of linear models Cohen et al. (2019),
      and against a conservative certified radius returned by a prominent neural network verifier Wang
      et al. (2021) on a network. Our attack success rate differs between learners and threat models. In
      the weak threat model, our success rates are over 50% for random linear classifiers and 15% on
      an MNIST neural network model. In the strong threat model, the attack success rates are lower
      but are still non-zero. For all cases, in theory, the certification should guarantee a 0% success
      rate for such attacks within certified radii.
    • We propose a defense based on rounded interval arithmetic, with strong theoretical and empirical
      support for mitigating rounding search attacks.


2     BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES

Let input instance x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xD ) be a vector in RD with xi denoting the ith component of
x. We consider classifiers f mapping an instance in RD to a binary class label in {−1, 1} or to a
K-class label in [K] = {1, . . . , K}.

Adversarial examples. Given an input instance x, a classifier f , and a target label t 6= f (x), x0
is a targeted adversarial example Szegedy et al. (2014) if f (x0 ) = t where x0 is reachable from x
according to some chosen threat model. In the vision domain, it is common to assume that small `p
perturbations to x will go unnoticed by human observers. In this paper we consider `2 distance, i.e.,
kx − x0 k ≤ ∆ for some small perturbation limit ∆. An adversarial example in the multi-class setting
is untargeted if t is not specified.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Floating-point representation. Floating-point values represent reals using three binary numbers:
a sign bit b, an exponent e, and a significand d1 d2 . . . dd . For example, 64-bit (double precision)
floating-point numbers allocate 1 bit for b, 11 bits for e, and 52 bits for the significand. Such a
floating-point number is defined to be (−1)b × (1.d1 d2 . . . dd )2 × 2e−1023 . Floating points can
represent only a finite number of real values. Hence, computations involving floating-point numbers
often need to be rounded up or down to their nearest floating-point representation IEEE.

2.1       C ERTIFIED ROBUSTNESS

A robustness certification for a classifier at input x is a neighborhood (typically an `2 ball) of x on
which classifier predictions are constant. Certifications aim to guarantee that no perturbed adversarial
examples exist in this neighborhood, including “slightly” perturbed instances.

Definition 1 A pointwise robustness certification for a K-class classifier f at input x ∈ RD is a real
radius R > 0 that is sound and (optionally) complete:
    (i)    [sound] ∀x0 ∈ RD , kx0 − xk ≤ R ⇒ f (x0 ) = f (x).

    (ii) [complete] ∀R0 > R, ∃x0 ∈ RD , kx0 − xk ≤ R0 ∧ f (x0 ) 6= f (x).

For a given certification mechanism, we will distinguish the idealized certification radius R (i.e.,
the mapping of Definition 1 under the soundness condition) from a candidate radius R̃ that an
implementation of this mechanism computes. As we will see, the latter may not be necessarily sound
(or complete). We categorize certification mechanisms into three kinds depending on their claims.

Exact certification mechanisms. These mechanisms output sound and complete radii under ideal
realization of R arithmetic. Binary linear classifiers f (x) = sign(wT x + b) admit a certified radius
R = |wT x + b|/kwk. Cohen et al. derive this radius and prove its soundness (Cohen et al., 2019,
Proposition 4) and completeness (Cohen et al., 2019, Proposition 5) for real arithmetic.

Conservative certification mechanisms. These are mechanisms that output radii that are sound
and not necessarily complete under real-valued arithmetic. Bound propagation aims to provide a
certified lower bound of minimum distortion Zhang et al. (2018); Wang et al. (2021); Wong & Kolter
(2018); Wang et al. (2018) to an input that would cause a label change.

Approximate mechanisms. Approximate certifications output random radii that under R are
sound (or abstain), with high probability 1 − α, and that are not necessarily complete. Randomized
smoothing Cohen et al. (2019) is an example of this approach.

3         ROUNDING SEARCH ATTACK
We now present a rounding search method that exploits floating-point rounding errors to find adver-
sarial examples within a computed certified radius R̃.

Threat model. Like prior works on adversarial examples Carlini & Wagner (2017); Madry et al.
(2018); Jia & Rinard (2021), we assume that the adversary has white-box access to a classifier f ,
and has white-box access to the certification mechanism that it can query with inputs f and instance
x ∈ RD , and obtain a certified radius R̃ as an output.
Since there are floating-point rounding errors in the operations for computing a certification, the
computed radius R̃ at an instance x could overestimate an intended sound (and possibly complete)
radius R < R̃. This creates leeway for an adversary to find adversarial perturbations whose norms
are less than or equal to the computed certified radius, but which can change the classifications of the
model, invalidating soundness of the computed certification. Our work aims to find a systematic and
efficient way to exploit these rounding errors.
A perturbation’s norm kδk = kx0 − xk must be estimated when evaluating the perturbation’s success.
This norm computation can also suffer floating-point rounding errors, and could be underestimated.
To handle this possibility, we conduct attacks in two threat models, one weak one strong.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The weak model makes minimal assumptions on how certification is violated: an attack is ruled
successful if the floating-point computation of kδk is smaller than or equal to R̃ (i.e., kδk ≤ R̃).
We note that this model represents settings where the norm is computed using common software
libraries for computing operations on floating numbers (e.g., Numpy’s 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point
arithmetic).
The strong model does not make these assumptions, the true (real-valued) norm of attacks must
violate certifications. This model considers a setting where the norm is computed using software
packages that instead of returning a result that is potentially rounded can return a representation
of a real-valued norm or its range. Since we cannot do real arithmetic on machines, we use the
upper bound of the norm kδk instead, which is computed with bounded interval arithmetic and is
guaranteed to be greater than or equal to the true norm. That is, a successful attack satisfies kδk ≤ R̃.

Attack overview. Consider a classifier f , in-
put x and the corresponding computed radius R̃.
A naïve way to search for an adversarial exam-
ple would be to try all x0 such that kx−x0 k ≤ R̃,
checking whether f (x) 6= f (x0 ). Unfortunately
this exhaustive search is computationally in-
tractable (e.g., there are ≈ 217 floating points
in a small interval such as [10, 10 + 2−32 ]). We
can avoid some futile search. For example, ob-
serve that instances in the gray area, as depicted
in Figure 1, are unlikely to flip predictions, as Figure 1: The search direction ν (blue line) and
they are in the opposite direction of the decision search area (green area) for finding adversarial ex-
boundary. A key idea is to find a perturbation amples against a model, whose decision boundary
direction ν that reaches the decision boundary is the orange line. x is the original instance, R̃
in the shortest distance, and add a perturbation δ and R are the computed and real-valued certified
in that direction to x, to maximize our chance to radii of the model on x, δ = R̃ν/kνk is the ad-
flip the classifier’s prediction with perturbation versarial perturbation in the search direction ν, in-
norm kδk (or kδk) less than or equal to R̃. This stance x0 = x + δ is the seed for the green search
baseline method has several challenges. First, area. Our rounding search method will sample
computation of perturbation direction ν is not N floating-point neighbors δ 0 of δ, and evaluate
easy for NNs which do not typically have lin- each x + δ 0 to check if any one of them can flip
ear decision boundaries. To this end, for ReLU the classification of the model with kδ 0 k ≤ R̃ or
networks, we find a local linear approximation kδ 0 k ≤ R̃ (the red points in the green search area).
prior to computing the gradient for ν. Second,
while ν guides a search towards the decision boundary, the search may still be unable to exploit the
leeway between the real certified radius R and the computed certified radius R̃ to find certification
violations. We address this challenge with a tightly-confined randomized floating-point neighborhood
search. In summary, our attack proceeds as follows (depicted in Figure 1).
  1.    Find an adversarial perturbation direction ν that reaches the decision boundary of classifier f
        in the shortest distance, as a form of PGD attack Madry et al. (2018) (Section 3.1).
  2.    Compute perturbation δ in the direction ν within the computed certified radius R̃:
                                                δ = R̃ν/kνk .                                        (1)
  3.    Search for multiple floating-point neighbors δ 0 of δ with kδ 0 k ≤ R̃ (or kδ 0 k ≤ R̃), and
        evaluate if any x + δ 0 can flip the classifier’s prediction (Section 3.2).

3.1    A DVERSARIAL PERTURBATION DIRECTION

For linear models, direction ν is a normal to the decision boundary’s hyperplane wT x + b = 0
and equals w. The perturbation direction for neural networks is not as obvious as it is for linear
models, as the decision boundary can be highly non-linear. In the rest of this section we describe our
approach for finding ν for neural networks with ReLU activations that we show to be effective in our
experiments. A neural network with ReLUs can be represented as
                                F (x) = (Fn ◦ Fn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ F1 ) (x)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Fi (x) = ReLU(θiT x + θ̂i ). Here x and θ̂i are vectors, θi is a matrix, and the rectified linear
(ReLU) activation function acts pointwise on a vector, returning a vector.
We use the fact that such networks are piecewise linear: therefore a (local) linear approximation at
instance x is in fact exact. Then, one can find an adversarial example for x against this linear model
as described above and use it to attack the original ReLU network.

Warmup. As a warmup, let us consider a network where ReLUs are all activated. For each node
ReLU(z) = max{0, z} = z, and so the network is a combination of K linear models where K is the
number of classes. That is,
                                         F (x) = θ T x + θ̂ ,
                                         Pn  Qn
where θ T = θnT θn−1
                  T
                     · · · θ1T , and θ̂ = i=1      j=i+1 θj
                                                            T
                                                                θ̂i . Note that θ T is a K × D matrix
and θ̂ is a column vector of length K. Each class k corresponds to the linear model
                                        F k (x) = wkT x + bk ,
where wkT = (θ T )k,· is the kth row of θ T and bk = θ̂k .
In order to change this model’s classification from the original class l to the target class t 6= l, we
observe that one can attack the following model:
                        L(x) = F t (x) − F l (x) = (wtT − wlT )x + bt − bl .
This is a linear model, and L(x) < 0 when F (x) classifies x as l, L(x) > 0 when F (x) classifies x
as t, so L(x) has the decision boundary hyperplane L(x) = 0. Hence, the most effective perturbation
direction to change classification of F (x) from l to t, as before for linear models, is ν = wtT − wlT ,
which is the gradient of L(x) with respect to x.

Linear approximation of ReLU networks. ReLUs will all be activated when the weights and
biases of each hidden layer of the network are positive, and all values of the input are also positive
(e.g., an image, whose pixel value is usually in the range [0, 1]). However, in practice this usually is
not the case and some ReLUs will not be activated. For inactive ReLUs, we modify outgoing weights
to zero in the calculation of the perturbation direction ν.
The overall process, LinApproxPerturbDir, is described in Algorithm 1 of Appendix A. It pro-
                                                                 0       T
Pn      Qn             an exact (local) linear approximation F (x) = τ x + τ̂ where τ̂ ←
ceeds  by first finding
  i=1     j=i+1 τj
                   T
                      θ̂i using the notation in the pseudo-code. The weights of F 0 are equal to
weights of F for internal nodes where F (x) activated the corresponding ReLUs, otherwise they are
set to 0. Specifically, we zero out columns of matrix θiT when the corresponding elements of mask
mi are zero. Given these weights, LinApproxPerturbDir computes ν as explained in the warmup.
This direction corresponds to a gradient of the network’s target minus current class scores, with
respect to the instance x.

Projected gradient descent for ReLU networks. Given ν as output by Algorithm 1 of Appendix A
and a computed certified radius, one could compute adversarial perturbation δ in direction ν close
to the certified radius as in Equation 1. However, the resulting x0 = x + δ may activate different
ReLUs of F than x. Hence, the linear approximation F 0 on x0 may be different to F 0 on x: these
approximations are only exact in local neighborhoods. To this end we perform a search by iteratively
updating x0 and invoking LinApproxPerturbDir until an adversarial example within the input domain
[Vmin , Vmax ] is found or the procedure times out. Algorithm 2 of Appendix A describes this procedure,
which we refer to as ReluPGD. The algorithm iteratively performs the following: computes the
gradient of the network’s linearization at the current iteration, rescales to the step size s, clips the
perturbation to the domain constraint, applies the perturbation.

Remark 1 Note that R̃ may not be given, as is the case for some network verifiers that instead of
returning R̃, take F , x and some R as input and either certify R or not. In this case, we need to
search for the smallest perturbation in the direction of ν to find such an R to attack. Hence, in
Algorithm 2 of Appendix A we use s as an input, which is set to a small initial value (e.g., 10−5 in our
experiments) so that ν can be updated frequently. If a R̃ is given, we can set it as a threshold value to
stop the algorithm, that is, the algorithm should stop when the total perturbation norm reaches R̃.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   ROUNDING SEARCH

Given the direction ν and the computed certified radius R̃, an adversarial perturbation δ can be
computed using Equation 1, and x0 = x+δ should give an adversarial example so that F (x) 6= F (x0 ).
If the accumulated rounding errors are large, δ can be sufficient to conduct a successful attack (e.g.,
for neural networks with many neurons). For some attacks, the rounding errors we exploit are much
smaller, such as linear models with fewer operations. Hence, we create N floating-point neighbors
of δ to explore more possibilities of robustness violations close to the decision boundary due to
rounding errors. At a high level, each neighbor δ 0 is constructed by using δ as a seed and then, for each
dimension, replacing the original value with a neighboring floating point that is either larger or smaller
than it. For example, a neighbor of [1.0, 1.0] can be [0.9999999999999999, 1.0000000000000002].
We provide the pseudo-code of the neighbors sampling procedure in Algorithm 3 of Appendix A.
We call this algorithm Neighbor. The result is a set of N neighboring perturbations. Then for each
neighbor δ 0 we test if x + δ 0 leads to an adversarial example (i.e., flips the classifier’s prediction) that
is certified (i.e., kδ 0 k ≤ R̃ in the weak threat model, or kδ 0 k ≤ R̃ in the strong threat model).


4     ATTACK EXPERIMENTS

In this section we evaluate whether our rounding search attacks can find adversarial examples within
a certified radius. We first consider linear classifiers and then neural networks. We evaluate certified
radii obtained using the exact method for linear classifiers, and conservative Wang et al. (2021);
Gurobi Optimization, LLC (2022) and approximate Cohen et al. (2019) certification mechanisms
for neural networks. Since the computation of exact certification for linear classifier is R = |wT x +
b|/kwk, we compute it ourselves using either 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point arithmetic in Numpy.
For linear classifiers, we will conduct attacks in both the weak and strong threat models. For neural
networks, we will conduct attacks in the weak threat model. We show that our rounding search finds
adversarial examples within certified radii for all of them. Our linear models are run on an Intel Xeon
Platinum 8180M CPU, while our neural network models are run on a Tesla V100 16GB GPU.

Baseline attack rates. The baseline success rate for finding an adversarial example against a
linear model within the radius defined in Section 2.1 should be 0% in both threat models, since the
mechanism is exact: it claims to be both sound and complete. The baseline success rate for radii
returned by conservative mechanisms should also be 0% since they too are claimed to be sound.
Though randomized smoothing comes with a failure probability α   1 to account for sampling error
in approximating a smoothed classifier, it does not explicitly take into account errors due to rounding.

Model training. We train (primal) linear SVM with sequential minimal optimization, by using
corresponding modules of scikit-learn. Our linear classifiers are trained with `1 regularization so
that model weights are sparse, and perturbations are less likely to move images outside their legal
domain (recall that the perturbation direction for a linear classifier is its weights ν = w). All ReLU
networks in this section are trained with the SGD optimizer using PyTorch, with momentum 0.9,
learning rate 0.01, batch size 64, for 15 epochs. For some controlled experiments we require the
weights and biases of the hidden layers to be positive (to activate all ReLUs). In this case weights
and biases are clamped with the lower bound 0 after each step of training.

4.1   R ANDOM LINEAR CLASSIFIERS

To evaluate the performance of our attack in an ideal scenario, we first conduct our attack on
randomly initialized (binary) linear classifiers with randomly generated target instances: f (x) =
sign(wT x + b), where weights wi and bias b are random values drawn from the range [−1, 1],
∀i ∈ [D] = {1, . . . , 100}. Each value is represented with either 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point
precision. For each dimension, we test 10 000 randomly initialized models. For each model we choose
one instance x to attack, where each component xi is drawn randomly from [−1, 1]. Hence, attack
success rate measures the number of models out of 10 000 for which a random instance can result in
a successful attack. For each combination of (w, b, x), we sample and evaluate N = D2 neighboring
perturbations of δ = R̃w/kwk using the Neighbor function (Algorithm 3 in Appendix A).


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 2: (a) Rounding search attack success rates against a random binary linear classifier in both
weak (W) and strong (S) threat models (Section 4.1). For each dimension D, we report the percentage
of 10 000 randomly initialized models for which we can successfully find an adversarial example
within certified radius R̃ for a random instance x drawn from [−1, 1]D . Since the attacks are against
an exact certified radius, the baseline attack rate should be 0% in both weak and strong threat models.
Model weights w and biases b are randomly initialized with w ∈ [−1, 1]D , b ∈ [−1, 1]. All values
and computation is done using either 32-bit or 64-bit floating points. (b) Maximum rounding error in
the calculation of the certified radius R̃ on a sample x with each xi = 3.3 × 109 , for the linear model
with wi = 3.3 × 10−9 , b = 3.3 × 109 , where i ∈ [1, D] and D ∈ [20, 1000].


Results are shown in Figure 2(a). With higher dimension, our attack success rate first increases
and then flattens around 50% in the weak threat model, and around 5% in the strong threat model.
(we investigate the flattening phenomenon in Appendix E). With higher dimension more arithmetic
operations are done in computing kδ 0 k and R̃, which results in accumulation of rounding errors.
Figure 2(b) further shows this influence of D on the rounding error, which can be accumulated to
the magnitude of 103 with increasing D. In summary, with the increasing rounding error, a greater
leeway is left between the real certified radius R and the computed certified radius R̃ for our method
to exploit, so the attack success rate increases.
The success rates are lower in the strong threat model than in the weak threat model. This is expected,
as the leeway (i.e., R̃ − kδk) exploited by our attack in the conservative strong model is likely much
smaller than that (i.e., R̃ − kδk) in the weak model.



4.2   L INEAR SVM

In this section, we evaluate our attack on linear SVM trained with the MNIST dataset. MNIST LeCun
et al. (2010) contains images of hand-written digits where each image has 784 attributes and each
attribute is a pixel intensity within the domain [0, 255]. We used ≈ 12 000 images for training, and
≈ 2 000 images for validation and evaluation of our attacks, for each combination of the labels
i, j ∈ {0, . . . , 9}. We trained 45 models for each combination of distinct labels i, j ∈ {0, . . . , 9} of
the MNIST dataset. Validation accuracies range between 91% and 99% for linear SVM.
We then try to find an adversarial image with respect to each image in the test dataset. Our attack
samples N = 5 000 neighbors of δ = R̃w/kwk using Algorithm 3 of Appendix A.
In the weak threat model, we observe non-zero attack success rates for 44/45 models (full results
appear in Table 1 of Appendix B), and our attacks can have success rates up to 23.24%. In the strong
threat model, we observe non-zero attack success rates for 11/45 models (full results appear in Table 2
of Appendix B), and our attacks can have success rates up to 0.16%. Recall that the baseline success
rate should always be 0%. We demonstrate a weak model example of original and adversarial images
together with their perturbation and certified radius information in Figure 3 of Appendix B.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3   C ERTIFICATION FOR NEURAL NETS

We now turn our attention to neural network verification mechanisms. In this section we consider
neural networks with ReLU activations and rely on their linear approximations. Given a radius R̃, a
neural network F and an input x, these mechanisms either certify R̃ or not. Hence, in order to find
a tight certified radius for a given model, one can perform a binary search to check multiple radii
and call those verifiers multiple times. We avoid the binary search to find a certified radius R̃ by
first finding an adversarial example x0 via ReluPGD (Section 3.1 and Algorithm 2 of Appendix A)
and then try to verify the perturbation norms (i.e., kx0 − xk) of those adversarial examples using the
complete verifiers. We set ReluPGD to time out after 15 minutes.

Certification with β-CROWN. β-CROWN Wang et al. (2021) guarantees sound but not complete
robustness certification. That is, it provides a lower bound on the radius and it is possible that a
tighter radius may exist. We use the β-CROWN verifier Wang et al. (2021) in the `2 metric, to verify
a 3-layer neural network binary classifier with 1 node in the hidden layer. All model weights and
biases in the hidden layers of this classifier are trained to be positive, so the perturbation direction is
always ν = wtT − wlT . The classifier has validation accuracy 99.67%. We use ReluPGD, with step
size s = 1 × 10−5 , to incrementally add perturbation in direction ν to image x, until its prediction is
flipped, and we get x0 . Then we use β-CROWN to verify the image with respect to kδk = kx0 − xk.
If the verification succeeds, we have a successful attack. ReluPGD times out on 30 out of 2 108
images. When the attack does not time out, it takes ≈ 30 seconds. A call to a verifier takes ≈ 1
second. We conduct our attack on all MNIST test images labeled 0 or 1. We find adversarial images
for 2 078 images, and β-CROWN erroneously verifies 53 of them. Our attack success rate is 2.6%.

Certification with MIP solver. We now consider another method that provides conservative
verification via mixed-integer programming (MIP). We use the implementation from Wang et al.
(2021), which uses the Gurobi MIP solver Gurobi Optimization, LLC (2022) for neural network
verification. We verify two 3-layer neural network multiclass classifiers with 100 nodes in their hidden
layer. For the first classifier, the weights and biases in the hidden layers are all trained to be positive,
so the perturbation direction is ν = wtT − wlT . The second classifier is trained without constraints
on its weights and represents a regular network without artefacts. The validation accuracies for the
first and second classifiers are 84.14%, and 96.73%, respectively.
We use ReluPGD to attack the two classifiers on all images of the MNIST test dataset, with step
size s = 1 × 10−5 . We found adversarial images against 8 406 images for the first classifier, and
adversarial images against 9 671 images for the second classifier. ReluPGD times out on only 8 and
2 images for the first and second classifier, respectively. We then use MIP to verify each image with
respect to their adversarial image’s perturbation norm kδk. Each attack takes ≈ 30 seconds and each
verification takes ≈ 10 seconds. MIP successfully verified 5 108 out of 8 406 successfully attacked
images for the first classifier, and verified 1 531 out of 9 671 successfully attacked images. That is,
the attack success rate is 60.76% on an artificially trained network (where ReLUs are all activated)
and 15.83% on the second classifier trained without artefacts.

Certification with randomized smoothing. We also attack approximate certification methods
based on randomized smoothing Cohen et al. (2019). Recall that guarantees of randomized smoothing
are probabilistic with a failure probability α. Nevertheless we report a success rate up to 21.11% for
our rounding search attacks on MNIST with α = 0.1%. We refer readers to Appendix C for details.


5     M ITIGATION : C ERTIFICATION WITH ROUNDED INTERVAL ARITHMETIC

Our attack results demonstrate that floating-point rounding invalidates the soundness claims of a wide
range of certification implementations for a variety of common models. How might such rounding
errors in certification calculations be mitigated, for both of our threat models?
Rounding errors violating certifications are sometimes small. For example, the rounding error for
the certified radius of the first MNIST image of Figure 3 (Appendix A) is in the 13th decimal place.
One’s first intuition may be to adopt slightly more conservative radii (e.g., using R̃ − γ for some
positive constant γ   1). Unfortunately, such radii are not in general sound, and attacks against


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R̃ − γ are still possible. For example, as we show in Section 4.1, it is easy to construct a linear
classifier and find adversarial examples against it within R̃ − 0.1.
We outline a mitigation applying rounded interval arithmetic Higham (2002) to certified robustness.
Interval arithmetic replaces every numerical value with an interval. Interval operators exist for
elementary arithmetic operations, serving as useful building blocks for more complex computations
with bounded rounding errors (Definition 2 of Appendix D). We have re-framed existing results from
numerical analysis in the language of sound floating-point computation (Lemma 1 of Appendix D).

Theorem 1 Consider a classifier f , floating-point instance x, and a certification mechanism R(f, x)
that is sound when employing real arithmetic. If R(f, ·) can be computed by a composition of real-
valued operators ψ1 , . . . , ψL with sound floating-point extensions φ1 , . . . , φL , then the following
certification mechanism R(f, x) is sound with floating-point arithmetic: run the compositions of
φ1 , . . . , φL on (coordinate-wise) intervals [x, x], [f (x), f (x)] to obtain [R, R]; return R.

The proof of Theorem 1 appears in Appendix D.1. We offer an example application of this mitigation
theorem on linear classifiers. We use the PyInterval library Taschini (2008) that performs rounded
interval arithmetic to compute sound R for linear classifiers Cohen et al. (2019). Our attack success
rates for randomly initialized linear classifiers (Section 4.1) drop to 0% for all dimensions in both
weak and strong threat models. In sum, our theoretical and empirical results provide support for
mitigating attacks against exact robustness certifications Cohen et al. (2019).


6    R ELATED WORK

Several works have explored the influence of floating-point representation on guarantees of verified
neural networks. For example, verifiers designed for floating-point representation have been shown to
not necessarily work for quantized neural networks Giacobbe et al. (2020); Henzinger et al. (2021).
The closest to our work is the independent work by Jia & Rinard (2021) who also exploit rounding
errors to discover violations of network robustness certifications. Our work differs from Jia & Rinard
(2021) on the adversarial examples we find. As we show in Section 4.3, we are able to find an
adversarial example x0 for unaltered natural image x from test data, within that image x’s certified
radius. The work by Jia and Rinard, instead, does not find certification-violating adversarial examples
of test instances. It finds perturbed inputs x00 of synthetic inputs x0 , that violate certifications of x0 .
In particular, they adjust brightness of a natural test image x to produce a x0 . That is, their attack
point x00 is outside the certified radius of x. Hence, our attack can be seen as a stronger attack that is
possible due to a novel attack methodology based on accurate perturbation directions.
Research in the area of numerical analysis has proposed approaches to address the limitations of
floating-point rounding, with a focus on measuring the stability of calculations. Proposed approaches
include replacing floating-point arithmetic with interval arithmetic Jaulin et al. (2001) or affine
arithmetic De Figueiredo & Stolfi (2004). Both account for rounding errors and return an interval that
contains the correct result. Our work is the first to suggest that modern systems implementing these
approaches could be of use to certified robustness implementations. We adopt interval arithmetic
with the implementation PyInterval Taschini (2008) in the calculation of robustness certification.


7    C ONCLUSION

Certified robustness has been proposed as a defense against adversarial examples. In this work we
have shown that guarantees of several certification mechanisms do not hold in practice since they rely
on real numbers that are approximated on modern computers. Hence, computation on floating-point
numbers—used to represent real numbers—can overestimate certification guarantees due to rounding.
We propose and evaluate a rounding search method that finds adversarial inputs on linear classifiers
and verified neural networks within their certified radii—violating their certification guarantees. We
propose rounded interval arithmetic as the mitigation, by accounting for the rounding errors involved
in the computation of certification guarantees. We conclude that if certified robustness is to be used
for security-critical applications, their guarantees and implementations need to account for limitations
of modern computing architecture.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Lawrence D. Brown, T. Tony Cai, and Anirban DasGupta. Interval estimation for a binomial
  proportion. Statistical science, 16(2):101–133, 2001.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P), pp. 39–57, 2017.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
  smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1310–1320. PMLR,
  2019.
Luiz Henrique De Figueiredo and Jorge Stolfi. Affine arithmetic: concepts and applications. Numeri-
  cal Algorithms, 37(1):147–158, 2004.
Mirco Giacobbe, Thomas A Henzinger, and Mathias Lechner. How many bits does it take to quantize
 your neural network? In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
 and Analysis of Systems, pp. 79–97. Springer, 2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2022. URL https://www.
  gurobi.com.
Thomas A Henzinger, Mathias Lechner, and Ðord̄e Žikelić. Scalable verification of quantized neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), volume 35, pp.
  3787–3795, 2021.
Nicholas J. Higham. Accuracy and stability of numerical algorithms. Society for Industrial and
  Applied Mathematics (SIAM), 2002.
IEEE. IEEE standard for floating-point arithmetic. IEEE Std 754-2019 (Revision of IEEE 754-2008),
  pp. 1–84. doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229.
Luc Jaulin, Michel Kieffer, Olivier Didrit, and Eric Walter. Interval analysis. In Applied Interval
  Analysis, pp. 11–43. Springer, 2001.
Kai Jia and Martin Rinard. Exploiting verified neural networks via floating point numerical error. In
  International Static Analysis Symposium, pp. 191–205. Springer, 2021.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher J.C. Burges. MNIST handwritten digit database. ATT
  Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.
Mathias Lecuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. Certified
 robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy. In IEEE Symposium on Security and
 Privacy (S&P), pp. 656–672, 2019.
Bai Li, Changyou Chen, Wenlin Wang, and Lawrence Carin. Certified adversarial robustness with
  additive noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32,
  2019.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199.
Stefano Taschini. PyInterval, interval arithmetic in Python, 2008. URL https://pypi.org/
  project/pyinterval/. version 1.2.0 released 2017-03-05.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shiqi Wang, Kexin Pei, Justin Whitehouse, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana. Formal security analysis
  of neural networks using symbolic intervals. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
  Security 18), pp. 1599–1614, 2018.
Shiqi Wang, Huan Zhang, Kaidi Xu, Xue Lin, Suman Jana, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and J Zico Kolter.
  Beta-CROWN: Efficient bound propagation with per-neuron split constraints for complete and
  incomplete neural network verification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Eric Wong and Zico Kolter. Provable defenses against adversarial examples via the convex outer
  adversarial polytope. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 5286–5295.
  PMLR, 2018.
Huan Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Luca Daniel. Efficient neural network
  robustness certification with general activation functions. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 31, 2018.
Dániel Zombori, Balázs Bánhelyi, Tibor Csendes, István Megyeri, and Márk Jelasity. Fooling a
  complete neural network verifier. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2020.


                                                11
