Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE MECHANISTIC BASIS OF DATA DEPENDENCE AND
ABRUPT LEARNING IN AN IN - CONTEXT CLASSIFICA -
TION TASK

 Gautam Reddy ∗
 Department of Physics, Princeton University
 Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research Inc.
 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University



                                              A BSTRACT

            Transformer models exhibit in-context learning: the ability to accurately predict
            the response to a novel query based on illustrative examples in the input sequence.
            In-context learning contrasts with traditional in-weights learning of query-output
            relationships. What aspects of the training data distribution and architecture fa-
            vor in-context vs in-weights learning? Recent work has shown that specific dis-
            tributional properties inherent in language, such as burstiness, large dictionaries
            and skewed rank-frequency distributions, control the trade-off or simultaneous
            appearance of these two forms of learning. We first show that these results are
            recapitulated in a minimal attention-only network trained on a simplified dataset.
            In-context learning (ICL) is driven by the abrupt emergence of an induction head,
            which subsequently competes with in-weights learning. By identifying progress
            measures that precede in-context learning and targeted experiments, we construct
            a two-parameter model of an induction head which emulates the full data distribu-
            tional dependencies displayed by the attention-based network. A phenomenolog-
            ical model of induction head formation traces its abrupt emergence to the sequen-
            tial learning of three nested logits enabled by an intrinsic curriculum. We pro-
            pose that the sharp transitions in attention-based networks arise due to a specific
            chain of multi-layer operations necessary to achieve ICL, which is implemented
            by nested nonlinearities sequentially learned during training.


1       I NTRODUCTION

A striking feature of large language models is in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020; Dong et al.,
2022; Garg et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022). In-context learning (ICL) is the ability to predict the
response to a query based on illustrative examples presented in the context, without any additional
weight updates. This form of learning contrasts with in-weights learning (IWL) of query-response
relationships encoded in the weights of the network. ICL emerges in transformer models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) trained on a diverse set of tasks that contain a common structural element. ICL can
be exploited to perform zero-shot learning on novel tasks that share this structure. For example, a
transformer trained to solve numerous linear regression tasks learns to solve a new linear regression
task based on in-context examples (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023;
Ahn et al., 2023). Specifically, given a sequence of sample input-output pairs, the predictive error
on a target query is comparable to an optimal Bayes predictor (Ahuja et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2023). This remarkable feature extends to other generative models such as hierarchical
regression models that involve model selection (Bai et al., 2023), random permutations of images
(Kirsch et al., 2022) and mixture models over sequential data (Wang et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2021).
Transformer models trained on language data exhibit another simple yet powerful form of in-context
learning. Given a sequence . . . x, y, . . . , x, ? for x, y pairs unseen during training (for example, to-
kens belonging to a novel proper noun), these models learn the ability to predict y (Olsson et al.,
2022). In other words, the model learns empirical bigram statistics on-the-fly, thus displaying a
    ∗
        greddy@princeton.edu


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a)                                                          (c)                                 (d)
                                                          ?                         logits (L labels)



                                ...                           ...     3-layer MLP

                K classes                   L labels                                        +
        (b) In-weights (IW) accuracy (target not in context)          attention
                                                                      head 2
                                                          ?

                                                                                            +
               In-context (IC) accuracy (novel classes)
                                                                      attention
                                                          ?           head 1

              In-context (IC2) accuracy 2 (swapped label)
                                                          ?                               input


Figure 1: (a) Input sequences consist of N item-label pairs followed by a target. Items are drawn
from K classes assigned to L ≤ K labels. At least one item belongs to the same class as the
target. The network is tasked to predict the label of the target. The number of classes (K), their
rank-frequency distribution (α), within-class variability (ε) and the number of items from a single
class in an input sequence (B) parameterize the data distribution. (b) IWL is measured using input
sequences where the items’ and target’s classes are randomly sampled. ICL is measured using items
and targets from novel classes and by swapping the label of an existing class in the context. (c)
Network architecture. (d) Loss and accuracy curves for six seeds (dark lines show averages over the
seeds). Here, B = 2, K = 512.


primitive form of zero-shot associative learning. Past work has shown that this computation involves
an induction head (discussed in detail further below) and that a minimal implementation requires a
two-layer attention-only network (Olsson et al., 2022; Bietti et al., 2024). Across networks of dif-
ferent scales and task structures, the ability to perform ICL often increases abruptly during training
(Olsson et al., 2022). The mechanistic basis of the abrupt transition remains unclear. Notably, this
abrupt transition is often preceded by the formation of induction heads in intermediate layers of the
network, suggesting that induction head formation may provide a scaffold for the development of
more complex in-context computations. Other work provides empirical evidence that ICL is the key
driver behind the emergent abilities of large language models (Lu et al., 2023). Thus, elucidating
the mechanisms that underpin ICL, and induction heads in particular, may provide crucial insights
into the data distributional and architectural factors that lead to emergent zero-shot learning.
A recent empirical study has highlighted key data distributional properties pertinent to language that
promote ICL in a hybrid in-context/in-weights classification task (Chan et al., 2022). In this setup,
a 12-layer transformer network is trained to predict the class label of a target item given a sequence
of N item-label pairs in the context. The item classes are drawn from Omniglot (Lake et al., 2019),
a standard image-label dataset. By manipulating the distribution of classes shown during training,
various data distributional properties that influence the ICL vs IWL trade-off were identified. This
setup offers a well-controlled paradigm for identifying the factors that enable attention-based models
to learn in-context learning solutions without explicitly trained to do so.
Our main contributions are as follows. We first show that the data dependencies highlighted in Chan
et al. (2022) are recapitulated in a task with simplified input statistics and a two-layer attention-
only network architecture. By identifying progress measures and designing careful experiments,
we show that ICL is driven by the abrupt formation of an induction head. We construct a mini-
mal two-parameter model of an induction head stacked with a deep classifier, which reproduces all
data distributional dependencies and captures the dynamics of learning. Finally, we develop a phe-
nomenological model of an induction head’s loss landscape. This analysis enables us to trace the
abrupt learning phenomenon to cliffs in the landscape created by nested nonlinearities in a multi-
layer attention-based network.


                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    TASK AND NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
Task structure. The task structure is based on a common ICL formulation. The network is
trained to predict the label of a target xq given an alternating sequence of N items and N labels:
x1 , ℓ1 , x2 , ℓ2 , . . . , xN , ℓN , xq , ? (Figure 1a). We embed the items and labels in P + D dimensions.
The first P dimensions encode positional information and the latter D dimensions encode content.
Position is encoded by a one-hot P -dimensional vector (we use P = 65 throughout). The input se-
quence occupies a random window of length 2N + 1 between 0 and P − 1. This choice of positional
encoding biases the network to learn a translation-invariant computation.
The items are sampled from a gaussian mixture model with K classes. Each class k is defined by a
D-dimensional vector µk whose components are sampled i.i.d from a normal distribution with mean
zero and variance 1/D. The content of item xi , x̃i , is given by
                                                    µk + εη
                                              x̃i = √        ,                                          (1)
                                                      1 + ε2
where η is drawn√ from the same distribution as the µk ’s and ε sets the within-class variability. The
re-scaling with 1 + ε2 ensures that ||x̃i || ≈ 1. Each class is assigned to one of L labels (L ≤ K).
The contents of the labels are drawn prior to training from the same distribution as the µk ’s. Each
label in an input sequence appears the same number of times as every other label in that sequence.
Importantly, at least one item in the context belongs to the target’s class. The network is trained
to classify the target xq into one of the L labels using a cross-entropy loss. The network can thus
achieve zero loss by either learning to classify targets from the K classes as in a standard in-weights
classification task (IWL), or by learning a more general in-context solution (ICL).
Parameterizing the data distribution. The data distribution is modulated by tuning various pa-
rameters in addition to K and ε. The burstiness B is the number of occurrences of items from a
particular class in an input sequence (N is a multiple of B). pB is the fraction of bursty sequences.
Specifically, the burstiness is B for a fraction pB of the training data. The classes (including the
target) are sampled i.i.d for the remaining fraction 1 − pB . The rank-frequency distribution over the
classes is f (k) ∼ k −α . We use L = 32, N = 8, D = 63, ε = 0.1, α = 0 unless otherwise specified.
Metrics for tracking in-context and in-weights learning. To track IWL, we measure the prediction
accuracy on input sequences. The target and item classes are sampled independently from the rank-
frequency distribution used during training (Figure 1b). Since K ≫ N in our experiments, it is
unlikely that the target’s class appears in the context. The network therefore has to rely on IWL to
correctly predict the target’s class label.
The primary metric for tracking ICL is the prediction accuracy on input sequences. The target and
items belong to novel classes (the µk ’s are drawn anew). The novel classes are randomly assigned
one of the existing L labels (Figure 1b). B copies of the target (within variability ε) are included
in the context. Since the classes are novel, the network has to rely on ICL for accurate prediction.
We introduce a secondary metric for tracking ICL using input sequences where the items’ labels
are different from those presented during training. We measure the accuracy of the network on
predicting the swapped label. That is, the network has to rely on ICL rather than IWL.
Network architecture. The inputs are passed through a two-layer attention-only network followed
by a classifier. Each attention layer has one attention head with a causal mask. Given a sequence of
inputs u1 , u2 , . . . , un , the outputs of the first (vi ) and second (wi ) layers are
                                              X (1)                          X (2)
                               vi = ui + V1       pij uj , wi = vi + V2          pij vj          (2)
                                        j≤i                             j≤i

where                                                  T
                                      (µ)     e(Kµ uj ) (Qµ ui )
                                     pij = P       (Kµ uk )T (Qµ ui )
                                                                                                        (3)
                                             k≤i e
is the attention paid by query i on key j in the µth layer. Qµ , Kµ , Vµ are the query, key and value
matrices, respectively. The classifier receives wn as input.
The classifier is a three-layer MLP with ReLU activations and a softmax layer which predicts the
probabilities of the L labels. We use a deep classifier to ensure perfect IWL is feasible. At least three


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a)                             (b)                           (c)


Figure 2: In-weights (top row) and in-context accuracy (bottom row) against the number of classes
(K), burstiness (B), within-class variability (ε) and the exponent of the rank-frequency distribution
(α). Here K = 1024, α = 0, B = 1, ε = 0.1 except when that parameter is varied.


layers were necessary to achieve perfect classification accuracy for the parameter ranges considered
in this paper (since K ≫ L). The query/key dimension and the MLP hidden layer dimension are
both 128. We repeat every experiment with six seeds (with random initializations and training/test
sets). For training, we use a batch size of 128 and vanilla SGD with learning rate 0.01. Figure 1d
shows sample loss and accuracy curves, including the measures used to track IWL and ICL.


3    R ESULTS

Recapitulating data distributional dependencies. In Figure 2, we quantify how IWL and ICL
depend on the parameters of the data distribution. The upshot is that the highly simplified input
statistics and network architecture considered here reproduce the core distributional dependencies
observed in past work. The results are summarized below.
Increasing the burstiness B and the number of classes K promotes ICL while decreasing IWL
(Figure 2a), highlighting the trade-off between ICL and IWL. Recall that the target and item classes
are randomly sampled when B = 0. This implies that the network can indeed learn a perfect IWL
solution for the corresponding K. Similarly, within-class variation (ε) promotes ICL and decreases
IWL (Figure 2b). We find that the network always converges to an IWL solution when the fraction
of bursty sequences pB < 1. This is expected as the ICL solution is not a global minimum when
pB < 1.
A striking result is that a Zipfian rank-frequency distribution (α = 1) overcomes the trade-off be-
tween IWL and ICL, and promotes both forms of learning. This is recapitulated in our experiments
(Figure 2c). Note, however, that while the network learns the IWL solution for the most common
classes, it does not learn the less frequent classes even for α = 1.
Moreover, we find that the network can support both ICL and IWL simultaneously. To show this,
we train the network on IC sequences, where the items are all drawn from novel classes randomly
assigned to one of the L labels. The parameter pC is the fraction of the training data containing
IC sequences. The remaining fraction of the training data is drawn as described previously. When
0 < pC < 1 and 0 ≤ pB < 1, the network can only achieve zero loss if it learns both the in-context
and in-weights solutions. Figure A.1 shows that the network is capable of learning both solutions
simultaneously.
One potential explanation for the results in Figure 2 and Figure A.1 is that the network independently
learns the in-weights and in-context solutions at different rates until it achieves zero loss. The relative
rates at which the network achieves ICL and IWL will then determine the fraction of loss explained
by each mechanism after convergence. The rates of ICL and IWL depend on K, ε, B. Specifically,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a)                            (b)         Before                         After


Figure 3: (a) IC accuracy curve (pC = 0.8, B = 1, K = 256) shows a slow learning phase followed
by the abrupt transition to zero loss. (b) The layer 1 and 2 attention maps p(1) (top matrices) and
 (2)
pq. (bottom vectors) before and after the abrupt transition (marked in the IC curve in panel (a)).


increasing K, ε decreases the rate of IWL (as the classification task is harder) whereas increasing
B increases the rate of ICL (as there are more demonstrations in the context). The Zipfian case
of α = 1 further highlights the dynamic balance between ICL and IWL. Frequent occurrences of
common classes allow the network to learn to classify them using IWL. On the other hand, the large
number of rare classes promotes learning of a more general in-context solution. Once the in-context
solution is learned, IWL freezes as the network incurs near-zero loss on all classes. When α > 1,
the tail of the rank-frequency distribution falls off rapidly and the rare classes do not contribute
sufficiently to the loss to promote ICL. Conversely, when α < 1, the network learns the in-context
mechanism if K is large enough such that IWL takes longer than ICL (see Figure 2a for α = 0 and
varying K).
                                             Attention maps and progress measures. We now ex-
                                             amine the dynamics of ICL. We set pC > 0, pB = 1 as
                                             the IC sequences promote rapid convergence to the in-
                                             context solution and allow for more experiments. Figure
                                             3a shows the IC accuracy, which displays a slow learning
                                             phase followed by an abrupt transition to perfect accu-
                                             racy. To investigate network behavior at the transition, we
                                             examine the attention maps (for a randomly chosen input
                                             sequence) before and after the transition (Figure 3b). Be-
                                             fore the transition, the attention map of the first layer p(1)
                                             shows queries paying uniform attention to the keys. For
                                             the second layer, we visualize the attention paid by the
                                                     (2)
                                             target pq. on the other tokens (as the other attention pat-
Figure 4: Progress measures for six          terns do not influence classifier output), which also shows
seeds aligned based on when the IC ac-       no clear pattern. After the transition, however, the atten-
curacy crosses 50%. The color-progress       tion heads show clear structure: queries in the first layer
measure pairings are orange: (ILA1),         pay attention to keys that immediately precede them and
green: (TILA2), blue: (CLA), red:            the target pays attention to one particular key (here, the
(TLA2), black: IC accuracy. See text         target’s correct label).
for more details.
                                            Another curious feature of the IC accuracy curves is the
                                            slow learning phase that precedes the abrupt transition
                                            (Figure 3a). This phase leads to a non-negligible increase
in IC accuracy despite the unstructured attention maps. What drives this slow learning? We hypoth-
esize that the network learns to extract useful information from the context despite not learning the
optimal ICL solution. Specifically, the total number of labels (L) is larger than the number of labels
represented in the context (N ). The network can thus randomly pick one of the N contextual labels
to increase its accuracy from 1/L to 1/N . This picture suggests that the target pays attention to the
N labels in the second layer.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To test this hypothesis and quantify the patterns visualized in the attention maps, we define four
progress measures. Item-label association (ILA1): the attention paid by a token to its previous one
in the first layer. Target-item-label association (TILA2): the attention paid by the target to the correct
label in the second layer. Context-label accuracy (CLA): the probability that the network predicts a
label present in the context. Target-labels association (TLA2): the total attention paid by the target
to the N labels in the second layer. (ILA1) and (TILA2) quantify the changes that occur during
the abrupt transition whereas (CLA) and (TLA2) quantify the changes expected during the slow
learning phase. Each progress measure is obtained by averaging over 1000 test input sequences.
Figure 4 shows aligned progress measures (based on when IC accuracy reaches 50%). The dynamics
of IC accuracy and the progress measures are remarkably reproducible across seeds. Figure 4 con-
firms the hypothesis that the network learns to randomly pick a contextual label in the slow learning
phase (blue curve in Figure 4). Moreover, this is accompanied by the target paying attention to the
labels (red curve in Figure 4). As visualized in Figure 3b, the item-label associations of the first
layer and target-item-label associations of the second layer appear precisely at the transition (green
and orange curves in Figure 4).
Induction head formation drives the abrupt transition during ICL. The dynamics of the progress
measures raises various hypotheses regarding the factors that lead to ICL. Specifically, we are in-
terested in whether learning (CLA) or (TLA2) is necessary for the abrupt transition (tracked by
(ILA1),(TILA2)). We consider various hypotheses and design experiments to test them: H1. (CLA)
→ (TLA2) → (ILA1), (TILA2). H2. (TLA2) → (ILA1), (TILA2). H3. (CLA) → (ILA1), (TILA2).
It is also possible that none of these factors or a progress measure that we have no considered leads
to ICL.
                                             We first note that progress measures (ILA1) and (TILA2)
                                             strongly suggest the formation of an induction head. Recall
            position
                              read           that an induction head enables zero-shot copying: given an
                              write          input sequence . . . x, ℓ . . . x, ?, an induction head allows for
                 content                     predicting ℓ even if x, ℓ never appear together during train-
        buffer
                                             ing. Clearly, this is a mechanism that plausibly solves our
                                 ?           task in-context. An induction head implemented by a two-
                                             layer attention-only network executes the following sequence
 (i)                                         of operations (visualized in Figure 5): (i) A token (say, ℓ) pays
                                             attention to the token immediately preceding it (here, x) using
 (ii)
                                             positional information. (ii) The value matrix of the first layer
                                             now writes the content of x into ℓ. Importantly, this is writ-
                                             ten to a “buffer” subspace orthogonal to the content of ℓ. (iii)
(iii)                                        The target x pays attention to ℓ by matching its content to ℓ’s
                                             buffer, which now contains the content of the contextual x that
(iv)                                         preceded it. (iv) The value matrix of the second layer writes
                                             the content of ℓ to the target x, which is then passed to the
                                             classifier. The classifier in turn uses this information to predict
                                             ℓ.
Figure 5: An illustration of the four
operations performed by an induc-   We construct a minimal three-parameter model of the two-
tion head.                          layer induction head that emulates these core computations
                                    and also captures the four progress measures. We assume that
                                    the input embedding space can be decomposed into two or-
                                                                                                      (c)
thogonal D-dimensional subspaces. For a token ui , these orthogonal subspaces encode content ui
              (b)
and a buffer ui (initially empty). Given a sequence u1 , u2 , . . . , un , the first and second layers of
our minimal model compute



                                       (b)
                                                 X (1) (c)        (c)      (c)
                                      vi     =    qij uj ,      vi      = ui                                (4)
                                                 j≤i
                                       (b)
                                                 X (2) (c)        (c)      (c)
                                  wi         =    qij vj ,      wi      = vi                                (5)
                                                 j≤i



                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a)                          (b)                          (c)


Figure 6: (a) Aligned progress measures (plotted as in Figure 4) for the minimal three-parameter
model show similar dynamics as the progress measures for the full network. For L = 32, N = 8.
(b) As in panel (a) with β2 fixed to 0. (c) Loss curves for six seeds when L = N = 8.


where
                                                                (b)   (c)
                     (1)    eβ1 δi−1,j           (2)    eαvj .vi +β2 ∆i,j
                    qij = P      β1 δi−1,k
                                           ,    qij = P        (b) (c)
                                                                              .                    (6)
                           k≤i e
                                                             αvk .vi +β2 ∆i,k
                                                       k≤i e
                                                  (c)     (b)
The classifier receives the concatenated vector wn ⊕ wn . Here, δi,j is one only if i = j and zero
otherwise. β1 thus determines the attention paid by a token to its previous token (progress measure
(ILA1)). α determines the attention paid by the target’s content to a token’s buffer (progress measure
(TILA2)). ∆i,j is one only if i − j is odd and zero otherwise. β2 thus determines the attention paid
by the target to the labels in the context (progress measure (TLA2)). Since the classifier receives the
target’s content and buffer, it has the capacity to capture progress measure (CLA). We optimize for
α, β1 , β2 and the classifier’s parameters using the same training procedure as the full network. Loss
and accuracy curves are presented in Figure A.2.
Progress measures from the minimal model exhibit strikingly similar dynamics (Figure 6a), includ-
ing the abrupt transition in IC accuracy. Note that the slow learning phase in the IC accuracy curve is
truncated in Figure 6a compared to Figure 4. Nevertheless, the network does indeed gradually learn
to predict the N contextual labels (blue curve in Figure 6a). The abrupt transition appears sooner
for the three-parameter model, which masks the slow learning phase.
Next, we repeat the experiment fixing β2 = 0. In this case, the target cannot pay more attention to
the N contextual labels relative to the items in the second layer. The dynamics of (ILA1), (TILA2)
remain the same (Figure 6b), including the abrupt transition. This experiment rules out hypotheses
H1 and H2, i.e., that the target-labels association (TLA2) leads to (ILA1), (TILA2).
The two-parameter model (with β2 = 0 in equation 6) together with the deep classifier recapitulate
all the data distributional dependencies exhibited by the full network (Figure A.3). Moreover, note
that the two-parameter model contains only the two parameters that characterize an induction head.
This reduction strongly suggests that induction head formation drives the abrupt transition in ICL in
the full model.
To test hypothesis H1 that (CLA) leads to (ILA1), (TILA2), we ablate the slow learning phase. Re-
call that during the slow learning phase, the network learns to randomly pick one of the N contextual
labels. Since L > N , this simple strategy increases accuracy from 1/L to 1/N . The slow learning
phase can be prevented by setting L = N and B = 1. That is, the input sequence contains all the
L labels exactly once. This perturbation indeed affects robust ICL. Specifically, two of the six seeds
acquire the IC solution. The other four of the six seeds exhibit distinct, slow dynamics and converge
to a sub-optimal minimum (Figure 6c).
The loss landscape of the induction head. We now examine the loss landscape of the induction
head. Through this analysis, we aim to provide mechanistic insight into the abrupt transition and ex-
plains the empirical results described above. We propose a phenomenological model, which contains
the key elements of the two-parameter induction head and the classifier. While this phenomenologi-
cal approach helps identify core features of the learning dynamics, it ignores other elements. These
other factors include the effects of stochasticity and the finite dimension (D) of the embedding. We
assume B = 1; it is straightforward to extend the model to B > 1.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a)                          (b)                              (c)


Figure 7: (a) Loss curve for the phenomenological model obtained via gradient descent on the loss
in equation 9. (b) The three parameters β1 (layer 1), α (layer 2), ξ (layer 3) are learned sequentially.
(c) The trajectory visualized on the loss landscape (green: initial point, red: final point).


Consider a softmax classifier that receives an input w and classifies it into L labels. Given that the
target’s correct label for a particular input sequence is t, the classifier models the probability that the
label is t as
                                                     eγt .w
                                            πt = PL              ,                                      (7)
                                                           γj .w
                                                    j=1 e

where γj is the D-dimensional regression vector for label j. The cross-entropy loss given target
label t is L = − log πt . The input w is given by
                                                           N
                             ey         1                  X                   eβ1
                    w=     y
                                 ℓτ + y                         ℓk ,   y = α β1    ,                   (8)
                          e + 2N     e + 2N                                 e + N1
                                                     k=1,k̸=τ

where ℓj is the D-dimensional embedding vector for the label at index j, τ is the index of the target
label t in the input sequence and N1 = N for reasons discussed below. In equation 8, y determines
the attention paid by the target to the correct label in the second layer (recall that there are 2N + 1
tokens in the input sequence including the target). Note that we have ignored the contributions to w
from the N item vectors, which contain irrelevant information and add noise to w.
                                               (b)   (c)                                (b)   (c)
From equation 6, y is the product of α and vτ .vq , where q is the target’s index. vτ .vq is 1 if the
label at τ pays attention to the item before it in the first layer. The attention weight corresponding
                    β1
to this term is eβ1e+N1 (equation 6), where N1 is the number of other tokens that compete for the
label’s attention, namely, 2τ − 1. Since τ varies from 1 to N across input sequences, we use an
intermediate value, N1 = N , for simplicity. A more elaborate model would consider an expectation
over the N possibilities.
From equation 8, the exponents in equation 7 contain dot products of the form γi .ℓj for arbitrary
pairs i, j. If all labels are statistically identical and balanced, it is simpler to track the overlaps
γi .ℓi ≡ ζ for all i and γi .ℓj ≡ ζ ′ for all i ̸= j.
In summary, the loss after re-arranging terms is given by
                                                            ′

                 L = log 1 + (N − 1)e−z + (L − N )e−z , where
                         y
                                                     ey                 eβ1

                           e −1             ′
                  z=                 ξ,   z   =             ξ,  y = α         ,                        (9)
                         ey + 2N                  ey + 2N             eβ1 + N
where ξ = ζ − ζ ′ . The loss contains three nested logits parameterized by β1 , α, ξ, which correspond
to the first attention layer, the second attention layer and the third softmax layer, respectively.
The learning curves generated by gradient descent on this landscape beginning from the initial point
ξ, α, β1 = 0 recapitulate the slow learning phase and the abrupt transition (for L > N , Figure 7a).
Indeed, ∂L/∂ξ = −(L − N )/(L(2N + 1)) at the origin. Intuitively, when L > N , the classifier
gradually aligns the regression vectors with the labels (increasing ξ) when learning to randomly pick
one of the labels in the context. This phase is slow as the classifier cannot discriminate between the
N contextual labels. The gradual rise in ξ eventually drives the loss off a cliff and leads to rapid
learning of α and β1 (Figures 7b,c).


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As shown in Figure 6c, when L = N , the slow learning phase is ablated and the learning dynamics
show two distinct behaviors: ICL and slow convergence to a sub-optimal minimum. We reproduce
these two distinct behaviors by setting L = N in equation 9 and simulating gradient descent from
two points near the origin (Figure A.4a). Examining the loss landscape shows that this divergence
is due to a saddle point at the origin (Figure A.4b). One path leads to the ICL solution whereas the
other path gradually converges to a sub-optimal minimum. Moreover, the ICL solution takes much
longer to acquire due to a shallower gradient at the origin (compare Figure 7a and A.4a). We tested
this prediction in the full model (equation 2). Consistent with theory, the full model robustly learns
an ICL solution for L > N but not when L = N (Figure A.5).


4   D ISCUSSION

Summary. In summary, past work has found that particular features of the data distribution influ-
ence the trade-off between ICL and IWL. The features that promote ICL are especially prominent
in language, such as a large number of rare tokens that are highly over-represented in specific con-
texts. We reproduced these data distributional dependencies in a simplified model, highlighting the
essential ingredients necessary to explain those observations. We present strong evidence that ICL is
implemented by an induction head. We build a minimal version of an induction head, which through
careful experiments reveal the key factors that lead to its emergence. In particular, the learning of
an independent sub-optimal strategy accompanied by a slow learning phase supports the induction
head’s abrupt formation. A phenomenological model of the loss landscape shows that this abrupt
transition is likely due to the sequential learning of three nested logits.
Abrupt transitions during ICL. An abrupt transition in loss has been noted in a wide variety of
ICL tasks. However, a mechanistic understanding of ICL dynamics has been lacking. Known mech-
anisms for ICL, such as an induction head, rely on a series of specific operations performed by
multiple attention-based layers. The attention operation involves a logit (or, in general, other non-
linear operations), which creates sharp gradients. A chain of operations across attention layers will
thus entail a series of nested logits, which together create “cliffs” in the loss landscape. Parallel
work suggests that similar mechanisms underlie ‘eureka’ moments in other multi-step tasks involv-
ing transformers Hoffmann et al. (2023). Note that this mechanism is distinct from the one that leads
to sharp transitions in simple reinforcement learning tasks Reddy (2022).
Relationship with past work. Our work adds to existing evidence that induction heads play a key
role during ICL Olsson et al. (2022); Bietti et al. (2024). We also recapitulate the data distributional
dependencies delineated in Chan et al. (2022). Our results show that even simple networks such as
ours are capable of simultaneously learning ICL and IWL solutions (see Figure A.1 for example).
However, ICL is not transient in our simulations. This contrasts with recent work Singh et al. (2023)
who use a much larger transformer network (12 layers and 8 heads) and finite training data. It is
possible that larger networks slowly memorize the training data, leading to a gradual degradation of
ICL.
Implications for LLMs. We show that an intrinsic curriculum may be necessary to overcome
the shallow gradients at the top of the cliff and guide networks towards the ICL solution. This
observation is consistent with empirical results in Garg et al. (2022), who use curricula to robustly
train transformers to solve complex ICL tasks. An intriguing possibility is that learning of simpler
ICL operations enables the learning of more complex ICL strategies in LLMs. An hierarchy of
increasingly complex sub-tasks may lead to a cascading effect and potentially explain the sudden
emergence of zero-shot learning abilities in LLMs. Testing this hypothesis will require careful
mechanistic analysis of minimal networks that solve complex ICL tasks. More generally, while
automatic curriculum learning has been used to train foundational models for RL Team et al. (2023),
the role of curricula for accelerating ICL in LLMs remains relatively unexplored.
Limitations. While our formulation provides a minimal model that exhibits ICL, it is possible that
larger models use different mechanisms than the ones that we have identified here. Methods for
mechanistic interpretability Wang et al. (2022) may help probe these mechanisms in LLMs. We
have not used heuristics such as weight tying Inan et al. (2016); Press & Wolf (2016), which are
used to accelerate training of LLMs. Such heuristics may make the slow learning phase unnecessary
by aligning the classifier’s regression vectors with the labels (increasing ξ) from the outset.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00297, 2023.
Kabir Ahuja, Madhur Panwar, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the bayesian prism.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04891, 2023.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians: Prov-
  able in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04637,
  2023.
Alberto Bietti, Vivien Cabannes, Diane Bouchacourt, Herve Jegou, and Leon Bottou. Birth of a
  transformer: A memory viewpoint. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
David T Hoffmann, Simon Schrodi, Nadine Behrmann, Volker Fischer, and Thomas Brox. Eureka-
  moments in transformers: Multi-step tasks reveal softmax induced optimization problems. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.12956, 2023.
Hakan Inan, Khashayar Khosravi, and Richard Socher. Tying word vectors and word classifiers: A
  loss framework for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01462, 2016.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.
Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. The omniglot challenge: a
  3-year progress report. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 29:97–104, 2019.
Yingcong Li, M Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as al-
  gorithms: Generalization and implicit model selection in in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.07067, 2023.
Sheng Lu, Irina Bigoulaeva, Rachneet Sachdeva, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, and Iryna Gurevych.
  Are emergent abilities in large language models just in-context learning?   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.01809, 2023.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ofir Press and Lior Wolf. Using the output embedding to improve language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1608.05859, 2016.
Gautam Reddy. A reinforcement-based mechanism for discontinuous learning. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 119(49):e2215352119, 2022.
Aaditya K Singh, Stephanie CY Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew M Saxe, and Fe-
  lix Hill. The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.08360, 2023.
Adaptive Agent Team, Jakob Bauer, Kate Baumli, Satinder Baveja, Feryal Behbahani, Avishkar
  Bhoopchand, Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg, Michael Chang, Natalie Clay, Adrian Collister, et al.
  Human-timescale adaptation in an open-ended task space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07608,
  2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, and William Yang Wang. Large language models are implicitly topic
  models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.11916, 2023.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX


Figure A.1: Accuracy curves for the full model when 0 < pB < 1 and 0 < pC < 1. In all cases, the
network learns both the ICL and the IWL solutions. Here K = 256, B = 1, α = 0, ε = 0.


 Figure A.2: Loss and accuracy curves for the minimal model. Here K = 512, D = 64, B = 2.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure A.3: Data distributional dependencies are recapitulated by the minimal model. Plotted as in
Figure 2. Here K = 512, D = 64, B = 1, α = 0, ε = 0.1 (except when that parameter is varied)


           (a)                                       (b)


Figure A.4: (a) When L = N , the loss curves starting from two initial values recapitulate the two
distinct behaviors noted in Figure 6c. (b) The loss landscape has a saddle at the origin such that small
fluctuations lead the path either to the ICL solution (top right quadrant) or a sub-optimal minimum
(bottom left quadrant).


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure A.5: IC accuracy curves for different N and L (six seeds for each pair of values of L and
N are shown). Consistent with the theory and the minimal network, the full network (equation 2)
robustly learns the in-context solution if L > N but not when L = N . Here K = 256, B = 1, pC =
0.8, pB = 1, α = 0, ε = 0.


                                               14
