Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B EYOND THE TRAINING SET: AN INTUITIVE METHOD
FOR DETECTING DISTRIBUTION SHIFT IN MODEL -
BASED OPTIMIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Model-based optimization (MBO) is increasingly applied to design problems in
         science and engineering. A common scenario involves using a fixed training set
         to train models, with the goal of designing new samples that outperform those
         present in the training data. A major challenge in this setting is distribution shift,
         where the distributions of training and designed samples are different. While some
         shift is expected, as the goal is to create better designs, this change can negatively
         affect model accuracy and subsequently, design quality. Despite the widespread
         nature of this problem, addressing it demands deep domain knowledge and artful
         application. To tackle this issue, we propose a straightforward method for design
         practitioners that detects distribution shifts. This method trains a binary classifier
         using knowledge of the unlabeled design distribution to separate the training data
         from the design data. The classifier’s logit scores are then used as a proxy measure
         of distribution shift. We validate our method in a real-world application by running
         offline MBO and evaluate the effect of distribution shift on design quality. We find
         the intensity of the shift in the design distribution varies based on the number of
         steps taken by the optimization algorithm, and our simple approach identifies these
         shifts. This enables users to constrain their search to regions where the model’s
         predictions are reliable, thereby increasing the quality of designs.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning (ML) is increasingly guiding design in fields like materials science, chemistry, and
biology (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Alley et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023). ML
in design is used to find inputs that enhance specific properties, such as designing peptides with better
antimicrobial properties (Gupta & Zou, 2019), or optimizing superconductors for higher critical
temperatures (Fannjiang & Listgarten, 2020). Traditional design methods often rely on expensive,
time-consuming experiments (Arnold, 1998). ML-guided design reduces these costs by substituting
or supplementing experimental data with ML model predictions (Yang et al., 2019).
Offline model-based optimization (MBO) (Sinai & Kelsic, 2020; Trabucco et al., 2022) is a key
method in ML-guided design. It involves creating a “surrogate” model from a set of input-property
pairs to predict property values. Then, one searches the space of possible input values to find a new
batch of inputs with predicted property values that are greater than those observed in the training
set. This search can use various optimization methods including evolutionary algorithms for discrete
inputs or gradient-based methods for continuous inputs.
MBO is conceptually simple and versatile, applicable to various design problems with black-box
methods, given an initial dataset. However, its effectiveness depends on careful implementation
due to several challenges, notably the tendency of black-box search methods to focus on out-of-
distribution (OOD) regions compared to the training data (?). This “distribution shift” can lead to
unreliable predictions when provided with OOD inputs, especially for high-capacity neural network
models. In extreme cases, the search method might exploit these unreliable predictions, especially in
maximization problems, resulting in nonsensical outputs known as ”adversarial examples” (Brookes
et al., 2019).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The main challenge in effective MBO is detecting distribution shifts from training data and identi-
fying resulting adversarial examples. Several methods have been proposed to minimize these shifts,
including using Bayesian Optimization (BO) to regularize the search based on the surrogate model’s
predictive uncertainty (Snoek et al., 2012), limiting the search to regions with high likelihood in
the training distribution (Brookes et al., 2019; Linder et al., 2020; Angermueller et al., 2019), and
incorporating domain-specific knowledge into the search algorithm (Sinai et al., 2020). While these
methods can reduce adversarial examples, they do not fully eliminate distribution shift and can be
challenging to adapt to specific problems.
A different emerging direction in reducing distribution shift is the use of foundation models trained
on all known proteins (Madani et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023), where the set of data in the training
domain is expansive. However, while they are the go-to choice for zero-shot generation, design with
these models is nascent, and they are not better than supervised approaches when some functional
data has already been collected (Dallago et al., 2021).
We propose a simple technique for detecting distribution shifts in MBO. This method not only
addresses several of the previously mentioned challenges but can also be combined with any existing
design method to further minimize adversarial designs. In particular, we propose training a binary
classifier to distinguish between the initial training samples and a separate set of samples drawn
from one’s chosen search algorithm. We demonstrate that the logit score output by the trained
“OOD classifier” is an interpretable and effective metric for determining which designed sequences
are OOD and thus are associated with unreliable predictions from the surrogate model. This method
is straightforward to implement given the initial training set and a search method, and can be used in
conjunction with any black-box surrogate model and search method. We suggest multiple ways in
which the OOD classifier score (henceforth referred to as “OOD scores”) can be used to guide the
selection of designed inputs for subsequent experimental verification.
We study the OOD classifier in three increasingly realistic problems. The first is an illustrative toy
problem with a two-dimensional input space. Next, we validate the method in a simulated envi-
ronment for protein structure prediction of a small protein, where we can use in silico structure
prediction methods to measure the effectiveness of our black-box design. Finally, we apply our
method in a real-world experiment where we design Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) capsid seqe-
unces, a complex protein of major importance to gene therapy. We trace the generated sequences
over the course of MBO trajectories where they are experimentally tested for multiple important
properties. This unique dataset allows us to track the extent and effects of distribution shift during
MBO, and test how methods such as the OOD classifier are able to detect such a shift. We show that
the OOD classifier can improve the outcome in this black-box design problem, which is inaccessible
to structural and domain-informed approaches.



2     M ETHODS

2.1   O FFLINE M ODEL BASED O PTIMIZATION

The objective in a data-driven design problem is to identify an optimal input x∗ of some ground-
truth function, f (x), that encodes a scalar property of the input. This can be expressed as the
objective x∗ = arg maxx∈X f (x), where X is a bounded set that we refer to as the “input space”
of the problem. The input space may be a discrete or continuous space, and f (x) is typically
assumed to be a black box from which we can only make zeroth-order evaluations. We assume the
availability of a static dataset, D = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                  i=1 , consisting of elements of the input space paired
with corresponding noise-corrupted evaluations of the ground truth function.
In MBO, the design strategy is to train a surrogate model fˆ(x) on the dataset D using an appropriate
supervised regression strategy (e.g. minimizing the mean squared error of predictions from the
model via stochastic gradient descent). This surrogate model is then used to guide a search around
the input space to find inputs with high predicted property values. This search may take the form
of an optimization algorithm (Sinai et al., 2020; Angermueller et al., 2019), probabilistic sampling
method (Brookes et al., 2019), or sampling from a generative model (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018;
Linder et al., 2020; Nijkamp et al., 2022).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In an ideal scenario for MBO, the inputs of the training dataset would be evenly distributed across
the input space, and therefore the error between the surrogate model and the ground truth function
would be roughly equal in all regions of input space. In such a case, one could safely optimize the
surrogate model directly with a reasonable assumption that this would produce an input that is close
to a local optimum of the ground truth function. In most practical scenarios, however, the training
inputs are not evenly distributed, and are instead concentrated in a small region of input space. In
such cases, the error of the surrogate model will change drastically depending on which region of
input space is being tested. Further, search methods that use the surrogate model will tend to move
to regions of input space where there is a low density of training points, and therefore predictions
from the surrogate model may be unreliable (Brookes et al., 2019; Fannjiang & Listgarten, 2023).
In other words, the design strategy induces a distribution shift between the training distribution and
the “design distribution” that results from performing the search (Fannjiang et al., 2022; Wheelock
et al., 2022).
In the next section, we discuss the type of distribution shift commonly observed in design problems
and how we may be able to detect which inputs are most affected by this shift.

2.2   D ISTRIBUTION SHIFT IN DESIGN

Distribution shift in sequence design problems typically takes the form of covariate shift, in which
ptr (x) ̸= pte (x), where ptr (x) and pte (x) are the distributions of training and test inputs, respectively
(Shimodaira, 2000). Under covariate shift, the ground truth conditional distribution of property
values given inputs, p(y|x), remains fixed between the train and test distributions. This is because
design problems are oftentimes modeling an underlying system that has a fixed relationship between
x and y, e.g., a biological process.
In MBO, the search method uses information from the surrogate model to guide its exploration
of input space. This induces a dependence between the training distribution and the distribution
of designed inputs, pde (x), resulting in a form of covariate shift known as “feedback covariate
shift” that can have a particularly pernicious effect on the accuracy of model predictions (Fannjiang
et al., 2022; Stanton et al., 2023). Although our proposed method can be used to detect any type of
covariate shift, our experiments are focused on demonstrating that it is effective in the difficult case
of feedback covariate shift.
Figure 1 illustrates feedback covariate shift in MBO, detailed in Section 4.3. Here, a discrete op-
timization method optimized a surrogate model to identify protein sequences with high predicted
values for a desired property. We tested sequences from each point along the optimization trajectory
in a bulk physical experiment to (i) determine whether they satisfy basic functional properties, and
thus not adversarial, and (ii) measure the actual property value. Figure 1a shows increasing surrogate
model predictions along the optimization trajectory, as expected. However, Figure 1b demonstrates
a significant increase in prediction error along the trajectory compared to true property values, in-
dicating a distribution shift during design. This increase in error occurs despite the model’s low
MSE on a random holdout as shown in the inset of Figure 1b. Figure 1c further shows that later
designs in the optimization trajectory mostly consist of adversarial sequences, which fail to meet
basic requirements of a functional protein, highlighting the severe distribution shift.
Our central aim is to detect when a covariate shift such as that shown in Figure 1 has occurred, so
that input points associated with reliable predictions from the surrogate model can be identified. This
allows one to avoid selecting inputs for experimental validation that may have unreliable predictions.
In order to detect such shifts, we require a score, s(x) that reports the extent, or “intensity” of the
shift at each input point. An intuitive score that has been frequently used is the density ratio between
the test distribution and train distribution (Sugiyama et al., 2007). In the design setting a fixed test
is not given, so we select the unlabeled design distribution as our test distribution (see Appendix D
for comparisons to other design-independent test sets).
                                                      pde (x)
                                             s(x) =           .                                          (1)
                                                      ptr (x)

For the purpose of detecting covariate shifts that induce error in the surrogate model, Equation 1 is
not necessarily the ideal score. In particular, one should expect 1/ptr (x) to be correlated with the error
of the surrogate model at a point x, but the density of the design distribution should not necessarily


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Distribution shift in a protein design problem. Independent trajectories of discrete iterative
optimization were run using a surrogate model of a desired property as the objective function and se-
quences generated along the trajectory were evaluated experimentally. Each subplot shows statistics
associated with these trajectories; gray lines correspond to individual trajectories and colored lines
display the mean values over all trajectories. (a) Predicted property value from the surrogate model.
(b) MSE between surrogate predictions and observed experimental measurement of the property.
Inset shows surrogate predictions versus observed property values for a randomly held out set of
data from the training distribution. (c) Fraction of sequences observed to be adversarial examples.
impact the surrogate error. However, estimating the density of a high-dimensional distribution such
as ptr (x) can be difficult in practice (Hido et al., 2011; Weinstein et al., 2022), while we will see that
the density ratio s(x) is simple to estimate using a binary classifier. Further we provide a simple
argument in Appendix B to suggest that the 1/ptr (x) term will tend to dominate the difference in
scores between two nearby designed inputs; therefore the distinction between s(x) and 1/ptr (x) is
small in practice and both can be used to detect distribution shift that results in surrogate model
error.

2.3   D ISTRIBUTION SHIFT DETECTION WITH BINARY CLASSIFICATION

It is well known that a binary classifier can be trained such that its output values approximate a
density ratio such as that in Equation 1. In particular, let g(x) be a model with a single continuous
scalar output, and let ρ(x) = σ(g(x)) be the probability score of such a model, where σ represents
the sigmoid function. Let pde (x) and ptr (x) represent the distribution of positive and negative class
inputs, respectively. Then, the binary cross-entropy loss to distinguish between these two classes is:
                       L(ρ) = Eptr (x) [− log(1 − ρ(x))] + Epde (x) [− log ρ(x)]                       (2)
We follow Srivastava et al. (2023) and take the functional derivative of L with respect to ρ, resulting
in
                                      δL      ptr (x)     pde (x)
                                         =             −                                            (3)
                                      δρ    1 − ρ(x)       ρ(x)
Setting this expression equal to zero demonstrates that the minimizer of the binary cross entropy can
be used to exactly predict the OOD score s(x):
                                           pde (x)       ρ(x)
                                     s(x) =        =            .                              (4)
                                           ptr (x)     1 − ρ(x)
The equivalence shown in Equation 4 is often referred to as the “density ratio trick” and provides
a straightforward path towards estimating the OOD scores s(x). In practice, we cannot exactly
minimize Equation 2 with respect to ρ, so we parameterize g with parameters θ, and minimize
Equation 2 with respect to θ. We then calculate approximate OOD scores as:
                                                   ρθ (x)
                                       ŝ(x) =                                                 (5)
                                                 1 − ρθ (x)
where ρθ (x) = σ(gθ (x)) are the probability scores associated with the parameterized model gθ (x).
In all of our experiments, gθ is instantiated as either a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) or convolutional
neural network (CNN); however, any model architecture could be used within this framework.

2.4   S ELECTION USING OOD SCORES

The final step of any MBO procedure is selecting one or more inputs sampled from the design distri-
bution for follow-up evaluation on the ground truth function (i.e. testing the inputs’ property values


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in a physical experiment). We propose using the approximate OOD scores calculated via Equation 5
to guide this selection process. Our experiments will demonstrate these OOD scores provide an in-
terpretable metric for detecting distribution shift in MBO methods, and can reliably identify regions
of input space where we can expect a surrogate model to make accurate predictions. Given a set
of designed inputs, a distribution shift-aware selection procedure should prioritize inputs associated
with high surrogate model predictions that are also expected to be accurate based on OOD scores.
How exactly a practitioner chooses to enforce this intuition will ultimately be application-specific,
and should be tailored to the user’s needs and level of risk-tolerance. Three possible techniques for
doing so are (i) a cutoff process, where only allows an input to be selected if ρθ (x) < c for a chose
cutoff value c, (ii) stratified selection in which selects a specified number of inputs from ranges of
OOD scores (e.g. select ten inputs from scores between a and b, and 10 inputs from scores between
b and c) and (iii) selection based on a user-defined utility function.

2.5   D EPLOYING OFFLINE MBO IN THE WILD

The primary aim of creating new offline MBO algorithms is to deploy them in real-world scenar-
ios. However, methods development faces a gap between simulation and the real world. Typically,
methods development is relegated to simulation, and in the rare cases where real-world deploy-
ment is involved, the goal is to use the method to produce an optimized design. We are aware of
no instances where offline MBO has been applied in real-world situations specifically to study the
algorithm itself. Studying offline MBO in real-world settings is essential for improving algorithm
development and understanding where simulations break down. The experimental setup for analyz-
ing offline MBO retrospectively can differ in crucial aspects from the usual optimization process
aimed at improving a design. Consider the following example. The distribution of designed inputs
will gradually shift away from the training data with each optimization step. To study this shift and
to determine the limitations of offline MBO, it is crucial to label data at every step to understand
where our predictions become inaccurate. On the other hand, if the sole objective is to optimize,
there is no need to waste valuable resources on assessing inputs that likely don’t improve design.
Herein, we design a real-world dataset to study distribution shifts and to evaluate our method in the
wild. In the related work section, we discuss the state of datasets in offline MBO and some of its
limitations.

3     R ELATED W ORK

Regularized search in ML-guided design The OOD classifier, inspired by ML-guided design,
limits search to regions near the training distribution. “Latent space optimization” is one method,
involving an encoder-decoder model jointly trained with a regression model that maps latent space
points to property values. After training, optimization in the latent space identifies points with high
property values for generation. This optimization remains close to the training distribution through
a spherical boundary (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) or by implicitly altering the training objec-
tive(Castro et al., 2022). Another method is adaptive generative modeling, where model parameters
are updated iteratively to generate inputs with high model scores. This approach stays close to the
training distribution by weighting points based on their training distribution density (Brookes et al.,
2019) or through gradual weight updates (Gupta & Zou, 2019). Unlike these methods, which de-
pend on specific surrogate models or search strategies, the OOD classifier is versatile, compatible
with any surrogate model or search technique.
Fannjiang et al. (2022) proposes an MBO method that applies conformal prediction to FCS, ensur-
ing search is limited to inputs where the surrogate model is guaranteed to be reliable. Stanton et al.
(2023) applies these methods to Bayesian Optimization (Snoek et al., 2012). While effective against
FCS, these strategies are computationally intensive as they require training at least n models, where
n is the number of test data points. This is impractical for high-throughput sequence design prob-
lems. In contrast, the OOD classifier method is more scalable, requiring only one model for a fixed
test set. It is accessible to practitioners with basic machine learning knowledge and our results will
indicate that it can also detect FCS.
Density ratio estimation for covariate shift and outlier detection The density ratio between test
and train distributions (e.g., Equation 1), has been widely used to address covariate shift in su-
pervised and reinforcement learning. In supervised learning, when the test set is shifted from the


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


training set, the density ratio, w(x) := pte (x)/ptr (x), can be used to minimize a loss function, ℓ(x, y),
averaged over a test set based on the equivalence Epte (x,y) [ℓ(x, y)] = Eptr (x,y) [w(x)ℓ(x, y)] (Shi-
modaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2007). This led to techniques for estimating w(x) using binary
classifiers and the density ratio trick (Sugiyama et al., 2012). Propensity scores are also closely
related, which learns a weight equal to the Radon-Nikodym derivative (RND) between the test set
q and the training set p w(x) := dpte (x)/dptr (x) (Agarwal et al., 2011). Similar to the OOD classifier,
binary classification models are used to estimate the propensity score. In reinforcement learning, the
density ratio helps regularize policies in off-policy and offline RL (Precup et al., 2000), reweight-
ing marginal state-action pairs during training to avoid low-support regions. However, while these
techniques address non-feedback covariate shift, they can not be applied in the feedback case be-
cause this requires the surrogate model to already be trained in order to generate the test distribution,
pde (x). Thus, we apply the density ratio score in Equation 1 to detect covariate shift of designed
inputs instead of weighting samples during training.
Our use of OOD scores at test time is most similar to how density ratio estimates are used to detect
outliers in a test set, such as by Hido et al. (2011). Our methods and results differ from this work
in a few notable ways. First, we use deep binary classifiers in order to estimate density ratios, in
contrast to the linear models used in Hido et al. (2011). Further, the outlier detection task only
requires detection of standard (non-feedback) covariate shift; in contrast, our result demonstrates
the density ratios can be used to mitigate the effects of feedback covariate shift, and thus can be used
for ML-guided design problems. We also find that the use of a design-induced test set, rather than
a fixed test set is crucial to the performance of our method (see Appendix D for a comparison of q
distributions). Finally, our results show that OOD scores can be used as a continuous measure that
reports on the degree of distribution shift intensity at any point in input space, rather than only for
the binary classification task of outlier detection.
Datasets in sequence design While the ML-guided sequence design field has produced a wide
variety of datasets and benchmarks in recent years, there remains a gap in understanding how offline
MBO methods will perform in the real-world given their performance in these simulated settings
(see Appendix F for experimental evidence of this gap). Some examples of progress in dataset
development and benchmarking include the following. In protein engineering, one of the more active
subdomains where offline MBO has been applied, FLIP (Dallago et al., 2021) curated published data
and developed tasks and metrics for model generalization, emphasizing dataset-splitting techniques
to probe generalization for offline static datasets. There has also been efforts towards producing
comprehensive (i.e., combinatorially complete) low-dimensional datasets (Poelwijk et al., 2019).
These datasets are useful for evaluating supervised model performance, but are not suitable for
evaluating design methods. Outside of protein engineering, Design-Bench (Trabucco et al., 2022)
consolidates offline MBO challenges across problem domains, allow for algorithm evaluation in a
variety of simulated contexts. There exists very few examples of real-world evaluation of design
strategies, and none that explicitly study distribution shift (Bryant et al., 2021; Madani et al., 2023).
In the next section, we will use a two-dimensional example to illustrate our method and then evaluate
its performance in a real-world deployment of offline MBO.


4     R ESULTS

4.1   2D T OY MODEL

We first demonstrate the utility of the OOD classifier in a two-dimensional toy problem. The goal
here is to learn a surrogate model of a ground truth function, f (x), and to determine the regions in
input space where the surrogate model’s predictions are reliable. We employ a modified Himmelblau
function Himmelblau (1972) as the ground truth. This function is negated and normalized such
that all function values are between 0 and 1 in the range [−5, 5] of both input dimensions. The
Himmelblau function is commonly used for testing non-convex optimization methods because it
contains multiple local optima. We illustrate a case where the training data for the surrogate model
is limited to a small region of the input space mimicking real-world problems, such as in protein
engineering, where data usually clusters around a natural sequence that represents a local optima.
Figure 2a shows the ground truth function along with the positions of the training inputs for the
surrogate model. For this example, the training data labels are the exact values of the ground truth
function at the input points, with no noise added, i.e. yi = f (xi ).


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 a4                            1.0      b4                                    0.25        c 4                          12.0
                               0.9                                            0.20                                     8.5
      2                                       2                                                2


                                                                                                                               log OOD score
                               0.8                                                                                     5.0


                                                                                 |f(x) f(x)|
                                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                       1.5


                                     f(x)
      0                                       0                                                0
                               0.7                                            0.10                                       2.0
      2                                       2                                                2
                               0.6                                            0.05                                       5.5
      4                                       4                                                4                         9.0
                               0.5                                            0.00
           4   2   0   2   4                        4    2    0       2   4                        4   2   0   2   4
                                            Surrogate training points         OOD points
Figure 2: Two-dimensional test of the OOD classifier. (a) The ground truth function, f (x), that
we aim to estimate with a surrogate model. Scatter points indicate the training data used to fit the
surrogate model. (b) Absolute error between the trained surrogate model fˆ(x) and the ground truth
function. (c) Logarithm of the OOD scores produced by an OOD classifier that was trained using
the black and red scatter points as negative and positive training examples, respectively. Arrows on
ends of colorbars indicate that all values in the direction of the arrow are shown as the same color.



We fit a two-layer MLP to the training data using the MSE loss and the Adam optimizer (Kingma &
Ba, 2015). Figure 2b shows the absolute error between the surrogate model, fˆ(x), and the ground
truth function across the input space. As expected, errors increase in regions far from the training
data. In a design setting, we might optimize the surrogate model over the input space to find points
with increased ground truth values relative to the points in the training set. This optimization can
be effective if properly constrained to low-error regions near the training data, but might fail if
the optimization can stray to other regions where the model predictions are unreliable. In offline
MBO, we are unable to query the ground truth function, which means we need a method to identify
trustworthy regions to constrain our search a priori. To identify these regions, we trained a (separate)
two-layer MLP binary classifier, using the surrogate model’s input training points as negative (in-
distribution) training examples and points uniformly sampled across the input space as positive
(OOD) examples. We then used Equation 5 to calculate OOD scores for points in the input space;
these scores are shown in Figure 2c, along with the positions of the positive and negative training
examples. Comparing Figs 2b and 2c, high OOD scores align with areas where surrogate model
predictions deviate from the ground truth.
In this toy model, the “design distribution” is the uniform distribution over the input space, mak-
ing OOD scores proportional to 1/ptr (x). This score is a more suitable predictor surrogate model
error than s(x), as discussed in Section 2.2. While estimating this ratio is straightforward in a low-
dimensional 2D space, it can be exceedingly difficult in high-dimensional spaces where ptr (x) may
be arbitrarily complex. Therefore, in most practical cases, we select positive OOD examples from
areas likely to be explored by a search method. These are regions of the input space that are un-
likely to be densely sampled by a uniform sampling scheme, but are the most important for detecting
distribution shift in designed inputs (see Appendix D for a comparison to design-independent dis-
tributions for the positive OOD class). This more focused strategy results in an OOD classifier that
approximates the density ratio s(x).



4.2       S IMULATED P ROTEIN S TRUCTURE D ESIGN


As a sanity check before our real-world experiment, we also develop a proof-of-concept simulation
scheme. We rely on protein folding prediction models (Jumper et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023) and
devise a task to optimize the folding of a small protein to its target structure, using ESMfold as a
ground truth simulator. We see signs of distribution shifts caused by design, and our method can aid
in selecting designed inputs by lowering regret (performance of best design vs. the performance of
best possible design) when selecting top candidates. However, simulation settings are less relevant
when real experiments can be done (Appendix F), and hence we focus the body of the paper on the
latter. Interested readers can find the details in Appendix C.


                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Application of OOD classifier to AAV engineering. (a) Experimental observation and
distribution shift detection metrics over the course of design trajectories. x-axis and lines are as
in Figure 1; y-axes represent the fraction of functional viruses (top), the logarithm of the OOD
scores from the OOD classifier (middle) and the standard deviation of a deep ensemble (bottom)
evaluated on each designed sequence. (b) Comparison of distribution shift detection metrics with
experimental packaging measurement. Each scatter point represents a sequence; red points indicate
functional variants and gray points indicate non-functional variants. Shaded regions are a Kernel
Density Estimate (KDE) of the scatter points. Histogram (top) shows distribution of distribution
shift metrics for functional and non-functional variants. (c) Evaluation of design selection using
distribution shift metrics. Horizontal axis indicates the cutoff percentile of selected distribution shift
detection metrics among designed sequences; Vertical axis represents the difference between the
maximum observed transduction in the entire dataset and in the set of K = 100 sequences with the
largest predicted transduction and distribution shift detection metric below the cutoff indicated by the
horizontal axis. Error bars represent standard deviation estimates over 50 bootstrap resamples. Grey
dashed line represents regret for K = 100 sequences selected greedily by predicted transduction
without filtering by distribution detection metrics.

4.3   R EAL - WORLD APPLICATION TO THE DESIGN OF AAV CAPSID PROTEIN

We next apply our method to the design of AAV sequences. AAVs are small viruses that have been
repurposed as delivery vehicles for gene therapies. Because of the complex processes involved in
gene delivery, it is a real-world black box. Previous studies have demonstrated the potential of ML
to improve various properties of AAVs such as manufacturability and transduction efficiency (i.e.
how well the viruses can deliver genetic material to specific tissues or cell types) (Ogden et al., 2019;
Bryant et al., 2021).
We consider the problem of designing AAV variants that maximize transduction in cell culture. A
necessary precursor to successfully delivering genetic material is the proper folding of the viral
capsid and encapsulation of the virus’s genetic material, processes that we collectively refer to as
“packaging”. We refer to variants that do not package as “non-functional”. Both packaging and
transduction can be quantitatively measured experimentally using standard sequencing-based tech-
niques (see Appendix A.2 for details).
Our aim with generating data for this problem was to overcome the issues with testing MBO meth-
ods described in Section 2.5 by inspecting mutational trajectories at many points over the course
of a design procedure. We began by following a standard MBO procedure. First, we used an ini-
tial training dataset containing AAV sequence variants associated with packaging and transduction
measurements to train surrogate models fˆpkg (x) and fˆtsd (x) to predict packaging and transduction,
respectively, for a given sequence x. We then used AdaLead, a simple algorithm previously shown
to be effective for biological sequence design applications (Sinai et al., 2020), to optimize fˆtsd (x)
under the constraint that fˆpkg (x) > γ for a chosen cutoff γ. AdaLead maintains a pool of N
candidate sequences and iteratively updates this pool in a greedy manner to optimize the objective
function. Because genetic algorithms are local search methods, we run the optimization starting
from 9 distinct starting sequences for 15 iterations each. To study variability across search methods,
we also used a variant of beam search to generate another pool of designed sequences for exper-
imental validation; the details of this method and results associated with these sequences can be
found in Appendix A.2. After the design was completed, measured packaging and transduction


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


experimentally for all 15N sequences generated along each trajectory, for a total of about 5, 000
sequences. Figure 1 shows various properties of this data as a function of algorithm iteration; in
particular, this figure demonstrates that a significant distribution shift occurs over the course of the
design trajectories. The top panel in Figure 3a additionally shows the fraction of functional viruses
generated at each step of the design. Since all designed sequences were predicted to package, the
drop in the number of functional sequences demonstrates the frequency of adversarial examples.
We also evaluate the use of different model architectures including large language models (LLMs)
pretrained on hundreds of millions of protein sequences adapted to our regression task with linear
probing. In Appendix E, we show these models are subject to the same distribution shift that we see
from training surrogate models from scratch on our data.
We tested two metrics for detecting distribution shift. The first used OOD scores outputted from an
OOD classifier trained to classify the training data as negative samples and the designed sequences as
positive examples. The OOD classifier has an identical architecture as the surrogate model described
in Appendix A.2 except using a binary cross-entropy loss instead of MSE. The second uses the
standard deviations of predictions from an ensemble of surrogate models, which we refer to as Deep
Ensemble uncertainties (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). The middle and bottom panels of Figure
3a show the values of these metrics as a function of the optimization iteration. We can see that
the OOD scores steadily increase over the course of the trajectory, in concert with the increase in
surrogate model MSE shown in Figure 1b. This shows that the OOD scores can be effectively used
as a continuous predictor of the intensity of distribution shift at points along a design trajectory,
rather than only as a binary predictor of whether a point is in- or out-of-distribution. In contrast, the
Deep Ensemble scores cannot effectively serve as a quantitative predictor of shift intensity.
Figure 3b compares the distribution shift detection metrics to packaging measurements for all de-
signed sequences. The upper histograms compare the ability of the detection metrics to separate
Functional and Non-Functional designed variants. Clearly, the OOD scores are better able to distin-
guish between these two categories than the Deep Ensemble uncertainties, indicating that the OOD
scores can be used to determine whether a designed sequence is adversarial. Further, the lower KDE
plots demonstrate that the OOD scores are a fairly reliable predictor of the continuous packaging
measurement, again indicating that the OOD scores can be used as a continuous indicator of the
intensity of distribution shift at a given input point.
We next evaluate using the OOD scores for selecting designed sequences, as discussed in Section
2.4. Typically, a designer will use surrogate model scores to select a small subset of designed
for experimental validation. We replicate this by selecting only K designed sequences out of all
designs (for which in this case we know, but don’t use, the ground truth). Using a cutoff scheme,
sequences with the highest predicted transduction values were chosen after filtering out sequences
with a distribution shift score above a certain threshold (e.g., OOD score > 10). We use regret as
our success measure, which measures the gap between the maximum transduction value found in
the full set and the K selected sequences. Figure 3c displays this regret across various cutoffs and
50 bootstrap data samples. We used percentiles for the cutoffs to enable comparison between the
OOD score and Deep Ensemble uncertainty. Selecting sequences with OOD scores consistently led
to lower regret compared to selecting with Deep Ensemble uncertainty, even achieving zero regret
in a number of cases. We note that the regret eventually increases as the cutoff is increased because
more adversarial examples are included in the set of selected sequences, replacing the sequences
with higher observed transduction. See Appendix A.2 for analogous regret plots at multiple settings
of K and for different statistics of the observed transduction values in the selected set.
5   D ISCUSSION

Our method tackles distribution shifts in sequence design by training a binary classifier to differen-
tiate training data from designed sequences. The model’s logit scores effectively identify varying
distribution shift intensities. Large gaps between distributions p and q may result in inaccurate den-
sity ratio estimates by the OOD classifier, highlighting the need for q to overlap with p. This can be
addressed with a telescoping product (Rhodes et al., 2020), which we leave for future work. We also
examine the difficulties in assessing offline MBO with static datasets.To address this, we conducted
a real-world experiment deploying offline MBO in a challenging task, focusing on the interaction be-
tween MBO and distribution shift. Our experimental results confirm that this approach successfully
detects distribution shifts and improves established design approaches when used in conjunction.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Deepak Agarwal, Lihong Li, and Alexander Smola. Linear-time estimators for propensity scores.
  In Geoffrey Gordon, David Dunson, and Miroslav Dudı́k (eds.), Proceedings of the Fourteenth
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 15 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 93–100, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 11–13 Apr 2011. PMLR.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/agarwal11c.html.
Ethan C Alley, Grigory Khimulya, Surojit Biswas, Mohammed AlQuraishi, and George M Church.
  Unified rational protein engineering with sequence-based deep representation learning. Nature
  Methods, 16(12):1315–1322, 2019.
Christof Angermueller, David Dohan, David Belanger, Ramya Deshpande, Kevin Murphy, and Lucy
  Colwell. Model-based reinforcement learning for biological sequence design. In International
  conference on learning representations, 2019.
Frances H Arnold. Design by directed evolution. Accounts of Chemical Research, 31(3):125–131,
  1998.
David H Brookes, Hahnbeom Park, and Jennifer Listgarten. Conditioning by adaptive sampling for
  robust design. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 773–782. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Drew H Bryant, Ali Bashir, Sam Sinai, Nina K Jain, Pierce J Ogden, Patrick F Riley, George M
  Church, Lucy J Colwell, and Eric D Kelsic. Deep diversification of an AAV capsid protein by
  machine learning. Nature Biotechnology, pp. 1–6, 2021.
Egbert Castro, Abhinav Godavarthi, Julian Rubinfien, Kevin Givechian, Dhananjay Bhaskar, and
  Smita Krishnaswamy. Transformer-based protein generation with regularized latent space opti-
  mization. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(10):840–851, 2022.
Christian Dallago, Jody Mou, Kadina E Johnston, Bruce Wittmann, Nick Bhattacharya, Samuel
  Goldman, Ali Madani, and Kevin K Yang. FLIP: Benchmark tasks in fitness landscape inference
  for proteins. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi, Yu Wang, Llion Jones,
  Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger, et al. Prottrans: Toward un-
  derstanding the language of life through self-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 44(10):7112–7127, 2021.
Clara Fannjiang and Jennifer Listgarten. Autofocused oracles for model-based design. In
  H Larochelle, M Ranzato, R Hadsell, M F Balcan, and H Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12945–12956. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Clara Fannjiang and Jennifer Listgarten. Is novelty predictable? arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00872,
  2023.
Clara Fannjiang, Stephen Bates, Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Jennifer Listgarten, and Michael I.
  Jordan. Conformal prediction under feedback covariate shift for biomolecular design. Proceed-
  ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(43):e2204569119, 2022.
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Con-
  tinuous Representation of Molecules. ACS Central Science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.
Anvita Gupta and James Zou. Feedback GAN for DNA optimizes protein functions. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 1(2):105–111, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Kimin Lee, and Mantas Mazeika. Using pre-training can improve model robustness
  and uncertainty. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2712–2721. PMLR, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shohei Hido, Yuta Tsuboi, Hisashi Kashima, Masashi Sugiyama, and Takafumi Kanamori. Statis-
  tical outlier detection using direct density ratio estimation. Knowledge and Information Systems,
  26(2):309–336, 2011.
David M Himmelblau. Applied Nonlinear Programming. McGraw-Hill, 1972.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridgland,
  Clemens Meyer, Simon A A Kohl, Andrew J Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-
  Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman,
  Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger, Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer,
  Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew W Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Push-
  meet Kohli, and Demis Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.
  Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, 2015.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10054, 2022.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and Scalable Predictive
  Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles. In I Guyon, U Von Luxburg, S Bengio, H Wallach,
  R Fergus, S Vishwanathan, and R Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, Allan dos Santos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom
  Sercu, Salvatore Candido, and Alexander Rives. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023.
Johannes Linder, Nicholas Bogard, Alexander B Rosenberg, and Georg Seelig. A Generative Neural
  Network for Maximizing Fitness and Diversity of Synthetic DNA and Protein Sequences. Cell
  Systems, 11(1):49–62.e16, 2020.
Ali Madani, Ben Krause, Eric R Greene, Subu Subramanian, Benjamin P Mohr, James M Holton,
  Jose Luis Olmos Jr, Caiming Xiong, Zachary Z Sun, Richard Socher, et al. Large language
  models generate functional protein sequences across diverse families. Nature Biotechnology, pp.
  1–8, 2023.
Erik Nijkamp, Jeffrey Ruffolo, Eli N Weinstein, Nikhil Naik, and Ali Madani. Progen2: exploring
  the boundaries of protein language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13517, 2022.
Pierce J Ogden, Eric D Kelsic, Sam Sinai, and George M Church. Comprehensive AAV capsid
  fitness landscape reveals a viral gene and enables machine-guided design. Science, 366(6469):
  1139–1143, 2019.
Frank J Poelwijk, Michael Socolich, and Rama Ranganathan. Learning the pattern of epistasis
  linking genotype and phenotype in a protein. Nature Communications, 10(1):4213, 2019.
Doina Precup, Richard S. Sutton, and Satinder P. Singh. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy
  evaluation. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML ’00, pp. 759–766, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Benjamin Rhodes, Kai Xu, and Michael U Gutmann. Telescoping density-ratio estimation. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 33:4905–4916, 2020.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Sam Sinai and Eric D Kelsic. A primer on model-guided exploration of fitness landscapes for
  biological sequence design. arXiv:2010.10614, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sam Sinai, Richard Wang, Alexander Whatley, Stewart Slocum, Elina Locane, and Eric D Kelsic.
  Adalead: A simple and robust adaptive greedy search algorithm for sequence design, 2020.
Michael Smith. In vitro mutagenesis. Annual Review of Genetics, 19(1):423–462, 1985.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical Bayesian Optimization of Machine
  Learning Algorithms. In F Pereira, C J Burges, L Bottou, and K Q Weinberger (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
Akash Srivastava, Seungwook Han, Kai Xu, Benjamin Rhodes, and Michael U. Gutmann. Esti-
  mating the density ratio between distributions with high discrepancy using multinomial logistic
  regression. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Samuel Stanton, Wesley Maddox, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Bayesian optimization with con-
  formal prediction sets. In Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.),
  Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, vol-
  ume 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 959–986. PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023.
Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Buenau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct Importance Estimation with Model Selection and Its Application to Covariate Shift Adap-
 tation. In J Platt, D Koller, Y Singer, and S Roweis (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 20. Curran Associates, Inc., 2007.
Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori. Density Ratio Estimation in Machine
 Learning. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Brandon Trabucco, Xinyang Geng, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Design-bench: Benchmarks
  for data-driven offline model-based optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 21658–21676. PMLR, 2022.
Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak,
  Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, et al. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial
  intelligence. Nature, 620(7972):47–60, 2023.
Eli Weinstein, Alan Amin, Jonathan Frazer, and Debora Marks. Non-identifiability and the blessings
  of misspecification in models of molecular fitness. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:5484–5497, 2022.
Lauren B Wheelock, Stephen Malina, Jeffrey Gerold, and Sam Sinai. Forecasting labels under
  distribution-shift for machine-guided sequence design. In Machine Learning in Computational
  Biology, pp. 166–180. PMLR, 2022.
Zachary Wu, SB Jennifer Kan, Russell D Lewis, Bruce J Wittmann, and Frances H Arnold. Ma-
  chine learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial libraries. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 116(18):8852–8858, 2019.
Kevin K Yang, Zachary Wu, and Frances H Arnold. Machine-learning-guided directed evolution for
  protein engineering. Nature methods, 16(8):687–694, 2019.
Ruhong Zhou. Trp-cage: Folding free energy landscape in explicit water. Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 100(23):13280–13285, 2003.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPERIMENT DETAILS
A.1   2D TOY EXAMPLE DETAILS

Here we provide more details on the two dimensional toy example discussed in Section 4.1.
Ground truth function The ground truth function in this problem is given by

                                      1
                                     f (x) = −
                                        himm(x) + 1                             (6)
                                      m
where m = maxx∈X himm(x), with X = [−5, 5] × [−5, 5], and himm(x) is the Himmelblau
function, given by
                   himm(x) = (x20 + x1 − 11)2 + (x0 + x21 − 7)2 .               (7)

The modifications to the Himmelblau function in Equation 6 have the dual purpose of (i) negating
the function so that the local optima are maxima, which is aligned with the formulation of MBO
in Section 2.2 as a maximization problem and (ii) normalizing the function so that all ground truth
values are between 0 and 1 in the input space, which enables stable model training.
Training data for surrogate model The training data for the surrogate model was generated by
randomly selecting points in the input space according to the distribution

                                            exp(25 · f (x))   if x0 > 0
                               p(x) ∝                                                              (8)
                                            0                 otherwise.

Specifically, we created a grid with width 0.005 in each direction over the input space, evaluated
each point according to p(x), normalized the probabilities, and sampled 100 points from the grid
according to the probabilities. This distribution has the effect of concentrating the training data
around the local maxima of the ground truth function in the region x0 > 0. The labels for the
sampled training points are simply noiseless evaluations of the ground truth function at those points.
Surrogate model details The surrogate model for this example was an MLP with two fully con-
nected hidden layers with 200 nodes each and ReLU activation functions applied to each hidden
layer. The output of the model was scaled using a one-dimensional Batch Normalization. The
model was trained by minimizing an MSE loss over 1000 epochs using the Adam algorithm a batch
size of 32, an initial learning rate of 1e-3, and a dropout rate of 0.1 for hidden layer parameters.
OOD classifier details The training data for the OOD classifier consisted of (i) the input training
points for the surrogate model, associated with a label of 0 representing the “in-distribution” class,
and (ii) 100 input points sampled uniformly at random from the input space associated with a label
of 1 representing the OOD class. The architecture of the OOD classifier was identical to that of the
surrogate model; the only change being the removal of the final batch normalization layer and the
addition of L2 regularization over the weights with regularization strength 1e-3, to prevent overfit-
ting. The model was trained by minimizing the binary cross-entropy loss over 1000 epochs using
Adam algorithm a batch size of 32, and an initial learning rate of 1e-3, and a dropout rate of 0.1 for
hidden layer parameters.

A.2   AAV EXPERIMENT DETAILS

Data generation Both the initial training data and designed data contain AAV variants associated
with transduction and packaging measurements. In both datasets, the sequences are variants of the
AAV9 wild-type sequence, modified in a 63 amino-acid region containing the VR-IV loop of the
VP3 capsid protein. The distribution of edit distances to AAV9 WT for the training and design
datasets are shown in Figure 4.
Sequences in the training and designed data were assayed for packaging and transduction using a
standard sequencing-based technique Ogden et al. (2019). This technique involves first constructing
a “library” of plasmid sequences that encode the protein variants of interest. This plasmid library
is then subjected to experimental conditions that enable the plasmids to be converted to proteins
and assemble into viral capsids, to produce a sample of viruses containing genetic material. This


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


virus sample is then introduced to cells, allowing the viruses to enter these cells and transfer their
genetic material to the cell’s nucleus if they are capable of doing so; this is the process known as
transduction. The genetic material that successfully entered the nucleus of cells is then collected. At
each stage of the experiment, a small sample of genetic material is sequenced using Next Generation
Sequencing methods, allowing one to approximate the abundance of each sequence variant in the
plasmid library, the virus sample, and the sample of successfully transduced genetic material. These
abundance measurements are in the form of sequencing counts, i.e. the number of times a specific
variant appears in the sequencing data. Let nplasmid
                                                i    , nvirus
                                                        i     and ntsd
                                                                   i be the sequencing counts of the
 th
i variant in the plasmid, viral and transduced samples. The ability of variant i to package is then
quantified as the log rate:
                                                       nvirus
                                          yipkg = log plasmid
                                                        i
                                                                                                    (9)
                                                     ni

Similarly, the transduction ability of variant i is quantified as
                                                          ntsd
                                                             i
                                            yitsd = log          .                                   (10)
                                                          nvirus
                                                           i


Design strategy We run offline MBO given a fixed training dataset of (xi , yipkg , yitsd ) triplets, where
xi is the sequence of variant i. The input space for the design is the space of all amino acid sequences
of length 63. Details of the surrogate models and search method used in this MBO design are
discussed in turn below.
Surrogate models We trained two surrogate models: fˆpkg (x) to predict packaging from sequence
and fˆtsd (x) to predict transduction. These packaging and transduction surrogate models were trained
using the input-label pairs (xi , yipkg ) and (xi , yitsd ), respectively. Both models had a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) architecture with following hyperparameters:

       • Number of Convolutional Blocks: 2
       • Number of Channels: [32, 32]
       • Pooling Scales: [0, 0]
       • Number of dense layers: 1
       • Dense layer size: 32
       • activation type: LeakyReLU

Both models were trained by minimizing an MSE loss using the Adam optimization algorithm un-
til convergence using early stopping on a random-holdout validation set (10% of samples) with a
patience set to 10 epochs.
We used an identical architecture for training the OOD classifier except we used a binary cross-
entropy loss instead of a mean squared error (MSE).

Search algorithm. We applied two search methods to this problem. The first is AdaLead (Sinai
et al., 2020), a variant of a genetic algorithm that has been shown to work well for biological se-
quence design applications. We refer readers to Sinai et al. (2020) for a detailed treatment of the
AdaLead algorithm. The second search method we applied is a stochastic variant of beam search,
with a beam width of 5, maximum number of iterations equal to 15 and a total budget of 5,000.
Results. Results for sequences designed with AdaLead are shown in Figure 1 and 3 in the main text.
Analagous results for the sequences designed with beam search are shown in Figures 5 and 6, below.
We also report additional results for the selection regret experiment shown in Figures 3c and 6. In
particular, we show the regret as we vary the number of selected sequences (K = 10, 50, 100, 250)
and the batch statistic for the selected sequences (90th percentile, 95th percentile, and Max). We
show this for the AdaLead design in Figure 7 and the beam search design in Figure 8.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Distribution of edit distances to wild-type for training data (left) and designed data (right).


Figure 5: Analysis of distribution shift in AAV variants designed by MBO with beam search as the
search method. Plot descriptions are as in Figure 1 in the main text.


Figure 6: Results applying distribution shift detection metrics to AAV variants designed by MBO
with beam search as the search method. Plot descriptions are as in Figure 3 in the main text.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Expanded results of selection regret experiments for AAV variants designed by MBO with
AdaLead as the search method. Regret is shown for varying batch sizes (Top K) and batch statistics
(90th, 95th, Max). Plot descriptions are as in Figure 3c.


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Results of selection regret experiments for AAV variants designed by MBO with beam
search as the search method. Regret is shown for varying batch sizes (Top K) and batch statistics
(90th, 95th, Max). Plot descriptions are as in Figure 3c


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    BALANCE OF TERMS IN OOD SCORES
In Section 2.2, we discuss the distinction between the OOD score, s(x) = pde (x)/ptr (x), and another
potential distribution shift detection metric, 1/ptr (x). We suggest that the latter may be a more suitable
score for detecting distribution shift that would result in surrogate model error, but use the OOD
score instead because it is straightforward to calculate via the density ratio trick. Further, we claim
that the difference in OOD scores between two nearby design points will tend to be dominated by the
denominator terms in the OOD scores, and thus the distinction between s(x) and 1/ptr (x) will often be
negligible in practice. Here, we provide justification for this latter claim by considering a simple one
dimensional example. In particular, consider an input point x drawn from a one dimensional design
distribution with continuous support, pde (x), and a nearby point x + δx. The difference between the
log OOD scores of these two points can be approximated by Taylor expanding to first-order:
                                                                d
                             log s(x + δx) − log s(x) ≈ δx        log s(x),                           (11)
                                                               dx
which can then be simplified by computing
                                     d           p′ (x) p′tr (x)
                                       log s(x) = de    −        ,                                    (12)
                                    dx           pde (x) ptr (x)
where prime indicates differentiation with respect to x. Now we assume that both the design and
training distribution are Gaussian distributions, with means µde and µtr , respectively, and variances
  2
σde and σtr2 , respectively. In this case, the difference between the scores is approximately
                                                          x − µtr   x − µde
                           log s(x + δx) − log s(x) ≈        2    −    2                              (13)
                                                            σtr       σde

We now consider cases where the first term in Equation 13, which corresponds to the 1/ptr (x) term
in the OOD score, will be larger than the second term. If the variances of the train and design
distributions are roughly similar, then the first term will tend to be larger because x is drawn from
the design distribution and is therefore likely to be closer to the mean of the design than the training
distribution, as long as these means are well-separated. The impact of the second term will be further
reduced if the variance of the design distribution is large compared to that of the train distribution.
To summarize, the two conditions that will cause the 1/ptr (x) term to dominate the difference in
OOD scores between two nearby points are (1) the means of train and design distribution are well
separated and (2) the variance of the design distribution is larger than that of the train distribution.
In practice, both of these conditions are typically satisfied by design distributions. The first condition
is satisfied because the design method will tend to search around regions of input space far from the
training data (thus inducing the distribution shift that is the focus of this paper. Similarly, the second
condition is usually satisfied because the design method will tend to search large regions of the input
space to find candidate solutions, producing a large variance in the design distribution. Thus, we
can usually assume that the difference in 1/ptr (x) terms is the dominant effect when considering the
difference in OOD scores between two input points.

C    P ROTEIN S TRUCTURE P REDICTION E XPERIMENT
Problem Description. Real-world sequence design problems are characterized by high-dimensional
discrete input spaces, label noise, and limited training data. While evaluating design methods with
physical experiments in the sciences and engineering is the best way to evaluate offline MBO, these
experiments can be resource and time-intensive. Therefore, it is valuable to have simulation settings
that mimic key aspects of the target problem in order to develop and evaluate methods rapidly (Tra-
bucco et al., 2022). Here we describe a simulation using protein structure prediction (Jumper et al.,
2021) as a benchmark for evaluating offline MBO. The challenge in protein structure prediction is to
determine the 3D shape of a protein based solely on its amino acid sequence. Knowing this 3D shape
is key to understanding how the protein functions and interacts on a molecular level. Deep learn-
ing has recently brought about significant advances to the field. AlphaFold2 (Jumper et al., 2021)
has achieved impressive accuracy in predicting protein shapes, with some predictions reaching the
accuracy levels of experimental methods.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our proposal is to use a protein structure prediction network as the ground truth function given its
broad generalization capabilities across a wide variety of proteins. Concretely, this means our task is
to design an amino acid sequence that folds into the ground truth structure for a predefined protein.
The ground truth structure is a publicly available experimentally derived structure (e.g., by using
X-ray crystallography). Because there are many amino acid sequences that can fold into the same
structure, this is a design task to search in the amino acid sequence space for a sequence that has
a predicted structure with the minimum structural distance to the target structure. The wild-type
sequence that encodes this structure is intentionally hidden from the model.
Using a protein structure prediction network as a simulated fitness landscape offers several benefits.
These networks provide accurate results across various protein types and sequence lengths. They
are computationally efficient to query, free from label noise, and allow us to examine performance
differences across multiple datasets. Most importantly, we observe distribution shift induced by
design, which we find is a salient feature of real-world protein engineering settings.
Our aim is to design a protein sequence that folds into the structure of Trp-Cage (Zhou, 2003), a
notably compact 20-residue mini protein known for its stable folding and structural elements. To
determine how closely the predicted structure of our designed sequence matches the true structure
of Trp-Cage, we employ the frame-aligned point error (FAPE) metric (Jumper et al., 2021). Lower
FAPE scores indicate a closer alignment between the predicted and the actual structure of Trp-Cage.
Experimental Design. We design a training dataset by employing an in-silico variant of error-
prone PCR (Smith, 1985), a lab method that randomly mutates a system by decreasing the precision
of DNA replication. Here, we introduce mutations at each position in the wild-type (WT) protein
sequence (i.e., an example protein sequence that is known to fold into the target protein structure),
based on a specific error rate ϵ. We loop over every position in a sequence and with probability
ϵ we mutate each position using a uniform distribution over the 20 canonical amino acids. This
process is repeated 10K times to generate a set of unlabeled sequences. In our setting we set ϵ to
0.5, so roughly half of the positions of the wild-type sequence are mutated. This makes the problem
sufficiently challenging with a lot of diversity in the sequences (and subsequently the distances
between their predicted structures and the ground truth). For each sequence, we compute predicted
structures using ESMFold (Lin et al., 2023) and FAPE scores by comparing each predicted structure
to the WT’s known crystal structure. Negative FAPE scores are used as the labels for our dataset
since our aim is to minimize the structural distance to the target protein (or maximize the negative
FAPE score).
We implement offline MBO with this training dataset. We first fit a surrogate regression model
f (x) to the (xi , y) pairs, predicting FAPE scores from the amino acid sequence. Then, we design
10K sequences using the same genetic algorithm used in the AAV experiment ((Sinai et al., 2020)
to maximize f (x). Because genetic algorithms are local search methods, we run the optimization
from 10 different starting points corresponding to 10 distinct initial sequences, restart each opti-
mization run with two random initializations, and save designed sequences from iterations 5, 20,
50 corresponding to low, medium, and high shift intensities. After running optimization, we train
the OOD classifier to separate the training data (class 0) from the designed data (class 1). We then
label our data by using our ground truth function (ESMFold) to compute FAPE scores, measuring
the structural distance between each amino acid sequence and our target protein structure.
Design hyperparameters We use an identical set of hyperparameters to what is described in Ap-
pendix A.2 for the AAV experiment for the surrogate regression model. For search, we use Adalead
(Sinai et al., 2020) as our optimization algorithm with a population size of 1K. We refer readers to
Sinai et al. (2020) on algorithm implementation and recommended hyperparameters.
Results. We first show evidence that our simulation shows a distribution shift between the design
data and the training data (Fig. 9a and in a more extensive ablation in Fig. 10). Here we evaluate
the regression model accuracy (as measured by Spearman Rank Correlation) across optimization
steps (holding edit distance fixed to 10) and across edit distances (holding optimization steps fixed
at 20). We observe substantial distribution shifts in both settings corresponding to feedback and
non-feedback covariate shift.
Next, we show how a distribution shift metric can enable better selection of variants. We follow an
identical setup to the AAV experiment described in Section 4.3 and show top K regret for a variety



                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of values of K and batch statistics (90th, 95th, Max) (Fig. 11). In all cases we see the OOD score
achieves lower regret than Deep Ensemble Uncertainty.


Figure 9: Application of OOD classifier to a protein folding simulation task using a protein structure
prediction network as the ground truth oracle. The goal is to design a sequence that folds into a target
3D protein structure. Offline MBO is run on a synthetically generated dataset. (a) Model accuracy
along an optimization trajectory. (b) Evaluation of design selection using distribution shift detection
metrics.

a                                                      b


c                                                      d


Figure 10: (Top) Predicted score (left) and ground truth measurement (right) increase as a function of
optimization step. (Bottom) Model performance decays as a function of optimization step (left) and
edit distance (right). Subpanels correspond to four randomly sampled datasets given the parameters
to the in-silico error-prone PCR generation procedure.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 a                                                   b


 c                                                   d


Figure 11: Regret plots for the protein structure prediction task for varying batch sizes and batch
statistics. Rows are Top K = 10, 50, 100, 250 and columns are transduction percentiles 90th, 95th,
Max. Subpanels correspond to four randomly sampled datasets given the parameters to the in-silico
error-prone PCR generation procedure.


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    C HOICE OF Q
We find that the use of a design-induced test set, rather than a fixed test, as the q distribution is
crucial to the performance of our method. To our knowledge, this choice of q distribution is not
discussed in the density ratio estimation literature, which typically assumes access to a fixed test set.
Here we evaluate three choices of a q distribution: (1) Uniform distribution over the input domain,
(2) 1-15 random mutations to the wildtype background sequence, and the (3) Design set.
We evaluate these three methods in the context of the AAV dataset described in Figure 3. For (1), we
fix the wildtype context and draw a sequence of length 63 (the modifiable region) from a uniform
distribution. For (2), we start with the wildtype sequence and perform ancestral sampling to draw
sequences: randomly select number of mutations from a uniform distribution over 1-15 mutations,
then randomly select positions to modify and then draw a mutation from a uniform distribution over
AAs. For (3) we use the method described in the main text, which uses the designed sequences as
the q distribution.
We compare the three choices by evaluating how well the scores serve as a predictor of whether a
designed variant is functional by looking at the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and
the corresponding area under curve (AUC) score and find substantial improvements in detecting
functional variants using the design distribution (in blue) over the uniform distribution (in green)
and the wild-type conditoined uniform sampling strategy (in red).


Figure 12: Comparing three choices of a q distribution: (1) Uniform distribution over the input
domain, (2) 1-15 random mutations to the wildtype background sequence, and the (3) Design set.
We evaluate the three choices on the AAV experiment in Figure 3 by looking at the discriminative
capabilities of the score to separate designed variants that are functional versus non-functional


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    D O P RETRAINED LLM S ADDRESS FEEDBACK COVARIATE SHIFT ?
It has previously been shown that model pretraining can improve robustness to distribution shift
(Hendrycks et al., 2019). In the protein domain, large language models (LLMs) have been pretrained
on hundreds of millions of protein sequences (Elnaggar et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023). These models
have shown impressive performance on a variety of downstream prediction tasks. Here we show that
pretrained LLMs do not address feedback covariate shift in the design setting. We use ProtBERT
(Elnaggar et al., 2021), a pretrained language model, to predict our target property using linear
probing (Kumar et al., 2022), a method for adapting pretrained models to downstream regression
problems by fixing the pretrained weights and fitting a linear head to predict the target property.
The linear head is fit to the average of the per-token embeddings. We used an identical train/test
split to the CNN in Figure 3 and computed predictions on the designed sequences. We observe a
substantial drop in predictive performance from a random holdout (Spearman rho = 0.75) to the
design set (Spearman rho = -0.55). In Fig Xa, we observe LLM model scores increase as a function
of iteration, which maps to an increase in the surrogate error (measured by MSE) in Fig Xb. Fig Xc
shows the fraction of non-functional designs, also increasing as a function of iteration.


Figure 13: Pretrained LLMs do not address feedback covariate shift. (a) Predicted property value
from the surrogate model. (b) MSE between surrogate predictions and observed experimental mea-
surements of the property. Inset shows surrogate predictions versus observed property values for a
randomly held out set of data from the training distribution. (c) Fraction of sequences observed to
be adversarial examples.


                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    F EEDBACK COVARIATE SHIFT IN SIMULATION BENCHMARKS
Demonstrating feedback covariate shift in simulated environments like Design-Bench (Trabucco
et al., 2022) or FLEXS (Sinai et al., 2020) has proven to be challenging. This is supported by the
unexpectedly high performance of unconstrained maximization algorithms, such has the maxx f (x)
method in Design-Bench and the performance of Adalead, a genetic algorithm used to implement
maximization in a discrete search space, in FLEXS. Running this method out-of-the-box in a real-
world setting can produce a 0% functionality rate as we show in our Figure 3 experiment. To provide
additional support for this, we ran a simulation in FLEXS using Adalead with an identical set of hy-
perparameters that we used to design the AAV experiment and we find a minimal drop in predictive
performance between a random holdout (Spearman ρ = 0.61) and the design set (Spearman ρ=0.49),
88.5% of the designed sequences were functional, and the above histogram clearly shows the de-
sign algoritm succesfully designed a batch of sequences (in red) that have a higher distribution of
measurements compared to the training data. The strong performance of the naive maximization
baseline in a variety of datasets covered in the simulation benchmarks coupled with our experimen-
tal results providing additional confirmatory evidence of this result, suggests that simulation settings
do not effectively mimic the feedback covariate shift setting found in real-world data problems.


Figure 14: Optimization of a RNA binding landscape using Adalead, a genetic algorithm that max-
imizes a reward function. The algorithm successfully optimizes this commonly used RNA binding
landscape in the FLEXS benchmark as evidenced by the shift in the ground truth measurements for
the designed sequences compared to the training data.


                                                  24
