Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IS F ORMER :               D ISENTANGLED O BJECT R EPRESEN -
TATIONS FOR                  L EARNING V ISUAL DYNAMICS V IA
T RANSFORMERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We focus on the task of visual dynamics prediction. Recent work has shown that
         object-centric representations can greatly help improve the accuracy of learning
         dynamics. Building on top of this work, we ask the question: would it help to
         learn disentangled object representations, possibly separating the attributes which
         contribute to the motion dynamics vs which don’t? Though there is some prior
         work which aims to achieve this, we argue in this paper either it is limiting in their
         setting, or does not use the learned representation explicitly for predicting visual
         dynamics, making them sub-optimal. In response, we propose DisFormer, an
         approach for learning disentangled object representation and use them for predict-
         ing visual dynamics. Our architecture extends the notion of slots Locatello et al.
         (2020) to taking attention over individual object representations: each slot learns
         the representation for a block by attending over different parts of an object, and
         each block is expressed as a linear combination over a small set of learned con-
         cepts. We perform an iterative refinement over these slots to extract a disentangled
         representation, which is then fed to a transformer architecture to predict the next
         set of latent object representations. Since our approach is unsupervised, we need
         to align the output object masks with those extracted from the ground truth image,
         and we design a novel permutation module to achieve this alignment by learning
         a canonical ordering. We perform a series of experiments demonstrating that our
         learned representations help predict future dynamics in the standard setting, where
         we test on the same environment as training, and in the setting of transfer, where
         certain object combinations are never seen before. Our method outperforms exist-
         ing baselines in terms of pixel prediction and deciphering the dynamics, especially
         in the zero-shot transfer setting where existing approaches fail miserably. Further
         analysis reveals that our learned representations indeed help with significantly bet-
         ter disentanglement of objects compared to existing techniques.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Predicting visual dynamics is an important problem that finds applications in computer vision,
model-based reinforcement learning, and visual question answering. Some of the classic work does
this by having dense representation for the image and then passing through a CNN-based or now
transformer-based architecture. More recent approaches have argued for the use of object-centric
representations, presumably because they can better capture the natural semantics of how objects
are represented in a scene and their interactions, for the task of dynamics prediction. This line of
work can further be divided into two sets of categories: ones that work with dense object embeddings
learned from the data Wu et al. (2023) and those that try to decompose each object representation in
terms of its attributes Singh et al. (2022b). While in the former category, the latest models exploit
the power of transformers to get the future dynamics, works in the second category have exploited
autoencoder-based models, or GNN-based models, to learn disentangled representation for down-
stream learning of dynamics. Interestingly, some of the SOTA models Wu et al. (2023) do not use
disentangled representation, leaving a possibility of further improvement in performance on this task
while having a more interpretable representation.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Even among the techniques that make use of a disentangled object representation, they are limited
by their assumptions: (1) They either work with objects of the same size Kossen et al. (2019) (2) Or
divide the attributes only into two sets: those relevant for dynamics, vs which are not Nakano et al.
(2023). Both these assumptions are pretty restrictive. The closest to our work is Lin et al. (2020a),
which can learn disentangled representations, but it does it with a fixed number of concepts indepen-
dent of the problem space. As observed in our experiments, this severely affects their performance,
especially in the setting of transfer, for instance, where certain attribute combinations are never seen
before. Motivated by these research gaps, we push the boundaries on two fronts: (1) Work with a
more flexible disentangled representation, which can choose the number of concepts depending on
the specific problem; (2) Combine the learned representation with the power of transformer-based
architectures, which have been shown to do very well on future prediction tasks. We refer to our
system as DisFormer.
Our work, in the form of DisFormer, presents several novel contributions. Starting with masks
extracted from an object extractor, our key idea is to represent each object as a set of blocks, where
each block is expressed as a linear combination of underlying (learned) concepts. Intuitively, each
block (or a set of blocks) can be thought of as potentially representing an underlying natural attribute
of an object (e.g., size, colour etc.). While such an idea has been explored in earlier work Singh et al.
(2022b), it is limited to the case of static images, whereas our goal is to tie the learned representation
with dynamics prediction, resulting in some significant technical differences. In order to learn the
individual block representation, we use the notion of a slot Locatello et al. (2020). Whereas in the
original slot attention paper, each slot binds to a particular object, and its representation is obtained
by iteratively refining a vector attending over the entire image, in our case, each slot represents a
block, which attends over an object, and its iterative refinement results in the final representation of
the block. Disentanglement is guided by forcing each block to be a linear combination of a small
number of learned concepts. The final object representation is the concatenation of the blocks.
For dynamics prediction, we pass the latent representation for the entire set of extracted objects in
the image, along with one for the background, to a transformer. A position embedding for each
block distinguishes it from others. Since object masks can be discovered in any order, we need to
impose a canonical ordering over them so that loss can be taken for the final image. This is done
via a novel permutation module, which learns to map object representations to a canonical ordering
starting from any given ordering over them. Finally, instead of passing the object representation as a
single vector during decoding, we directly map the discovered blocks to individual channels, further
reinforcing the discovery of a disentangled representation. For the object extractor, we make use of
a Mask-RCNN trained on labels provided by an unsupervised extractor Gupta et al. (2021), for 2D
scenes, and slot attention Locatello et al. (2020), for the case of 3D scenes. For our decoder, we
use a standard architecture Watters et al. (2019) along with mapping of attribute representation to
channels as described above.
Extensive experimentation on both 2D and 3D datasets shows that our approach outperforms ex-
isting SOTA baselines both in terms of pixel error and dynamics, for up to 15 steps of prediction.
Further, we create transfer datasets for 2D environments and we observe that our model performs
much better in zero-shot settings than the baselines that fail miserably1 . The rest of the paper is
organized as follows: in section 2, we will discuss the related work, and in section 3, we will pro-
pose our architecture. Section 4 discusses the experiments and results, followed by a conclusion and
discussion on future work in section 5.

2       R ELATED W ORK
The task of video prediction can be seen as a combination of image synthesis and learning dynamics
of various entities in the scene. There has been a tremendous amount of work in image synthesis
using unstructured representations like Variational Autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014), Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and their variants (Makhzani et al., 2016;
Tolstikhin et al., 2018; Dai & Wipf, 2019; Mondal et al., 2020; 2021; Ghosh et al., 2020; Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017). For video prediction, the initial works focused on direct pixel
synthesis using hybrid architectures (Shi et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017) that fuse recurrent neural
networks and convolutional networks. However, these methods struggled to do long-horizon predic-
    1
        We will release our code and datasets for further research after acceptance.


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tions. Another line of work (Dosovitskiy et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2018; Reda et al., 2018) leverages
optical flow information to forecast the movement of objects and pixels within a video sequence.
While these methods are relatively interpretable and capture a notion of motion, they still fail to
capture any higher level of semantics and object interactions. To have better interpretability and
control over the learned representation space, some parts of the research eventually shifted to learn-
ing interpretable and structured image and video representations. We will discuss the developments
in this area next.
Object-Centric Approaches: There has been a growing interest in learning object-centric repre-
sentations of images in an unsupervised manner by decomposing a scene into its constituting ob-
jects. Some of the notable works include CSWM (and variants) Kipf et al. (2020); Gupta et al.
(2021), AIR (Eslami et al., 2016), MONet (Burgess et al., 2019), IODINE (Greff et al., 2019),
GENESIS (Engelcke et al., 2019), SPACE (Lin et al., 2020b), Slot Attention (Locatello et al.,
2020), GENESIS-V2 (Engelcke et al., 2021), SLATE (Singh et al., 2022a), or Neural Systematic
Binder (Singh et al., 2022b). Slot Attention defines the notion of slots where each slot is tied to
an object in the scene, and it learns the object’s representation using iterative refinement. Another
line of work segments images by taking the last couple of frames as input; these include SAVi (Kipf
et al., 2022), SAVi++ (Elsayed et al., 2022) and STEVE (Singh et al., 2022c) extend Slot Attention
and VideoSaur (Zadaianchuk et al., 2023) uses self-supervised optical flow based loss.
Motivated by these successes, video prediction approaches were built by utilizing some of these
methods: SQAIR (Kosiorek et al., 2018) extends AIR, STOVE Kossen et al. (2019), GSWM Lin
et al. (2020a), OCVT Wu et al. (2021) and SlotFormer Wu et al. (2023). STOVE learns a factorized
representation per object with explicit position and size of each object; it then uses a Graph Neural
Network as the dynamics model. GSWM does explicit factorization of each object whereas we fac-
torize implicitly. OCVT also has limited explicit factorization of each object and uses a transformer
for learning dynamics. SlotFormer extends Slot-Attention to video prediction and uses a transformer
for dynamics prediction, however, it does not have disentangled object-level representation.
Object-centric representations for transfer learning: There has been a growing interest in learn-
ing neuro-symbolic systems that can transfer a learned solution to unseen combinations of objects.
These methods formulate the representation space into its constituting objects and then train a
GNN or transformer, leveraging their size-invariant nature, to learn transferable solutions. Works
like Yoon et al. (2023); Sharma et al. (2023b) apply this to learn generalized policy in Reinforce-
ment Learning, Ståhlberg et al. (2022); Sharma et al. (2022; 2023a) represent a state in relational
planning as a graph of objects, to learn a generalized policy using a GNN. In contrast, our work
learns disentangled object representations that help transfer dynamics to unseen combinations.


3     DISFORMER

We describe the architecture of DisFormer in this section. There are five important parts to the archi-
tecture: (1) Object Extractor: This module extracts dense object representations in an unsupervised
manner using pre-trained architectures. (2) Block Extractor: This a novel module that disentangles
each object in terms of an underlying block representation via iterative refinement (3) Permutation
Module: This is a novel module to enforce permutation invariance across the discovered set of ob-
jects. (4) Dynamics Predictor: This module predicts the next state of object latents, in terms of their
block representation via a transformer-based architecture (5) Decoder: This module inputs the dis-
entangled object representation and decodes it to get the final image. Figure 1 describes the overall
architecture. We next describe each module in detail.


3.1   O BJECT E XTRACTOR

We train object extractors independently to extract masks from frames. We freeze the object ex-
tractor during subsequent training. All our object extractors are unsupervised and trained in a self-
supervised manner. In our experiments, for 2D environments, we train an expert model similar to
(Sharma et al., 2023b) to generate supervised data for Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017). For 3D en-
vironments, we train Slot Attention (Locatello et al., 2020) and use decoder masks during training.
Our architecture generally allows the flexibility of using any object extractor model.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                             Permutation
                                                      BE
                                                                                               Module


                                          Extractor


                                                                                                                                  Decoder
                                          Feature
      Inputs             Mask


                                                                                   Positional Encoding
                                                                                                                           Attn


                                                               Linear Projection
(xt-6, ..., xt, xt+1)   R-CNN         x               BE                                                               +
                                                                                                         Transformer

                                                                                                          (Dynamics
                                                                                                           Module)
                                                      BE



                            Phase I                                                                      Phase II


Figure 1: Main architecture for DisFormer. Mask R-CNN in the diagram is the Object Extractor,
and the product operation is the Hadamard Product between Object Masks and the input images.
For 3D environments, Mask R-CNN would be replaced by Slot Attention. BE represents the Block
Extractor module, which takes in the object representations zti , one at a time, along with concept
vectors C and outputs the set of block representations for each object i. Note that each block has its
own set of concept vectors; thus, C = ||rj=1 Cj where r represents the number of blocks. Attn is the
simple dot-product attention module where the input block-based representation of all the objects is
converted into a linear combination of the corresponding concept vectors. Phase I and II represent
the two training phases. Other modules are as defined in Section 3


Formally, given a sequence of frames {xt }Tt=1 , for T time-steps, where xt ∈ RH×W ×3 , we repre-
sent the extracted object masks as mit ∈ [0, 1]H×W where i ∈ 1, · · · , N represents the discovered
number of objects. These extracted object masks are then multiplied element-wise with the cor-
responding input frame and passed through a pre-trained feature extractor to obtain latent object
representations denoted by zti ∈ Rf ×df

3.2          B LOCK E XTRACTOR

In our disentangled representation, each object is represented by a set of blocks, and a disjoint set
of blocks represents an attribute of an object. We aim to discover these (latent) blocks automatically
from the data. Recently, (Locatello et al., 2020) in the paper on slot-attention proposed architecture
for unsupervised discovery of objects via iterative refinement of what is referred to as a slot. Each
slot binds to an object via attention over the entire image in their work. We extend their idea to the
case of objects, where each slot now represents a block, which is iteratively refined by taking atten-
tion over a latent object representation. Further, to learn a disentangled representation, we enforce
that each block representation is represented as a linear combination of a fixed set of underlying
learnable concepts. This combination is discovered at every step of the block-refinement algorithm.
More formally, given a latent object representation zti for the ith object, its representation in terms
of blocks is given as {si,b     r
                             t }b=1 , where r is the number of blocks, and is a hyperparameter of the
                          i,a
model. We let each st ∈ Rdb . Algorithm 1 outlines the iterative refinement step to obtain the
block representation and closely follows the description in Locatello et al. (2020), with the image
features replaced by object features and each slot representing blocks instead of individual objects.
Each si,a
        t   is initialized to a learnable vector µb to break permutation invariance among blocks 2 .
After an initial layer normalization, we make the slot vectors attend over object features to compute
the attention scores. These are first normalized over queries (slots), followed by normalization over
keys (object features). The resultant linear combination of object features is first passed through
a GRU, followed by an MLP to get the block representation. Finally, unique to our approach, we
project each resultant block vector onto the learnable concept space and update its representation as
a linear combination of the concepts via projection weights (lines 9 - 12 in Algorithm 1). This step
results in discovering the disentangled representation central to our approach.
We note that recently Singh et al. (2022b) proposed a similar-looking idea of learning disentan-
gled representation for objects as a linear combination of concepts using an iterative refinement
over slots, albeit for static images. Our approach is inspired by their work but has some important
      2
          Locatello et al. (2020) initialize their slots randomly


                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differences. In their case, the slots still represent objects as in the original slot-attention paper, mak-
ing the disentanglement closely tied to the learning of object representations. This also means that
their approach is limited by a specific choice of object extractor. In contrast, since we work with
object representations directly, our approach is oblivious to the choice of the extractor. Further, as
already pointed out, their work is limited to static images, whereas we would like to learn these
representations for dynamics prediction.

Algorithm 1 Block Extractor: Inputs are: object features zti ∈ Rf ×df . Model parameters are:
WK ∈ Rdf ×d , WQ ∈ Rdb ×d , WV ∈ Rdf ×db , initial block values µ ∈ Rr×db , concept vectors
Cb ∈ Rk×db for b ∈ {1, .., r}, MLP, GRU
 1: sit = µ
 2: for t = 1 to T do
 3:      sit = LayerNorm(sit )
 4:      A = Softmax(( √1d (sit WQ )(zti WK )T , axis = ’block’)
 5:      A = A.normalize(axis=’feature’)
 6:      U = A(zti WV )
 7:      U = GRU(state = sit , input = U )
 8:      U = U + MLP(U )
 9:      for b = 1 to r do
10:           wti,b = Softmax( √1 Cb [U [b :]]T )
                                db

11:        si,b  T i,b
            t = Cb w t
            i
12: return st



3.3    DYNAMICS

Transformers(Vaswani et al., 2017) have been very effective at sequence-to-sequence prediction
tasks. Some recent work on unsupervised video dynamics prediction Wu et al. (2023) has given
SOTA results on this task on 3-D datasets, and have been shown to outperform more traditional
GNN based models for this task Kossen et al. (2019). While some of these models are object-
centric, they do not exploit disentanglement over object representation. Our goal in this section
is to integrate our disentanglement pipeline described in Section 3.2 with downstream dynamics
prediction via transformers. Here are some key ideas that go into developing our transformer for
this task:

1. We linearly project each si,b           ˆ                                          i,b    i,b
                                   t to a d dimensional space using a shared Wproj . st = st Wproj ,
                             ˆ
   where Wproj ∈ Rdb ×d .
2. The input to transformer encoder is T step history of all object blocks that is, at time step t, the
   input is {si,b
              t−t̄ |t̄ ∈ {0, .., T − 1}, i ∈ {1, .., N }, b ∈ {1, .., r}}.
3. We need positional encoding to distinguish between (a) different time steps in the history (b)
   blocks belonging to different objects (c) different blocks in an attribute. Accordingly, we design
   3-D sinusoidal positional encodings Pt,i,b and add them to block latents. That is the final vector
   si,b    i,b
    t = st + Pt,i,b .

4. Let the transformer encoder output be δŝi,b                                                     i,b
                                                     t . In principle, it can be directly added to st to
                    i,b
   obtain latent ŝt+1 at time step t + 1. But we rather exploit the fact that object blocks should be
                                                                          i,b
   linear combination of concept vectors. Therefore, we define v̂t+1          = si,b      i,b
                                                                                 t + δŝt , and compute
   ŵti,b,j = v̂t+1
                i,b
                    · Cb,j /||Cb,j ||2 . Then, ŝi,b         i,b,j
                                                       P
                                                 t+1 =   j ŵt     Cb,j .

Finally, we note that unlike (Wu et al., 2023), who have permutation equivariance between object
representations, since object slots at any given time step are initialized based on slots at the previous
time step, our object latents are obtained from an extractor which may not guarantee any specific
ordering among object latents across time steps. Therefore, in order to compute dynamics loss
between the actual latents si,b                           i,b
                             t+1 and predicted latents ŝt+1 , we need to ensure consistent ordering
among object block representations which are input, and the ones which are predicted. We design a
novel permutation module to achieve this objective, and we describe it next.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4   P ERMUTATION M ODULE

Let sit = ||rb=1 si,b
                  t denote the concatenation of block vectors for object i at time step t. Similarly,
we define ŝit = ||rb=1 ŝi,b
                          t . We treat them as column vectors. We note that because st is used to
                                                                                                 i,b
          i,b
predict ŝt+1 , ∀b, in the form of a residual, we expect that the ordering of objects in predicted next
slots is same as that of immediate last time step ordering. The key issue is between the ordering of
si,b         i,b
  t+1 and ŝt+1 which will not be the same in general. We are then looking for a permutation matrix
P ∈ RN ×N such that sit+1 when permuted by P aligns with ŝit+1 so that dynamics loss can be
computed. Further, we note that when predicting for t′ time steps ahead, given history until time
step T , during autoregressive generation, all the generated ŝiT +t′ ’s follow the same ordering that of
siT . We exploit this fact to instead align all the input latents siT +t′ ’s with the ordering in latents siT ’s.

Let M ∈ [0, 1]N ×N be a score matrix defined for time-steps T and T + t′ . Given, siT and sjT +t′ ,
                                                           (U siT )·(U sjT +t′ )
[i, j]th of the score matrix M is given as: M [i, j] =             √
                                                                     rd

We do this for all pairs of objects (i, j) in the two representations to get the full matrix. Similar
to (Mena et al., 2018) we compute soft permutation matrix P ∈ [0, 1]N ×N from M . Then, P =
Sinkhorn(M ). The dynamics loss at time step T + t′ is then computed after permuting the input
latents with P (see Section 3.6).
Here U ∈ Rdp ×rd is learnable matrix. This matrix is learned by supplying random permutations of
inputs at various time steps t ≤ T , computing the permutation matrix P , and then computing the
loss with respect to the true permutation matrix (which is known). Note that this module is only
used during training in order to align the predictions for loss in the dynamics module. We discard it
during testing.

3.5   D ECODER

Same as most of the previous work we use spatial mixture models to generate the final image.
As each object is represented by r vectors of blocks, we use a slightly different approach than
previous methods which have a single vector representing the object. We first use each block specific
                                                                                          ′
Spatial Broadcast decoder (Watters et al., 2019) to generate 2D maps qti,b ∈ Rf ×I×I representing
f ′ features each of size I × I, corresponding to si,b                                            i
                                                         t . We concatenate these blocks to form qt ∈
     ′
Rrf ×I×I . A CNN is applied on qit to generate final object mask which is normalized across the
                                                                       PN
objects m̂it and object content ĉit . Final image is obtained as x̂t = i=1 m̂it · ĉit .

3.6   T RAINING AND L OSS

Curriculum: We use a history of length T and do a T ′ step future prediction. We use two-phase
training. First Phase: we only train object extractor with object extractor-specific optimization ob-
jective. Second Phase: we freeze the object extractor and train the rest of the model. For the first
few epochs of training in the second phase, we only train block extractor, permutation module and
decoder. Then we only train the dynamic model for a few epochs freezing all other modules. Finally,
all modules are trained together except the object extractor.
                                                                                                   PT
Losses: We make use of the following losses: (a) Image reconstruction loss: Lrec = t=1 (x̂t −
                                                                                           PT +T ′
xt )2 . Captures the overall reconstruction loss. (b) Permutation Loss: Lper = t=1 (πt − Pt )2 ,
where πt is a matrix capturing a random permutation of sit ’s, and Pt is the permutation matrix
output by the permutation module when input with sit ’s and πt (sit )’s. (c) Mask Loss: Lmask =
PT P
             (mi − m̂it ). Captures the loss over predicted masks. (d) Orthogonality Loss: Lort =
Prt=1 Pik,k t                T
     b=1    i,j:i̸=j |(Cb,i ) Cb,j /||Cb,i )||2 ||Cb,j ||2 . Captures that vectors within each concept should
                                                                     PT +T ′ P
be orthogonal to each other. (e) Dynamic Loss: Ldyn = t=T +1 i,a,j (ŵti,b,j − w̃ti,b,j )2 , where
w̃ti ’s represent objects permuted by permutation matrix Pt at time step t.
The total loss in Phase II of training is given as: L = Ldyn +L1 , where L1 = λdec Ldec +λper Lper +
λmask Lmask + λdiss Ldiss .


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
We perform a series of experiments to answer the following questions: (1) Does DisFormer result
in better visual predictions than the existing SOTA baselines on the standard datasets for this prob-
lem? (2) Does learning disentangled representations with DisFormer lead to better performance in
the zero-shot transfer setting, i.e., when tested on unseen combinations of objects? and (3) Can
DisFormer indeed discover the disentangled representation corresponding to natural object features
such as color, size, shape, position, etc.? We first describe our experimental set-up, including the de-
tails of our datasets and experimental methodology, followed by our experimental results, answering
each of the above questions in turn.

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

4.1.1    DATASETS
We experiment on a total of three datasets; two are 2-dimensional and one is 3-dimensional.
2D Bouncing Circles (2D-BC): Adapted from the bouncing balls INTERACTION environment in
Lin et al. (2020a) with modifications in the number and size of the balls. Our environment comprises
three circles of the same size but different colors that move freely in the 2D space with a black
background, colliding elastically with the frame walls and each other. Similar environments have
been used in STOVE Kossen et al. (2019).
2D Bouncing Shapes (2D-BS): We create another dataset, which is an extension of the 2D-BC
environment with increased visual and dynamics complexity. Two circles and two squares move
freely in the 2D space with a checkered pattern as background. Collisions happen elastically among
various objects and frame walls while also respecting respective object geometries. We use the
MuJoCo physics engine Todorov et al. (2012) to simulate the domain with camera at the top, and
objects with minimum height to have a 2-D environment.
OBJ3D: A 3D environment used in GSWM Lin et al. (2020a) and SlotFormer Wu et al. (2023),
where a typical video has a sphere that enters the frame and collides with other still objects.

4.1.2    BASELINES , M ETRICS AND E XPERIMENTAL M ETHODOLOGY
Baselines: For the 2D domains, we compare DisFormer with three baselines, STOVE Kossen et al.
(2019), GSWM Lin et al. (2020a) and SlotFormer Wu et al. (2023). For the 3D domain, SlotFormer
beats both STOVE and GSWM, so we compare with only SlotFormer Wu et al. (2023) in this case.
Evaluation Metrics: For 2D-BC and 2D-BS domains, we evaluate the predicted future frames
quantitatively using two metrics: (1) Position error: Error in predicted object positions in compar-
ison to the ground truth from the simulator, and (2) Pixel error: MSE Loss between the predicted
frame and the ground-truth frame. For OBJ3D, the predicted future frames are evaluated on the
PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS metrics as used by Wu et al. (2023).
Experimental Methodology: We use the official implementation for each of our baselines: 3 . All
the models are given access to 6 frames of history and are unrolled up to 15 future steps while
testing. All result table numbers are summed over 15 step future prediction. Each model trains on
1000 episodes, each of length 100, for 2 million training steps on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU, with
the exception of SlotFormer which requires two A100’s.

4.2     V ISUAL DYNAMICS P REDICTION

Given a set of past frames, the goal is to predict the next set of frames. Table 1 presents the results
on the 2-D datasets. DisFormer beats all other approaches on both pixel-error and pos-error metrics.
Our closest competition is GSWM, which does marginally worse on 2D-BS and up to 2.5% worse
on 2D-BC in pixel error. In terms of position error, it is 1.5% and 10% worse on the two datasets
respectively. STOVE failed to give any meaningful results on 2D-BC dataset. Interestingly, on the 2-
D datasets, SlotFormer which is SOTA model on 3D, does worse than some of the earlier approaches
    3
      STOVE: https://github.com/jlko/STOVE, GSWM: https://github.com/zhixuan-lin/G-SWM, SlotFormer:
https://github.com/pairlab/SlotFormer


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the 2-D datasets. We do not report position error for SlotFormer since it does not explicitly work
with object masks (and rather only dense representation in terms of slots), and it is not clear how to
extract object positions from this representation.
Table 2 presents the results on the OBJ3D dataset. Our numbers are comparable to SlotFormer in
this case, with marginal improvement PSNR and marginal loss in LPIPS. This comparable perfor-
mance in 3D dataset comes at the advantage of being able to disentangle object representations (see
Section 4.4).
Finally, we did a small ablation, where on 2D-BC dataset, where we created a variation of our model
(called DenFormer, short for Dense-DisFormer) by replacing the block extractor (refer Section 3) by
an MLP to create dense object representations. Table 3 presents the results where we have compared
with DisFormer, and SlotFormer, which is the only baseline that works with a purely dense object-
centric representation. We see that while DenFormer’s performance drops, it is still comparable to
SlotFormer in pixel error. This only highlights the power of disentanglement but also that in the
absence of it, our model becomes comparable to some of the existing baselines.

                     2D-BC                    2D-BS                             OBJ3D
 Model         Pixel Err Pos Err       Pixel Err Pos Err        Model      PSNR SSIM LPIPS
 STOVE         0.294     0.421         -          -                        (↑)   (↑)  (↓)
 GSWM          0.283     0.417         0.7        0.711         Slotformer 32.40 0.91 0.08
 Slotformer    0.329     -             0.6257     -             DisFormer 32.93 0.91 0.09
 DisFormer     0.28      0.402         0.608      0.610
                                                                Table 2: Results on OBJ3D Dataset
              Table 1: Results on 2D Datasets


                   2D-BC                                   2D-BC-2L1S              2D-BS-2L2S
  Model      Pixel Err Pos Err            Model         Pixel Err Pos Err       Pixel Err Pos Err
  Slotformer 0.329     -                  GSWM       0.345           0.642      0.812        0.789
  DenFormer 0.332      0.591              Slotformer 0.357           -          0.794        -
  DisFormer 0.28       0.402              DisFormer 0.301            0.441      0.658        0.622
   Table 3: Dense vs Disentangled                          Table 4: Transfer Setting


4.3   T RANSFER L EARNING

Set-up: For each of the 2-D datasets in our experiments, we created a transfer learning set-up as
follows.
2D-BC: We create two variants of 2D-BC in the training dataset, one having larger sized balls and
other with relatively smaller balls. The transfer/evaluation then happens on an environment that
contains a combination of large and small sized balls.
2D-BS: We create a two variants of 2D-BS in a similar manner with different sized objects. The
transfer/evaluation then happens on an environment that contains a combination of large and small
sized objects.
Table 4 presents the results. Note that, L and S in the environment names represent number of
large and small sized objects in the environment. In this case, we clearly outperform all existing
baselines on all the metric. This demonstrates the power of learned disentangled representation,
which can work seamlessly with unseen object combinations, whereas the performance of other
baselines degrades significantly.

4.4   D ISENTANGLEMENT OF OBJECT PROPERTIES

Experiment Details: We conduct a post-hoc analysis to gain insights into the learned disentangled
representations of objects in terms of their correlation to their visual features. However, with the
latent representations, there is no directly visible mapping from the representations to the objects in
the scene. To overcome this challenge, given the trained model and a scene, we perform a forward
pass through DisFormer to obtain the block representations for the objects in the scene. Upon


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


receiving these, we manually perform swapping of different combinations of block representations
between the objects (same blocks for different objects) to create the mapping and identify set of
blocks that together represent visual features like position, colour and shape etc.
Figure 2 presents the results on the
2-D datasets. In each of the sub-
figures, the first two rows represent
the masks and contents of the origi-
nal scene, and the bottom two rows
represent mask and content after at-
tributing swapping, respectively. The
first column represents the generated
image and further columns represent
mask and content of decoded slots. In
the figure 2a, we swap a single block
of magenta circle and red square. The     (a) Shape swapped for 2D BS     (b) Position swapped for 2D BS
swapped representations after decod-
ing shows that the objects have same
position (seen in mask) but swapped
the color and shape. Thus that block
represents color and shape of an ob-
ject. In the figure 2b, we swap the
two other blocks of magenta circle
and green square. The resultant de-
coded masks and content after swap-
ping shows that objects have swapped
the positions (seen in mask) but have
retained the same color and shape        (c) Position swapped for 2D-BC   (d) Color swapped for 2D-BC
in content. This shows that the two
blocks combined represents the posi-    Figure 2: Qualitative Results for disentanglement of object
tion of an object.                      properties on 2D domains. For (a) and (b), attributes of
                                        magenta circle have been swapped with corresponding at-
Figure 2c shows the results for swap-   tributes of red and green square respectively. For (c) and
ping two blocks corresponding to red    (d), attributes of red and blue circles have been swapped.
and blue circle from a seen of 2D-BC
dataset which results in the positions
swapped for two objects as seen in the masks. Thus the two blocks combined repesents position of
objects. Similarly after swapping other single block it can be seen in figure 2d that particular block
represents the color of objects.


5   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK


We have presented an approach for learning disentangled object representation for the task of pre-
dicting visual dynamics via transformers. Our approach makes use of unsupervised object extrac-
tors, followed by learning disentangled representation by expressing dense object representation as
a linear combination of learnable concept vectors. These disentangled representations are passed
through a transformer to obtain future predictions. Experiments on three different datasets show that
our approach performs better than existing baselines, especially in the setting of transfer. We also
show that our model can indeed learn disentangled representation. Future work includes learning
with more complex backgrounds, extending to more complex 3D scenes, and extending the work to
action-conditioned video prediction.
Reproducibility Statement. To ensure that the proposed work is reproducible, we have included
an Algorithm (Refer to Algorithm 1). We have clearly defined the loss functions in Section 3. The
implementation details and hyperparameters are specified in appendix 5. The code of the proposed
method and datasets will be released post acceptance.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In Proc. of ICML, pp. 214–223, 2017.

Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt
  Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and represen-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.

Bin Dai and David Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing vae models. In Proc. of ICLR, 2019.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Philipp Fischer, Eddy Ilg, Philip Hausser, Caner Hazirbas, Vladimir Golkov,
  Patrick Van Der Smagt, Daniel Cremers, and Thomas Brox. Flownet: Learning optical flow with
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
  pp. 2758–2766, 2015.

Gamaleldin Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, Michael C Mozer,
  and Thomas Kipf. Savi++: Towards end-to-end object-centric learning from real-world videos.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28940–28954, 2022.

Martin Engelcke, Adam R Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Gener-
 ative scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1907.13052, 2019.

Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis-v2: Inferring unordered object
 representations without iterative refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:8085–8094, 2021.

SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Partha Ghosh, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Antonio Vergari, Michael Black, and Bernhard Scholkopf. From
  variational to deterministic autoencoders. In Proc. of ICLR, 2020.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. In Proc. of NeuRIPS, 2014.

Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2424–2433. PMLR, 2019.

Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Im-
   proved training of wasserstein gans. In Proc. of NeuRIPS, 2017.

Rushil Gupta, Vishal Sharma, Yash Jain, Yitao Liang, Guy Van den Broeck, and Parag Singla.
  Towards an interpretable latent space in structured models for video prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.07713, 2021.

Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn, 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870. cite arxiv:1703.06870Comment: open source; appendix
  on more results.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding Variational Bayes. In Proc. of ICLR, 2014.

Thomas Kipf, Elise van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of structured world models.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. In Proc. of ICLR, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adam Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  31, 2018.
Jannik Kossen, Karl Stelzner, Marcel Hussing, Claas Voelcker, and Kristian Kersting. Struc-
  tured object-aware physics prediction for video modeling and planning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.02425, 2019.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Peri, Bofeng Fu, Jindong Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Improving gen-
  erative imagination in object-centric world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6140–6149, 2020a.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. In Proc. of ICLR, 2020b.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot atten-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.
Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, and Ian Goodfellow. Adversarial autoencoders.
  In Proc. of ICLR, 2016.
Gonzalo Mena, David Belanger, Scott Linderman, and Jasper Snoek. Learning latent permutations
  with gumbel-sinkhorn networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08665, 2018.
Arnab Kumar Mondal, Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Aravind Jayendran, Parag Singla, Himanshu As-
  nani, and AP Prathosh. MaskAAE: Latent space optimization for adversarial auto-encoders. In
  Proc. of UAI, 2020.
Arnab Kumar Mondal, Himanshu Asnani, Parag Singla, and Prathosh AP. FlexAE: flexibly learning
  latent priors for wasserstein auto-encoders. In Proc. of UAI, 2021.
Akihiro Nakano, Masahiro Suzuki, and Yutaka Matsuo. Interaction-based disentanglement of en-
  tities for object-centric world models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JQc2VowqCzz.
Fitsum A Reda, Guilin Liu, Kevin J Shih, Robert Kirby, Jon Barker, David Tarjan, Andrew Tao, and
   Bryan Catanzaro. Sdc-net: Video prediction using spatially-displaced convolution. In Proceed-
   ings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 718–733, 2018.
Vishal Sharma, Daman Arora, Florian Geißer, Mausam, and Parag Singla. Symnet 2.0: Effectively
  handling non-fluents and actions in generalized neural policies for rddl relational mdps. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, volume 180
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1771–1781. PMLR, 01–05 Aug 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v180/sharma22a.html.
Vishal Sharma, Daman Arora, Mausam, and Parag Singla. Symnet 3.0: Exploiting long-range influ-
  ences in learning generalized neural policies for relational mdps. In Robin J. Evans and Ilya Sh-
  pitser (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 216 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1921–1931. PMLR, 31 Jul–04
  Aug 2023a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v216/sharma23c.html.
Vishal Sharma, Aniket Gupta, Prayushi Faldu, Rushil Gupta, Parag Singla, et al. Object-centric
  learning of neural policies for zero-shot transfer over domains with varying quantities of interest.
  In PRL Workshop Series {\textendash} Bridging the Gap Between AI Planning and Reinforce-
  ment Learning, 2023b.
Xingjian Shi, Zhourong Chen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung, Wai-Kin Wong, and Wang-chun Woo.
  Convolutional lstm network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate dall-e learns to compose. In Proc. of ICLR,
  2022a.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gautam Singh, Yeongbin Kim, and Sungjin Ahn. Neural systematic binder. In The Eleventh Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b.
Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple unsupervised object-centric learning for com-
  plex and naturalistic videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18181–
  18196, 2022c.
Simon Ståhlberg, Blai Bonet, and Hector Geffner. Learning general optimal policies with graph neu-
  ral networks: Expressive power, transparency, and limits. Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2022.
Deqing Sun, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Jan Kautz. Pwc-net: Cnns for optical flow using
  pyramid, warping, and cost volume. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 8934–8943, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Ilya Tolstikhin, Olivier Bousquet, Sylvain Gelly, and Bernhard Scholkopf.       Wasserstein auto-
   encoders. In Proc. of ICLR, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yunbo Wang, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Zhifeng Gao, and Philip S Yu. Predrnn: Recurrent
  neural networks for predictive learning using spatiotemporal lstms. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Christopher P. Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner. Spatial broadcast
  decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled representations in vaes, 2019.
Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Generative video transformer: Can objects be the words?
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11307–11318, 2021.
Ziyi Wu, Nikita Dvornik, Klaus Greff, Thomas Kipf, and Animesh Garg. Slotformer: Unsupervised
  visual dynamics simulation with object-centric models. In Proc. of ICLR, 2023.
Jaesik Yoon, Yi-Fu Wu, Heechul Bae, and Sungjin Ahn. An investigation into pre-training
  object-centric representations for reinforcement learning. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brun-
  skill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 40147–40174. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v202/yoon23c.html.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Object-centric learning for real-world
  videos by predicting temporal feature similarities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04829, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
A H YPERPARAMETERS

                                                               BC       BS        OBJ3D
                                    Training Steps Phase 1    30K       30K         60K
                                    Training Steps Phase 2    250K     250K        300K
                                      LR warm-up steps         1K        1K          1K
                                     Cosine Anneal Tcycle     500K     500K        600K
                                     Cosine Anneal Tmult        1         1           1
                 Training
                                          Batch size           32        32          32
                                             λdec               1         1           1
                                             λper              10        10          10
                                            λmask              0.1      0.1         0.1
                                             λdiss              5         5           5
                                           Blocks r             4         5           8
                                          Concepts k            4         4           8
                                     Block Dimension db        32        32          64
             Block Extractor
                                     Hidden Dimension d        64        64         128
                                              T                 3         3           3
                                     Input Dimension df        64        64         128
                                         Dimension dˆ         128       128        128
                                           Layers k            4         4          4
          Transition Transformer
                                            Heads              8         8          8
                                          Dropout d           0.1       0.1        0.1

                                   Table 5: Hyperparameters

                    Layers         Stride   Padding   Channels       Activation
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        16            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        16            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        32            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        32            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        64            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -
                   Conv 3x3          1         1        64            ReLU
                  MaxPool 3x3        2         1         -               -

                        Table 6: Encoder CNN for BC, BS and OBJ3D

           Layers        Stride Padding Output Padding Channels                   Activation
      ConvTranspose 5x5    2          2              1             32              ReLU
      ConvTranspose 5x5    2          2              1             32              ReLU
                      Concatenate the block level output channelwise
      ConvTranspose 5x5    2          2              1             32               ReLU
      ConvTranspose 5x5    2          2              1             32               ReLU
      ConvTranspose 5x5    1          1              0              5               ReLU
      ConvTranspose 3x3    1          1              0              4               ReLU

                            Table 7: Decoder for BC, BS and OBJ3D


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 3: Unaligned output of mask extractor


B O BJECT E XTRACTOR

We train object extractor beforehand and freeze them during final training. We use two different
mask extractor for 2D and 3D environments.

B1 2D ENVIRONMENT

As we want to perform the transfer experiment, the requirement for mask extractor is that we want
it to work on unseen composition of objects. We found that state of the art unsupervised object
extractor (Locatello et al. (2020), Lin et al. (2020b), Singh et al. (2022a)) does not give satisfactory
results. We found that MaskRCNN provides the compositional generalization we need when trained
with labeled data. To generate labeled data in unsupervised fashion we used expert models similar
to Sharma et al. (2023b), which are trained on specific variants of dataset. For each variant of dataset
we have one expert model. Expert model trained on one varient of dataset does not generalize to
other variant of dataset. We generate combined labeled data by using all expert models which is
used to train MaskRCNN.

B2 3D ENVIRONMENT

For 3D environment, we focused on video prediction task for in distribution test data and relaxed the
compositional generalization requirement of mask extractor. We used slot attention Locatello et al.
(2020) as mask extractor which was trained in unsupervised fashion.


C P ERMUTATION M ODULE

Since the order of masks generated by mask extractor is not same (Fig 3) across the video frames
                                          PT +T ′ P
we cannot directly use the loss Ldyn = t=T +1 i,a,j (ŵti,b,j − w̃ti,b,j )2 . This is because order of
objects in ŵ and w̃ may be different. We permute the objects in ŵ such that they are aligned with
objects in w̃. This is achieved by permutation module which returns required permutation matrix
using ŝt and sT . To train permutation module we permute st by randomly generated permutation
matrix πt and use st , πt (st ), πt as supervised data. We found that even though the permutation
module was trained on same time step object representations, it produces correct permutation matrix
even for 10 time step apart objects.


D P OSITION C ALCULATION

GSWM and STOVE have zpos latent for each object which corresponds to predicted position of ob-
ject in frame. This zpos was used to compute the MSE for these models. For DisFormer the decoder
                                                                      im̂t [i,j]              j m̂t [i,j]
                                                          P                     P
masks were used to obtain the predicted positions as xtk = Pi,j m̂tk[i,j] and ykt = Pi,j m̂tk[i,j]
                                                                i,j      k              i,j      k


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 4: Feature importance mask between blocks and object attributes for BC dataset


     Figure 5: Feature importance mask between blocks and object attributes for BS dataset


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION OF DISENTANGLEMENT
We followed the approach from Singh et al. (2022b) to evaluate disentanglement of blocks. Specif-
ically to visualize and quantify the disentanglement by looking as importance matrix R ∈ RA×r
in between the attributes and blocks. To obtain importance matrix, first step is to gradient boosted
trees one for each attribute to predict attribute given concatenated blocks of object. After that feature
importance vector is generated using permutation importance base. We obtain the importance score
of block by adding the importance score of dimensions of blocks.


                                                   16
