Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE HARDNESS OF LEARNING UNDER
SYMMETRIES

    Bobak T. KianiвҖ 12 , Thien LeвҖ 1 , Hannah LawrenceвҖ 1 , Stefanie Jegelka13 , Melanie Weber2
 1
     MIT EECS, 2 Harvard SEAS, 3 TU Munich, вҖ  co-first author



                                            A BSTRACT

          We study the problem of learning equivariant neural networks via gradient de-
          scent. The incorporation of known symmetries (вҖңequivarianceвҖқ) into neural net-
          works has empirically improved the performance of learning pipelines, in do-
          mains ranging from biology to computer vision. However, a rich yet separate
          line of learning theoretic research has demonstrated that actually learning shallow,
          fully-connected (i.e. non-symmetric) networks has exponential complexity in the
          correlational statistical query (CSQ) model, a framework encompassing gradient
          descent. In this work, we ask: are known problem symmetries sufficient to alle-
          viate the fundamental hardness of learning neural nets with gradient descent? We
          answer this question in the negative. In particular, we give lower bounds for shal-
          low graph neural networks, convolutional networks, invariant polynomials, and
          frame-averaged networks for permutation subgroups, which all scale either super-
          polynomially or exponentially in the relevant input dimension. Therefore, in spite
          of the significant inductive bias imparted via symmetry, actually learning the com-
          plete classes of functions represented by equivariant neural networks via gradient
          descent remains hard.


1     I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, the purview of machine learning has expanded to non-traditional domains with
geometric inputs, from graphs to sets to point clouds. Correspondingly, it is now common practice
to tailor neural architectures to the symmetries of the input вҖ“ for example, graph neural networks
are invariant to permutations of the input nodes, while networks operating on molecules and point
clouds are invariant to permutation, translation, and rotation. Empirically, encoding such structure
has led to computational benefits in applications (Wang et al., 2021; Batzner et al., 2022; Bronstein
et al., 2021). From the perspective of generalization, previous research has quantified the benefits
of imposing symmetry during learning (Long & Sedghi, 2019; Bietti et al., 2021; Sannai et al.,
2021; Weber et al., 2020; Mei et al., 2021), often achieving rather tight bounds for simple models
(Elesedy, 2021; Tahmasebi & Jegelka, 2023). At their core, these results are bounds on sample
complexity, i.e. how much data is needed to learn a given task. In contrast, the effect of symmetries
on the computational complexity of learning algorithms has not been previously studied. Broadly
speaking, generalization bounds are necessary but not sufficient to show efficient learnability, as
there can be exponentially large gaps between sample complexity and runtime lower bounds.
Indeed, an active line of research in learning theory studies the hardness of learning fully-connected
neural networks via вҖңcorrelational statistical queryвҖқ (CSQ) algorithms (defined in Sec. 2.1), which
notably encompass gradient descent. In particular, for a Gaussian data distribution, Diakonikolas
et al. (2020) proved exponential lower bounds for learning shallow neural networks. Such works
provide valuable impossibility results, demonstrating that one cannot hope to efficiently learn any
function represented by a small neural networks under simple data distributions.
In this work, we ask: does invariance provide a restrictive enough subclass of neural network func-
tions to circumvent these impossibility results? Our main finding, shown in various settings, is that
an inductive bias towards symmetry is not strong enough to alleviate the fundamental hardness of
learning neural nets via gradient descent. We view this result as a guide for future theoretical work:
additional function structure is generally needed, even in the invariant setting, to achieve guarantees
of efficient learnability. Our proof techniques largely rely on extending techniques from the general


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


setting to symmetric function classes. In many of our lower bounds, imposition of symmetry on a
function class reduces the computational complexity of learning by a factor proportional to the size
of the group. Some of our lower bounds use simple symmetrizations of existing hard families, while
others require bona fide new classes of hard invariant networks. For example, intuition from mes-
sage passing GNN architectures seems to indicate that complexity would grow exponentially with
the number of such message passing steps; however, our results show that even a single message
passing layer gathers sufficient features to form exponentially hard functions (Liao et al., 2020).

Our Contributions We consider various interrelated questions on the computational hardness of
learning, focusing primarily on how hard it is to learn data generated by invariant architectures.
Question (primary). Given Gaussian i.i.d. inputs in n variables, how hard is it to learn the class of
shallow single hidden layer invariant architectures in the correlational statistical query model?
We answer this question in various settings. As a warm-up, we give general (SQ) lower bounds
for learning invariant Boolean functions in Sec. 3. Next, we show that graph neural networks with a
single message passing layer are exponentially hard to learn, either in the number of nodes or feature
dimension (Theorem 3 and Theorem 4, respectively). Hardness in the feature dimension results from
careful symmetrization of the hard functions in Diakonikolas et al. (2020). This technique did not
extend to the node dimension hardness result in Theorem 3, for which we instead constructed a
customized set of hard functions whose outputs are parities in the degree counts of the graph. Since
adjacency matrices of graphs are often Boolean valued, this setting also offers general SQ lower
bounds scaling exponentially with the number of nodes n. For subgroups of permutations, we prove
CSQ hardness results for вҖңsymmetrizedвҖқ (frame-averaged) neural network classes encapsulating
CNNs (Theorem 7 of Sec. 5). The proofs here are based on constructions in Goel et al. (2020)
and Diakonikolas et al. (2020), ensuring that properly chosen frames retain the underlying structure
necessary (e.g., sign invariance) to guarantee orthogonality of hard functions.
These lower bounds constitute our main results, but we provide two complementary results to pro-
vide an even more complete picture. First, we show that classes of sparse invariant polynomials
can be learned efficiently, but not by gradient descent, via a straightforward extension of the algo-
rithm in Andoni et al. (2014) for arbitrary polynomials (Sec. 6). This learning algorithm is SQ, and
we give various nв„Ұ(log n) CSQ lower bounds for learning over nв„Ұ(log n) many orthogonal invariant
polynomials of degree at most O(log(n)). Second, we take a classical computational complexity
perspective to establish the NP hardness of learning GNNs. The work of Blum & Rivest (1988)
established that even 3-node feedforward networks are NP hard to train, and later expanded to av-
erage case complexity for improper learning by various works (Daniely et al., 2014; Daniely, 2016;
Klivans & Kothari, 2014). Although it is perhaps not surprising that these hardness results can be
extended to invariant architectures, for the sake of completeness (and since we were unaware of an
extension in the literature), in Sec. 4.3 we give an NP hardness result for proper learning of the
weights of a GNN architecture. Finally, Sec. 7 provides a few experiments verifying that the hard
classes of invariant functions we propose are indeed difficult to learn.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

A long line of research studies the hardness of learning neural networks. We briefly review the most
relevant works here, and refer the reader to App. A for a more holistic review.
Our work is largely motivated to extend hardness results for feedforward networks to equivariant
and symmetric neural networks. Early results showed that there exist rather artificial distributions
of data for which feedforward networks are hard to learn in worst-case settings (Judd, 1987; Blum
& Rivest, 1988; Livni et al., 2014). Interest later grew into studying hardness for more natural set-
tings via the statistical query framework (Kearns, 1998; Shamir, 2018). Goel et al. (2020) showed
superpolynomial CSQ lower bounds for learning single hidden layer ReLU networks, subsequently
strengthened to exponential lower bounds in Diakonikolas et al. (2020). We use the hard class of
networks in Diakonikolas et al. (2020) as a basis for the frame averaged networks in our work. Hard-
ness results for learning feedforward neural networks have also been shown by proving reductions
to average case or cryptographically hard problems (Chen et al., 2022a; Daniely & Vardi, 2020).
Though our work is focused on runtime lower bounds, some algorithms exist for learning restricted
classes of geometric networks efficiently such as CNNs (Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017; Du et al.,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2017; 2018a). Zhang et al. (2020); Li et al. (2021) give algorithms learning one hidden layer GNNs
via gradient based algorithms, which are efficient when certain factors such as the condition number
of the weights are bounded. We should also note that for practical separations between SQ and CSQ
algorithms, Andoni et al. (2014) show that learning sparse polynomials of degree d in n variables
requires в„Ұ(nd ) CSQ queries, but often only OМғ(nd) SQ queries. We extend this to polynomials in
the invariant polynomial ring in Sec. 6.

2     BACKGROUND AND N OTATION
We use a, a, and A to denote scalars, vectors, and matrices. In denotes the identity matrix of
dimension n. We denote groups by G and graphs by G. We denote the normal distribution supported
over Rn with mean v вҲҲ Rn and covariance matrix M вҲҲ RnГ—n as N (v, M ), often abbreviated as N
for N (0, In ). We also denote by Gn the set of graphs on n vertices and, when clear from context, E
an arbitrary distribution over Gn . To ease notation, we often use [n] to denote the set {1, . . . , n}.
Let X be an input space and D a distribution on X . Given functions
                                                                p f, g : X вҶ’ R, their inner
product is вҹЁf, gвҹ©D = ED [f g] with corresponding norm вҲҘf вҲҘD = вҹЁf, f вҹ©D . For functions f, g :
X вҶ’ {вҲ’1, +1} whose outputs are Boolean, the classification error is PxвҲјD [f (x) Мё= g(x)].

2.1   SQ L EARNING FRAMEWORK

The well-studied statistical query (SQ) model offers a restricted query complexity based model for
proving hardness, which encapsulates most algorithms in practice (Kearns, 1998; Reyzin, 2020).
Given a joint distribution D on input/output space X Г— Y, any SQ algorithm is composed of a set of
queries. Each query takes as input a function g : X Г— Y вҶ’ [вҲ’1, 1] and tolerance parameter П„ > 0,
and returns a value SQ(g, П„ ) in the range:
                    E(x,y)вҲјD [g(x, y)] вҲ’ П„ вүӨ SQ(g, П„ ) вүӨ E(x,y)вҲјD [g(x, y)] + П„.               (1)

A special class of queries are correlational statistical queries (CSQ), where the query function
g : X вҶ’ [вҲ’1, 1] is only a function of x, and the oracle returns E(x,y)вҲјD [g(x) В· y] the correlation of
g with y up to error П„ .
Hardness is quantified as the number of queries required to learn a function y = cвҲ— (x), drawn from a
function class C up to a desired maximal error. Notably, SQ hardness results imply hardness for any
gradient based algorithm, as gradients with respect to a loss can be captured by statistical queries.
Furthermore, only CSQ oracles are required for the mean-squared error (MSE) loss.
Example 1 (GD from CSQ). Given a function NОё : X вҶ’ R with parameters Оё, gradients of the
MSE loss with respect to Оё can be estimated with a correlational statistical query for each parameter:
              E(x,y)вҲјD вҲҮОё 12 (y вҲ’ NОё (x))2 = E [NОё (x)вҲҮОё NОё (x)] вҲ’ E [yвҲҮОё NОё (x)] .

                                                                                                   (2)
                                                |        {z          } |       {z      }
                                                       yвҲ’ independent     CSQ withвҲҮОё NОё

Access to the distribution D is typically provided through samples, and the tolerance П„ in part
captures the error in statistical sampling of quantities such as the gradient. In fact, by drawing
O(log(1/Оҙ)/П„ 2 ) samples, standard Hoeffding bounds guarantee estimates of a given query are
within tolerance П„ with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. In the SQ (CSQ) framework, the complexity of learn-
ing is determined by the tolerance bound and number of queries (loosely corresponding to вҖңstepsвҖқ
in an algorithm) needed to learn a function class.
Definition 1 (SQ (CSQ) Learning). Given a function class C and distribution D over input space X ,
an algorithm SQ (CSQ) learns C up to classification error (в„“2 squared loss) Пө if, given only SQ (CSQ)
oracle access to (x, cвҲ— (x)), x вҲј D for some unknown cвҲ— вҲҲ C, the algorithm outputs a function f
such that PxвҲјD [f (x) Мё= cвҲ— (x)] вүӨ Пө (i.e. вҲҘf вҲ’ cвҲ— вҲҘD вүӨ Пө).
SQ lower bounds for Boolean functions are typically shown by finding a set of roughly orthogonal
functions that lower bound the so-called statistical dimension. For real-valued function classes,
lower bounds on the statistical dimension imply CSQ lower bounds. Applying more general SQ
lower bounds is challenging, unless one reduces the problem of learning a real-valued function to
that of learning a subset therein of (say) Boolean functions within the class (Chen et al., 2022a). We
cover this in more detail and also discuss other learning theoretic frameworks in App. B.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    WARM UP : INVARIANT B OOLEAN FUNCTIONS
Before detailing our main results concerning real-valued functions, we explore the foundational
context of Boolean functions where the SQ formalism originated (Kearns, 1998; Blum et al., 1994).
This illustrative analysis will serve as a warm-up for the more complex scenarios later. It is known
that many classes of Boolean functions have exponential query complexity (e.g., the class of parity
functions) arising from the orthogonality properties of Boolean functions. Enforcing invariance
under a given group G, the number of orbits of the 2n bitstrings gives an analogous hardness metric,
though care must be taken in dealing with the distribution of these orbits.
More formally, in the Boolean setting, let input distribution D be uniform over X = {вҲ’1, +1}n .
For a group G with representation ПҒ, let OПҒ = {{ПҒ(g) В· x : g вҲҲ G} : x вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}n } denote
the orbits of the inputs under the representation. For any given orbit O вҲҲ OПҒ , let xO denote an
orbit representative (i.e., some fixed element in the set O). We can represent any symmetric function
f : On вҶ’ {вҲ’1, +1} as a function of these orbits, where the correlation of two functions f, g is
                                                 X
                        вҹЁf, gвҹ©D = E [f g] = 2вҲ’n             |Ok |f (xOk )g(xOk ).                 (3)
                                                         Ok вҲҲOПҒ

The probability pOПҒ : OПҒ вҶ’ [0, 1] of a random bitstring falling in orbit OK вҲҲ OПҒ is equal to
pOПҒ (Ok ) = |Ok |/2n . With this notation, we have a general lower bound on the SQ hardness of
learning invariant Boolean functions.
Theorem 2 (Boolean SQ hardness). For a given symmetry group G with representation ПҒ : G вҶ’
                                                      2
                                               |Ok |      1/2
GL({вҲ’1, +1}n ), let вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘ :=
                                   P
                                      Ok вҲҲOПҒ    2n            and let HПҒ be the class of symmetric
Boolean functions, defined as
    HПҒ = {f : {вҲ’1, +1}n вҶ’ {вҲ’1, +1} : вҲҖg вҲҲ G, вҲҖx вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}n : f (ПҒ(g) В· x) = f (x)} .                     (4)
Any SQ learner capable of learning HПҒ up to sufficiently small classification error probability Пө
(Пө < 1/4 suffices) with queries of tolerance П„ requires at least П„ 2 вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘвҲ’2 /2 queries.

Proof sketch. We show that 1 вҲ’ вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘ2 is the probability that, over independently drawn inputs
x, xвҖІ , the distribution (f (x), f (xвҖІ )) is uniformly random over f drawn uniformly from HПҒ . From a
proof technique in Chen et al. (2022a), this connects the task to one of distinguishing distributions,
for which the SQ complexity is at least the stated amount. See App. C for complete proof.

For a more direct lower bound, we can use HoМҲlderвҖҷs inequality such that вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘ2 вүӨ
                            вҲ’n
 1
2n maxOk вҲҲOПҒ |Ok | вүӨ |G|2      . This gives query complexity of at least 2nвҲ’1 |G|вҲ’1 П„ 2 . For com-
monly studied groups, assuming П„ = O(1), the SQ complexity generally aligns with the number of
orbits. Table 1 summarizes these hardness lower bounds for commonly studied groups1 .

      Group                                               maxOk вҲҲOПҒ |Ok |         Query Complexity
                                                            n
                                                          (n/2)     1                    вҲҡ
      Symmetric group on n bits                            2n = Оҳ( n)
                                                                    вҲҡ                 Оҳ( n)
                                                                  2                            2
      Symmetric group on n Г— n graphs               n!
                                                   2n2
                                                          = 2вҲ’n +n log n+O(n)          в„Ұ(2O(n ) )
      Cyclic group on n bits                                    n                      в„Ұ(2n /n)

        Table 1: Query complexity of learning common invariant Boolean function classes.


4    L OWER BOUNDS FOR GNN S
We now show statistical query lower bounds for graph neural networks, which are invariant to
node permutations, in three settings: (1) SQ lower bounds scaling with the number of nodes n
for ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi distributed graphs with trivial node features, (2) CSQ lower bounds scaling in the
node feature dimension for a fixed graph, and (3) a simple extension of NP hardness in a proper
learning task (deciding if fitting a training set with a given GNN is possible).
   1
     Certain sub-classes of HПҒ may suffice to attain hardness, much like how Parity functions suffice to prove
exponential lower bounds in the traditional Boolean setting. We do not consider this strengthening here.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   H ARDNESS IN NUMBER OF NODES

We consider a class of two hidden layer GNNs that are only a function of the adjacency matrix, and
show hardness in the number of nodes n. This covers a commonly used procedure where one learns
node-level equivariant features in the first layer, aggregates these features, and passes them through
an MLP (Dwivedi et al., 2020). We consider a Boolean function class of GNNs over the uniform
distribution Unif({0, 1}nГ—n ), which can be viewed as the ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi random graph model with
p = 0.5.2 Node features x вҲҲ Rn are trivial and always set to x = 1.

2 hidden layer GNN family We consider two layer GNNs f = f (2) в—Ұ f (1) . These take the
commonly used form of message passing f (1) : {0, 1}nГ—n вҶ’ Rk1 which aggregates k1 permutation
invariant features for the graph, followed by a single hidden layer ReLU MLP f (2) : Rk1 вҶ’ {0, 1}.
                       (1)
                     [fa,b (A)]i = 1вҠӨ
                                    n Пғ (ai + bi Ax)    (output of channel i вҲҲ [k1 ])
                                      k2                                                                     (5)
                      (2)
                                   X
                    fu,v,W (h) =          ui Пғ(вҹЁW:,i , hвҹ© + vi ),
                                         i=1
with subscripts for trainable weights. For our hard class of functions, k1 = O(n) and k2 = O(n),
so there are at most O(n2 ) parameters (proportional to the number of edges).

Family of hard functions We define the hard functions in terms of degree counts cA вҲҲ [n]n+1 ,
where entry [cA ]i counts the number of nodes that have i вҲ’ 1 outgoing edges in A:
                                         Xn
                                [cA ]i =        1 [[A1]k = i вҲ’ 1] .                      (6)
                                                  k=1
The hard functions in HER,n are enumerated over subsets S вҠҶ [n + 1] and a bit b вҲҲ {0, 1}:
                                                                 X
       HER,n = {gS,b : S вҠҶ [n + 1], b вҲҲ {0, 1}}, gS,b (A) = b +          [cA ]i mod 2.                       (7)
                                                                                  iвҲҲS
gS,b (A) is a sort of parity function supported over integers in cA in S. We show in Lemma 15 that
the GNNs in Eq. (5) can construct these functions. Additionally, the class HER,n is Boolean, so
hardness lower bounds apply in the general SQ model.
Theorem 3 (SQ hardness of HER,n ). Any SQ learner capable of learning HER,n up to classifica-
tion error probability Пө sufficiently small (Пө < 1/4 suffices) with queries of tolerance П„ requires at
least в„Ұ П„ 2 exp(nв„Ұ(1) ) queries.

Proof sketch. We form networks that in the message passing layer calculate cA , which is passed to
the MLP calculating Eq. (7) as a sum of ReLUs via hat-like functions that mimic parities. Based on
                                                                                                p
concentration properties of the ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi model, weвҲҡshow that for some p < 0.5, at least Оҳ(n )
entries of cA will have values scaling roughly as O( n) and the probability that any such entry
is odd converges to 1/2. Also using concentration properties, we condition on a high probability
region (where probability of these entries being odd are roughly independent from each other), and
use hardness of learning parity functions to get SQ lower bounds.

4.2   H ARDNESS IN FEATURE DIMENSION

In this section, we derive correlational statistical query lower bounds (CSQ) for commonly used
graph neural network architectures (GNNs), and state the corresponding learning-theoretic hardness
result. The techniques in this section extend those of Diakonikolas et al. (2020), resulting in an
exponential (in feature dimension) lower bound for learning one-hidden layer GNNs.

1-hidden layer GNN For a fixed directed, unweighted graph G with n вҲҲ N vertices, let A(G) вҲҲ
RnГ—n be the adjacency matrix or the Laplacian of G. For input feature dimension d вҲҲ N and width
parameter k вҲҲ N, we consider the following set of functions:
          FGd,k := f : RnГ—d вҶ’ R, f (X) = 1вҠӨ                                dГ—2k
                                                                                , a вҲҲ R2k ,

                                             n Пғ(A(G)XW )a | W вҲҲ R                               (8)
for some nonlinearity Пғ. When the graph itself is part of the input, we have the function class:
   Fnd,k := f : RnГ—d Г— Gn вҶ’ R, f (X, G) = 1вҠӨ                                  dГ—2k
                                                                                   , a вҲҲ R2k . (9)

                                                 n Пғ(A(G)XW )a | W вҲҲ R
   2
     Our exponential lower bounds arise from the wide range of possible degrees of nodes in the graph. Though
we do not generalize this result, this fact means that it is likely extendable to restricted sparse ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi
models G(n, pn ) where pn = Пү(1/n) (i.e. average degree grows arbitrarily with n).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Family of hard functions First, we define functions fG : RnГ—2 вҶ’ R and fn : RnГ—2 Г— GМ„n вҶ’ R as
             fG (X) = 1вҠӨ               вҲ—
                       n Пғ (A(G)XW ) a ,
                                           вҲ—
                                                fn (X, G) = 1вҠӨ            вҲ—
                                                             n Пғ (A(G)XW ) a ,
                                                                              вҲ—
                                                                                                          (10)
                                      вҠӨ
                         "                   #
                    вҲ—      (cos(ПҖj/k))jвҲҲ[2k]
                                               вҲҲ R2Г—2k ,    aвҲ— = (вҲ’1)j jвҲҲ[2k] вҲҲ R2k .

          where W :=                  вҠӨ                                                                   (11)
                           (sin(ПҖj/k))jвҲҲ[2k]

Given a set of matrices B вҠӮ RdГ—2 , our family of hard functions can now be written as:

                       fG (XB)                                          fn (XB, G)
 CGB := gGB : X 7вҶ’              | B вҲҲ B , CnB := gnB : (X, G) 7вҶ’                      |BвҲҲB .
                        вҲҘfG вҲҘN                                           вҲҘfn вҲҘN Г—E
                                                                                          (12)
Below, we show exponential lower bounds 3 for learning FGd,k and Fnd,k :
Theorem 4 (Exponential CSQ lower bound for GNNs). For any number of vertices n independent
of input dimension d and width parameter k, let Пө > 0 be a sufficiently small error constant and E
a distribution over Gn , independent of N , with PrE ({вҲ…}) < в„Ұ(1) < 1. Then there exists a set B
                     в„Ұ(1)
of size at least 2в„Ұ(d ) such that any CSQ algorithm that queries from oracles of concept f вҲҲ CGB
(resp. CnB ) and outputs a hypothesis h with вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ Пө (resp. вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN Г—E вүӨ Пө) requires either
   в„Ұ(1)                                                          в„Ұ(1)
2d      queries or at least one query with precision dвҲ’в„Ұ(k) + 2вҲ’d .

Proof sketch. Full details of the proof can be found in App. E. From Lemma 17 of Diakonikolas
                                                                в„Ұ(1)
et al. (2020), there exists a set B вҠӮ RdГ—2 of size at least 2в„Ұ(d ) such that
                              вҲҘB вҠӨ B вҖІ вҲҘ2 = O(dвҲ’в„Ұ(1) ) < 1 if B Мё= B вҖІ                      (13)
     вҠӨ                                     B
and B B = 12 which we use to index CG . We design a specialized class of invariant orthogonal
Hermite polynomials, such that the correlation in low degree moments vanishes and is bounded as:
                                                           [m]
                                                   X
          |вҹЁfG (В·B), fG (В·B вҖІ )вҹ©N | вүӨ вҲҘB вҠӨ B вҖІ вҲҘk2      вҲҘfG вҲҘ2N = вҲҘB вҠӨ B вҖІ вҲҘk2 вҲҘfG вҲҘ2N .    (14)
                                                           m>k
Finally, we use Eq. (13) to get the desired almost uncorrelatedness of elements in CGB and use a
simple total probability argument to extend this to CnB .

4.3   NP HARDNESS OF PROPER LEARNING OF GNN S

The classic work of Blum & Rivest (1988) showed that there exist datasets for which determining
whether or not a 3-node neural network can fit that dataset is NP hard. It is straightforward to prove
a similar result for invariant networks. We map the task of training a single hidden layer GNN to
the NP hard problem of learning halfspaces with noise (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2009; Feldman
et al., 2012). Here, one is given a set of N labeled examples {xi , yi }N
                                                                        i=1 and must determine whether
there exists a halfspace parameterized by vector v and constant Оё that correctly classifies a specified
fraction of the labels such that sign (вҹЁv, xi вҹ© вҲ’ Оё) = yi . We map a GNN learning problem to this
task, as informally described below and formally detailed in App. D.
Proposition 5 (NP hardness of GNN training; informal). There exists a sequence of datasets in-
dexed by the number of nodes n, each of the form {Ai , xi , yi }Ni=1 where yi вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}, such that
determining whether a GNN with parameters a, b вҲҲ Rk , c вҲҲ R and k = O(n) of the form
                                                Xk
                           fa,b,c (x, A) = c +         1вҠӨ relu (x + ai Ax) bi                     (15)
                                                     i=1
can correctly classify a specific fraction of the data is NP hard.

5     CSQ L OWER BOUND FOR CNN S AND F RAME AVERAGING
Several commonly used invariant architectures take the form of symmetrized neural networks over
permutation subgroups G вүӨ Sn , which can be generalized as frame-averaging architectures (Puny
et al., 2023). This includes translation invariant CNNs, group convolutional networks, and networks
with preprocessing steps such as sorting. We study the hardness of learning these invariant functions.
   3
     To have a meaningful set of functions, gGB and gnB must not vanish, which holds when Пғ is not a low-degree
polynomial (ReLU suffices, see Remark 12 of Diakonikolas et al. (2020)) and G МёвүЎ вҲ… (graph with no edges).


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Frame averaging and its connection with CNNs. Let G be a subgroup of the permutation group
Sn that acts on RnГ—d by permuting the rows. A frame is a function F : RnГ—d вҶ’ 2G \вҲ… satisfying
F(gВ·X) = gF(X) set-wise. As noted in Puny et al. (2023), given some frame F, one can transform
an arbitrary
        P function (or    neural network) h(X) into an invariant function by averaging its values as
    1                  вҲ’1
|F (X)|    gвҲҲF (X) h(g    X). For instance, setting вҲҖX : F(X) = G recovers the Reynolds (or
group-averaging) operator. Given a fixed frame F, we will first show CSQ lower bounds for the
following class of frame-averaged one-hidden-layer fully connected nets:
        (                                                                                            )
                nГ—d                     1        X
                                                        вҠӨ      вҠӨ вҲ’1                   nГ—k          k
HF := f : R         вҶ’ R, f (X) = p                    a Пғ(W (g X))1d | W вҲҲ R                ,a вҲҲ R ,
                                      |F(X)| gвҲҲF (X)
for some nonlinearity Пғ.
Example 2 (Frame for CNN). Set d = 1 and let G be the cyclic group acting on Rn via cyclic
shifts of its elements with frame F(X) = G, вҲҖX вҲҲ Rn . Then, Fnd consists of CNNs with one
convolutional layer and k hidden channels.
Remark 6 (Difficulty of frames). Since the frame F(X) may vary by datapoint X, the distribution
Unif(F(X)вҲ’1 ) в—Ұ X can be significantly different from the original distribution over X, even if
X вҲј gX for all g. For example, consider the frame F(X) containing all permutations that sort
X lexicographically (where |F(X)| > 1 if X contains a repeated row). Even if X вҲј N with N
invariant to row-permutation, the resultant distribution is not row permutation invariant.
We focus on certain cases where such effects are not too pronounced. For instance, it is simple to
check that if F(X) is constant over X, then F(X) = G вҲҖX (Lemma 28). In the following, we
assume that G is a polynomial-sized (in n) subgroup of Sn .

Family of hard functions. Recall the low-dimensional function from the proof of Theorem 4:
                       вҲ—
                      fexp : R2Г—d вҶ’ R with f (X) = (aвҲ— )вҠӨ Пғ((W вҲ— )вҠӨ X)1d                         (16)
                              вҲ—     2k         вҲ—       2Г—2k
for some special parameter a вҲҲ R and W вҲҲ R               in Eq. (11). We now define the family of
hard functions, indexed by a set of matrices B вҠӮ RnГ—2 obtained from Lemma 29:
                                                     вҲ—       вҠӨ вҲ’1
                                              P
                                                gвҲҲG fexp (B g     X)
           n                                                                          o
      B             nГ—d
     CF = gB : R        вҶ’ R with gB (X) =        q                    | B вҲҲ B вҠӮ RnГ—2 .       (17)
                                                            вҲ— вҲҘ
                                                   |G| В· вҲҘfexp  N

Theorem 7 (Exponential CSQ lower bound for polynomial-sized group averaging). For feature
dimension d independent of inputs n and width parameter k = Оҳ(n), let Пө > 0 be a sufficiently
                                                                       в„Ұ(1)
small error constant. Then there exists a set B вҖІ of size at least 2в„Ұ(d ) /|G|2 such that: for any
                вҖІ
              B
target g вҲҲ CF     with вҲҘgвҲҘN = 1, any CSQ algorithm outputting a hypothesis h with вҲҘg вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ Пө
                   в„Ұ(1)                                                       в„Ұ(1)  p
requires either 2n /|G|2 queries or at least one query with precision |G|2вҲ’n       + |G|nвҲ’в„Ұ(k) .

Proof sketch. Using a union bound argument over the original set B from Diakonikolas et al. (2020),
and concentration of inner product between permuted unit vectors, we obtain from Lemma 29 a set
of orthogonal matrices B вҖІ such that both вҲҘB(B вҖІ )T вҲҘ and вҲҘgB(g вҖІ B вҖІ )T вҲҘ are small вҲҖB Мё= B вҖІ вҲҲ B вҖІ ,
вҲҖg Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ G. This construction costs a factor of |G|2 in |B вҖІ |. The rest of the proof proceeds
similarly; see App. F.1.

We also obtain superpolynomial lower bounds for more general frames using the technique of Goel
et al. (2020). Here, we drop the assumption that G is polynomially-sized. The hard functions are
based on parity functions, similar to Goel et al. (2020) (but with an extra input dimension for X):
                                            X                           вҲҡ
   fS : RnГ—d вҶ’ R with fS (X) = 1вҠӨ    d               ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw,    X S вҹ©/  m) ,       S вҠҶm [n]. (18)
                                         wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}m

                                                parity function ПҮ(w) = i wi and XS вҲҲ RmГ—d
                                                                           Q
where вҠҶm indicates a size m subset, ПҮ is the P
                                                   m
denotes entries of X in S. Here, вҹЁw, XS вҹ© := i=1 wi (XS )i,: and Пғ : Rd вҶ’ Rd is an activation
function. The hard invariant function class consists of frame-averages of the functions above:
             пЈұ                                                                           пЈј
             пЈІ                                      1                                    пЈҪ
   HS,F := fЛңS : RnГ—d вҶ’ R with f (X) = p
                                                            X
                                                                  fS (g вҲ’1 X) | S вҠӮm [n] . (19)
             пЈі                                   |F(X)|       gвҲҲF (X)
                                                                                         пЈҫ


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Below, we show a hardness result for this class inspired by that of Goel et al. (2020), whenever the
frame F is sign invariant: F(X) = F(X в—Ұ z) for almost all X and for all z вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}n .
Theorem 8 (Superpolynomial CSQ lower bound for sign-invariant frame averaging). If F is a sign-
invariant frame, then for any c > 0, any CSQ algorithm that queries from an oracle of concept
f вҲҲ HS,F and output a hypothesis h with вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ Оҳ(1) needs at least в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) /M (n))
queries or at least one query with precision O(nвҲ’c/2 ), where M (n) is the size of the largest orbit of
size m вүӨ log(n) subsets of [n] under G. If moreover |F(X)| = 1 for almost all X (a вҖңsingletonвҖқ
frame), then the same result holds with M (n) replaced by 1.

Proof sketch. The proof hinges on the structure of fS , and in particular that applying g to the input
of fS yields fgS . The sign-invariance of F is necessary to ensure that the proof of Goel et al. (2020),
which involves introducing random sign-flips, goes through. See Lemma 33 for the full proof.

Example 3 (Singleton frames). An example of such a frame is the lexicographical sorting of
X вҲҲ RnГ—d according to the absolute value of the entries (to make the frame sign-invariant). With
probability 1, X does not have any repeated values, and thus there is a unique lexicographical sort
for X almost surely. In fact, for any group G, a singleton frame exists if X has no self-symmetry
with probability 1, i.e. X Мё= gX for all g вҲҲ G.

For the hard class function to be nonvanishing, we show in Corollary 39 that at least a
superpolynomial-sized subset of HS,F has norm lower-bounded by в„Ұ(poly(n)вҲ’1 ), assuming that
|F(X)| is polynomial in n almost surely (|G| does not have to be polynomial in n).


6    S EPARATION BETWEEN SQ AND CSQ FOR INVARIANT FUNCTION CLASSES

A natural question is whether there exist real-valued function classes which are hard to learn in the
CSQ setting (and hence by gradient descent with mean squared error loss), but efficient to learn
via a more carefully constructed non-CSQ algorithm. In the general (non-invariant) setting, one
such separation is that of learning k-sparse polynomials, i.e., degree d polynomials in n variables
expressible as sums of only k unique monomials over inputs drawn from a product distribution D =
Г—  n
       Вө . Here, an efficient SQ (but not CSQ) algorithm called the GROWING-BASIS algorithm
   i=1 i
is known from Andoni et al. (2014). CSQ algorithms require в„Ұ(nd ) queries corresponding to the
number of degree d orthogonal polynomials, but the GROWING-BASIS algorithms learns with
O(nkf (d)) SQ queries, where f (d) may be exponential in d but independent of n. We informally
illustrate the invariant extension of this here, leaving complete details to App. G.
To perform this extension, we apply GROWING-BASIS to more general spaces (so-called вҖҳringsвҖҷ)
of invariant polynomials whose basis consists of independent invariant functions or вҖҳgeneratorsвҖҷ
{gi вҲҲ R[x]G }iвҲҲ[r] , for some r вҲҲ N. Independence here asserts that any gi cannot be written as a
polynomial in the others. The space of all polynomials in gi (x) with degree d and sparsity k (both
in gi вҖҷs expansion) is denoted by R[g1 (x), . . . , gr (x)]d,k . We have the following separation result:
Lemma 9 (informal). Let x вҲј D such that the induced distribution of (gi (x))iвҲҲ[r] is a product
distribution. Then any CSQ algorithm that learns f вҲҲ R[g1 (x), . . . , gr (x)]d,k of degree at most d =
O(log n) to a small constant error requires в„Ұ(rd ) CSQ queries of bounded tolerance. However, the
GROWING-BASIS algorithm learns f with O(kr2 log r) SQ queries of precision в„Ұ(1/(k poly(r))).

A more rigorous exposition and proof is prepared in App. G. Finding independent generators it-
self can be a challenging task; however, we provide an example below, and more in App. G, for
separations over groups where r = в„Ұ(n) generators are known (Derksen & Kemper, 2015).
Example 4. The sign group G flips the sign of input elements and is commonly used to study
eigenvectors (Lim et al., 2022). G is indexed by vectors v вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}n with representation ПҒ(v) В·
x = x вҠҷ v where вҠҷ represents pointwise multiplication. Consider generators g1 , . . . , gn where
gi (x) = |xi |. For inputs x вҲј Unif([вҲ’1, +1]n ), the distribution of [g1 (x), . . . , gn (x)] is a product
distribution Unif([0, 1]n ) with the вҖңshiftedвҖқ Legendre polynomials as the orthogonal polynomials.
For d at most O(log n), any CSQ algorithm requires в„Ұ(nd ) queries of bounded tolerance to learn
these polynomials, whereas the GROWING-BASIS algorithm learns in O(kn2 log n) SQ queries.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        0.6           Train Set       MSE                                                   Train Set      MSE
                      Test Set        0/1 Error                           100               Test Set
        0.5


                                                       Error (log axis)
                                                                          10 2
Error

        0.4
                                                                          10 4
        0.3

              0     200 400 600 800 1000                                         0     100 200 300 400 500
                          Epoch                                                              Epoch
                                                                                                       B
                  (a) GNN learning HER,n                                             (b) CNN learning CF

Figure 1: Overparameterized GNN (a) and CNN (b) fail to learn functions from the class HER,n and
  B
CF  respectively by either failing to fit the training set or overfitting the data. Plots are aggregated
and averaged over five random realizations.


7       E XPERIMENTS

We train overparameterized GNNs and CNNs on the hard functions from Sec. 4 and Sec. 5, respec-
tively. Specifically, we attempt to learn relatively small instances drawn from the function classes
                                       B
HER,n for graphs (Theorem 3) and CF      for translationally invariant data (Theorem 7). For the func-
tion class HER,n , we consider n = 15 node inputs and the target function gS,b where S вҠҶ [n] is a
                                                                                      B
random subset of size 7 and b is either 0 or 1 at random. For the function class CF     , we choose a
random orthogonal matrix B and then symmetrize the function class as per Eq. (17).
Fig. 1a and 1b plot the performance of the GNN and CNN respectively. The GNN is unable to fit
even the training data consisting of 225 n = 15 node graphs drawn uniformly from the ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi
model (i.e., p = 0.5). The CNN trained on n = 50 dimension inputs fits the training set of size
500 appropriately, but fails to generalize in the mean squared error loss. The GNN/CNN were
overparameterized with 3 layers of graph/cyclic convolution followed by a two layer ReLU MLP on
the aggregated invariant features. We refer the reader to App. H for further details.


8       D ISCUSSION

Our study asked how hard it is to learn relatively simple function classes constrained by symme-
try. Setting aside mathematical formality, one may conjecture that such function classes are good
representations or approximations of the data observed in nature. Our results indicate that such an
assumption is unlikely to be a realistic one вҖ” at least in worst-case settings, where we show such
functions would be exponentially hard to learn. Provable guarantees of learning will have to incor-
porate further assumptions in the model class or biases in training to better account for the practical
success of learning algorithms (Lawrence et al., 2021; Gunasekar et al., 2018; Le & Jegelka, 2022).
We now state potential directions for future work and conjectures. It would be interesting to extend
our hardness results beyond the SQ setting or to apply to continuous groups. For example, a natural
question is whether symmetric functions are cryptographically hard to learn, as shown in Chen et al.
(2022a) for two hidden layer ReLU networks. A line of work in probability and statistics has identi-
fied barriers to many algorithms solving average-case settings of classic optimization problems, such
as max cut or largest independent set. These include the overlap gap property (Gamarnik, 2021) and
bounds on low degree algorithms (Hopkins & Steurer, 2017; Brennan et al., 2020). Whether these
barriers extend to the types of problems studied in geometric deep learning is an open question. We
should note that there are restricted settings where learning neural networks is possible (see App. A).
Recent work (Chen et al., 2022b; Chen & Narayanan, 2023) has shown that ReLU networks with
O(1) hidden nodes are learnable in polynomial time. Extending this result to invariant network
classes with O(1) channels would similarly expand the set of learnable invariant networks.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Sitan Chen for insightful discussions and feedback. BTK and MW were supported
by the Harvard Data Science Initiative Competitive Research Fund and NSF award 2112085. TL
and SJ were supported by NSF awards 2134108 and CCF-2112665 (TILOS AI Institute), and Office
of Naval Research grant N00014-20-1-2023 (MURI ML-SCOPE). HL is supported by the Fannie
and John Hertz Foundation and the NSF Graduate Fellowship under Grant No. 1745302.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. Polynomial-time universality and limitations of deep learning.
  Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 76(11):3493вҖ“3549, 2023.

Alexandr Andoni, Rina Panigrahy, Gregory Valiant, and Li Zhang. Learning sparse polynomial func-
  tions. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms,
  pp. 500вҖ“510. SIAM, 2014.

Eric R Anschuetz and Bobak T Kiani. Quantum variational algorithms are swamped with traps.
  Nature Communications, 13(1):7760, 2022.

Eric R Anschuetz, Andreas Bauer, Bobak T Kiani, and Seth Lloyd. Efficient classical algorithms
  for simulating symmetric quantum systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16998, 2022.

Ainesh Bakshi, Rajesh Jayaram, and David P Woodruff. Learning two layer rectified neural networks
  in polynomial time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 195вҖ“268. PMLR, 2019.

A Barvinok.    Measure concentration lecture notes.         See http://www. math. lsa. umich.
 edu/barvinok/total710. pdf, 2005.

Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Ko-
  rnbluth, Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E (3)-equivariant graph neural
  networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 13(1):
  2453, 2022.

Arash Behboodi, Gabriele Cesa, and Taco S Cohen. A pac-bayesian generalization bound for equiv-
  ariant networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5654вҖ“5668, 2022.

Alberto Bietti, Luca Venturi, and Joan Bruna. On the sample complexity of learning under geometric
  stability. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=vlf0zTKa5Lh.

Avrim Blum and Ronald Rivest. Training a 3-node neural network is np-complete. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 1, 1988.

Avrim Blum, Merrick Furst, Jeffrey Jackson, Michael Kearns, Yishay Mansour, and Steven Rudich.
  Weakly learning dnf and characterizing statistical query learning using fourier analysis. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 253вҖ“262,
  1994.

Matthew Brennan, Guy Bresler, Samuel B Hopkins, Jerry Li, and Tselil Schramm. Statistical query
 algorithms and low-degree tests are almost equivalent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06107, 2020.

Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar VelicМҢkovicМҒ. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.

Alon Brutzkus and Amir Globerson. Globally optimal gradient descent for a convnet with gaussian
  inputs. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 605вҖ“614. PMLR, 2017.

Yuan Cao and Quanquan Gu. Tight sample complexity of learning one-hidden-layer convolutional
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Venkat Chandrasekaran, Benjamin Recht, Pablo A. Parrilo, and Alan S. Willsky. The con-
  vex geometry of linear inverse problems. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 12(6):
  805вҖ“849, 2012. doi: 10.1007/s10208-012-9135-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  s10208-012-9135-7.
Sourav Chatterjee. Superconcentration and Related Topics. Springer Cham, 2014. http://
  example.com/history_of_time.pdf(visited 2016-01-01).
Sitan Chen and Shyam Narayanan. A faster and simpler algorithm for learning shallow networks.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12496, 2023.
Sitan Chen, Aravind Gollakota, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Hardness of noise-free learning
   for two-hidden-layer neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
   10709вҖ“10724, 2022a.
Sitan Chen, Adam R Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning deep relu networks is fixed-parameter
   tractable. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
   pp. 696вҖ“707. IEEE, 2022b.
Sitan Chen, Zehao Dou, Surbhi Goel, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning narrow one-
   hidden-layer relu networks. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   5580вҖ“5614. PMLR, 2023.
Zhengdao Chen, Lei Chen, Soledad Villar, and Joan Bruna. Can graph neural networks count
  substructures? Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:10383вҖ“10395, 2020.
Ziyu Chen and Wei Zhu. On the implicit bias of linear equivariant steerable networks: Margin,
  generalization, and their equivalence to data augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04198,
  2023.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks
  trained with the logistic loss. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1305вҖ“1338. PMLR, 2020.
Iris Cong, Soonwon Choi, and Mikhail D Lukin. Quantum convolutional neural networks. Nature
   Physics, 15(12):1273вҖ“1278, 2019.
Amit Daniely. Complexity theoretic limitations on learning halfspaces. In Proceedings of the
 forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 105вҖ“117, 2016.
Amit Daniely and Gal Vardi. Hardness of learning neural networks with natural weights. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:930вҖ“940, 2020.
Amit Daniely, Nati Linial, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. From average case complexity to improper
 learning complexity. In Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
 computing, pp. 441вҖ“448, 2014.
Amit Daniely, Nathan Srebro, and Gal Vardi. Most neural networks are almost learnable. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2305.16508, 2023.
Abhimanyu Das, Sreenivas Gollapudi, Ravi Kumar, and Rina Panigrahy. On the learnability of deep
  random networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03866, 2019.
Giacomo De Palma, Bobak Kiani, and Seth Lloyd. Random deep neural networks are biased towards
  simple functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Harm Derksen and Gregor Kemper. Computational invariant theory. Springer, 2015.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M. Kane, and Alistair Stewart. Statistical query lower bounds for robust
   estimation of high-dimensional gaussians and gaussian mixtures. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual
   Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 73вҖ“84, 2017. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.
   2017.16.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, and Nikos Zarifis. Algorithms and sq lower
   bounds for pac learning one-hidden-layer relu networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   1514вҖ“1539. PMLR, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Simon Du, Jason Lee, Yuandong Tian, Aarti Singh, and Barnabas Poczos. Gradient descent learns
  one-hidden-layer cnn: DonвҖҷt be afraid of spurious local minima. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1339вҖ“1348. PMLR, 2018a.
Simon S Du and Surbhi Goel. Improved learning of one-hidden-layer convolutional neural networks
  with overlaps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07798, 2018.
Simon S Du, Jason D Lee, and Yuandong Tian. When is a convolutional filter easy to learn? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1709.06129, 2017.
Simon S Du, Yining Wang, Xiyu Zhai, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Aarti
  Singh. How many samples are needed to estimate a convolutional neural network? Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018b.
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K Joshi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and
  Xavier Bresson. Benchmarking graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00982, 2020.
Bryn Elesedy. Provably strict generalisation benefit for invariance in kernel methods. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17273вҖ“17283, 2021.
Vitaly Feldman, Venkatesan Guruswami, Prasad Raghavendra, and Yi Wu. Agnostic learning of
  monomials by halfspaces is hard. SIAM Journal on Computing, 41(6):1558вҖ“1590, 2012.
Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with pytorch geometric.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02428, 2019.
David Gamarnik. The overlap gap property: A topological barrier to optimizing over random struc-
  tures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(41):e2108492118, 2021.
Floris Geerts and Juan L Reutter. Expressiveness and approximation properties of graph neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04661, 2022.
Surbhi Goel, Adam Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning one convolutional layer with overlapping
  patches. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1783вҖ“1791. PMLR, 2018.
Surbhi Goel, Aravind Gollakota, Zhihan Jin, Sushrut Karmalkar, and Adam Klivans. Superpolyno-
  mial lower bounds for learning one-layer neural networks using gradient descent. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3587вҖ“3596. PMLR, 2020.
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nati Srebro. Implicit bias of gradient descent
  on linear convolutional networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Venkatesan Guruswami and Prasad Raghavendra. Hardness of learning halfspaces with noise. SIAM
  Journal on Computing, 39(2):742вҖ“765, 2009.
Samuel B Hopkins and David Steurer. Bayesian estimation from few samples: community detection
  and related problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.00264, 2017.
Stefanie Jegelka. Theory of graph neural networks: Representation and learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.07697, 2022.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Directional convergence and alignment in deep learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17176вҖ“17186, 2020.
J Stephen Judd. Learning in networks is hard. In Proc. of 1st International Conference on Neural
   Networks, San Diego, California, June 1987. IEEE, 1987.
Dimitris Kalimeris, Gal Kaplun, Preetum Nakkiran, Benjamin Edelman, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak,
  and Haofeng Zhang. Sgd on neural networks learns functions of increasing complexity. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Michael Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 45(6):983вҖ“1006, 1998.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


WF Kibble. An extension of a theorem of mehlerвҖҷs on hermite polynomials. In Mathematical
 Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, volume 41, pp. 12вҖ“15. Cambridge Univer-
 sity Press, 1945.
Adam Klivans and Pravesh Kothari. Embedding hard learning problems into gaussian space. In
  Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques
  (APPROX/RANDOM 2014). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2014.
Mihail N Kolountzakis, Evangelos Markakis, and Aranyak Mehta. Learning symmetric k-juntas in
 time nЛҶ o (k). arXiv preprint math/0504246, 2005.
Hannah Lawrence, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Dienes, and Bobak T Kiani. Implicit bias of linear
  equivariant networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06084, 2021.
Thien Le and Stefanie Jegelka. Training invariances and the low-rank phenomenon: beyond linear
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=XEW8CQgArno.
Qunwei Li, Shaofeng Zou, and Wenliang Zhong. Learning graph neural networks with approximate
  gradient descent. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 8438вҖ“8446, 2021.
Renjie Liao, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard Zemel. A pac-bayesian approach to generalization bounds
  for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07690, 2020.
Derek Lim, Joshua Robinson, Lingxiao Zhao, Tess Smidt, Suvrit Sra, Haggai Maron, and Stefanie
  Jegelka. Sign and basis invariant networks for spectral graph representation learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.13013, 2022.
Richard J Lipton, Evangelos Markakis, Aranyak Mehta, and Nisheeth K Vishnoi. On the fourier
  spectrum of symmetric boolean functions with applications to learning symmetric juntas. In 20th
  Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCCвҖҷ05), pp. 112вҖ“119. IEEE, 2005.
Roi Livni, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. On the computational efficiency of training
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Philip M Long and Hanie Sedghi. Generalization bounds for deep convolutional neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12600, 2019.
Andreas Loukas. What graph neural networks cannot learn: depth vs width. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.03199, 2019.
Shaogao Lv. Generalization bounds for graph convolutional neural networks via rademacher com-
  plexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10234, 2021.
I G Macdonald. Symmetric functions and Hall polynomials / by I. Oxford University Press, Oxford
   : New York, 1979.
Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Learning with invariances in random
  features and kernel models. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3351вҖ“3418. PMLR, 2021.
Johannes Jakob Meyer, Marian Mularski, Elies Gil-Fuster, Antonio Anna Mele, Francesco Arzani,
  Alissa Wilms, and Jens Eisert. Exploiting symmetry in variational quantum machine learning.
  PRX Quantum, 4(1):010328, 2023.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, 2018.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4602вҖ“4609,
  2019.
Elchanan Mossel, Ryan OвҖҷDonnell, and Rocco P Servedio. Learning juntas. In Proceedings of the
  thirty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 206вҖ“212, 2003.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quynh T Nguyen, Louis Schatzki, Paolo Braccia, Michael Ragone, Patrick J Coles, Frederic
  Sauvage, Martin Larocca, and M Cerezo. Theory for equivariant quantum neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.08566, 2022.
Samet Oymak and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. End-to-end learning of a convolutional neural network via
  deep tensor decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06523, 2018.
Ian Parberry. Circuit complexity and neural networks. MIT press, 1994.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024вҖ“8035.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Arthur Pesah, Marco Cerezo, Samson Wang, Tyler Volkoff, Andrew T Sornborger, and Patrick J
  Coles. Absence of barren plateaus in quantum convolutional neural networks. Physical Review
  X, 11(4):041011, 2021.
Mircea Petrache and Shubhendu Trivedi. Approximation-generalization trade-offs under (approxi-
 mate) group equivariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17592, 2023.
Gilles Pisier. Probabilistic methods in the geometry of banach spaces. In Giorgio Letta and Maurizio
  Pratelli (eds.), Probability and Analysis, pp. 167вҖ“241, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1986. Springer Berlin
  Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-40955-7.
Omri Puny, Derek Lim, Bobak T Kiani, Haggai Maron, and Yaron Lipman. Equivariant polynomials
 for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11556, 2023.
Michael Ragone, Paolo Braccia, Quynh T Nguyen, Louis Schatzki, Patrick J Coles, Frederic
 Sauvage, Martin Larocca, and M Cerezo. Representation theory for geometric quantum machine
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07980, 2022.
Lev Reyzin. Statistical queries and statistical algorithms: Foundations and applications. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.00557, 2020.
Akiyoshi Sannai, Masaaki Imaizumi, and Makoto Kawano. Improved generalization bounds of
  group invariant/equivariant deep networks via quotient feature spaces. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 771вҖ“780. PMLR, 2021.
Louis Schatzki, Martin Larocca, Frederic Sauvage, and Marco Cerezo. Theoretical guarantees for
  permutation-equivariant quantum neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09974, 2022.
Hanie Sedghi, Majid Janzamin, and Anima Anandkumar. Provable tensor methods for learning
  mixtures of generalized linear models. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1223вҖ“1231.
  PMLR, 2016.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The pit-
  falls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573вҖ“9585, 2020.
Ohad Shamir. Distribution-specific hardness of learning neural networks. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 19(1):1135вҖ“1163, 2018.
Andrea Skolik, Michele Cattelan, Sheir Yarkoni, Thomas BaМҲck, and Vedran Dunjko. Equivariant
  quantum circuits for learning on weighted graphs. npj Quantum Information, 9(1):47, 2023.
Jure Sokolic, Raja Giryes, Guillermo Sapiro, and Miguel Rodrigues. Generalization error of invari-
  ant classifiers. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1094вҖ“1103. PMLR, 2017.
Le Song, Santosh Vempala, John Wilmes, and Bo Xie. On the complexity of learning neural net-
  works. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Min Jae Song, Ilias Zadik, and Joan Bruna. On the cryptographic hardness of learning single periodic
 neurons. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:29602вҖ“29615, 2021.
Joel Spencer. Asymptopia, volume 71. American Mathematical Soc., 2014.
BalaМҒzs SzoМҲreМҒnyi. Characterizing statistical query learning: simplified notions and proofs. In
  International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 186вҖ“200. Springer, 2009.
Behrooz Tahmasebi and Stefanie Jegelka. The exact sample complexity gain from invariances for
  kernel regression on manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14269, 2023.
Michel Talagrand. On RussoвҖҷs Approximate Zero-One Law. The Annals of Probability, 22(3):1576
 вҖ“ 1587, 1994. doi: 10.1214/aop/1176988612. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/aop/
 1176988612.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134вҖ“1142, 1984.
Guillermo Valle-Perez, Chico Q Camargo, and Ard A Louis. Deep learning generalizes because the
  parameter-function map is biased towards simple functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08522,
  2018.
Gal Vardi. On the implicit bias in deep-learning algorithms. Communications of the ACM, 66(6):
  86вҖ“93, 2023.
Santosh Vempala and John Wilmes. Gradient descent for one-hidden-layer neural networks: Poly-
  nomial convergence and sq lower bounds. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3115вҖ“3117.
  PMLR, 2019.
Saurabh Verma and Zhi-Li Zhang. Stability and generalization of graph convolutional neural net-
  works. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1539вҖ“1548, 2019.
Dian Wang, Robin Walters, and Robert Platt. So(2)-equivariant reinforcement learning.            In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Melanie Weber, Manzil Zaheer, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya K Menon, and Sanjiv Kumar. Robust
 large-margin learning in hyperbolic space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 33:17863вҖ“17873, 2020.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A com-
  prehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning
  systems, 32(1):4вҖ“24, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.
Chulhee Yun, Shankar Krishnan, and Hossein Mobahi. A unifying view on implicit bias in training
  linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02501, 2020.
Bohang Zhang, Shengjie Luo, Liwei Wang, and Di He. Rethinking the expressive power of gnns via
  graph biconnectivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09505, 2023.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. Fast learning of graph neural
  networks with guaranteed generalizability: one-hidden-layer case. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 11268вҖ“11277. PMLR, 2020.
Yuchen Zhang, Jason Lee, Martin Wainwright, and Michael I Jordan. On the learnability of fully-
  connected neural networks. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 83вҖ“91. PMLR, 2017.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Learning non-overlapping convolutional neural
  networks with multiple kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.03440, 2017.
Pan Zhou and Jiashi Feng. Understanding generalization and optimization performance of deep
  cnns. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5960вҖ“5969. PMLR, 2018.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TABLE OF C ONTENTS

A Extended related works                                                                              16

B Extended background into learning frameworks                                                        18

C Boolean statistical query setting                                                                   19

D Complexity theoretic hardness extension                                                             20

E GNN hardness proofs                                                                                 22
    E.1 Lower bound for ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi distributed graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22
    E.2 Invariant Hermite polynomial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25
    E.3 Proof of Theorem 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29

F Frame-Averaging hardness proofs                                                                     32
    F.1   Exponential lower bound for constant frame and Reynolds operator . . . . . . . .            32
    F.2   Superpolynomial lower bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
    F.3   Proof of extra tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41

G Learning invariant polynomials                                                                      44

H Experimental Details                                                                                47


A    E XTENDED RELATED WORKS

Restricted learning algorithms for CNNs and GNNs Various works show that convolutional
and graph neural networks can be efficiently learned under various assumptions on the form of
the network. For given input distributions, Brutzkus & Globerson (2017); Du et al. (2017) give
an efficient learning algorithm for learning a single convolution filter and Zhong et al. (2017) give a
polynomial time algorithm for learning a sum of a polynomial number of convolution kernels applied
to an input. These can be viewed as a single hidden layer network where the last layer weights are all
equal to one. Du & Goel (2018) (improving on Goel et al. (2018)) give a polynomial time algorithm
for learning single layer convolutional networks (not necessarily invariant) with filters that have
stride at least half the filter width. These CNNs have a single channel but are not invariant to the
cyclic group due to the presence of weights in the second layer that vary by each patch of the filter.
Similarly, Du et al. (2018a) show that gradient descent can also learn networks of a similar form with
non-overlapping patches in the random setting (weights are random) with high probability. Oymak
& Soltanolkotabi (2018) learn convolutional networks of depth D layers with a single kernel per
layer and make a similar assumption that stride is at least as large as width. Zhang et al. (2020); Li
et al. (2021) provide learning algorithms for a class of one hidden layer GNNs via gradient descent
based algorithms whose sample complexity and runtime depend on factors like the condition number
or norm of the weights of the target function. These algorithms are only guaranteed to be polynomial
in runtime for the restricted instances when such factors are appropriately bounded.

Learning feedforward neural networks The study of the hardness of learning feedforward nueral
networks has a rich history dating back many decades. Judd (1987); Blum & Rivest (1988) show that
in the proper learning setting, it is NP complete to find a set of weights of a given network that fits a
given training set. These results were later expanded in (Zhang et al., 2017) to more realistic settings.
Many works study the hardness of improperly learning the class of ReLU feedforward networks. In


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the SQ setting, Goel et al. (2018); Diakonikolas et al. (2020); Song et al. (2017) show that at least
a superpolynomial number of queries are needed to learn even single hidden layer networks in the
correlational statistical query model. Chen et al. (2022a) show that networks with two hidden layers
are even hard in the general SQ setting by using the networks to round inputs to boolean inputs and
applying hardness results from Boolean learning theory and cryptography. We should remark that
there are also other papers that reduce the task of learning feedforward neural networks to average
case or cryptographically hard problems (Song et al., 2021; Daniely & Vardi, 2020). To sidestep
these hardness results and provide proofs of learnability in the PAC setting, a number of works
make assumptions on the networks or inputs/outputs to give efficient PAC learning algorithms for
single hidden layer neural networks (Bakshi et al., 2019; Goel et al., 2018; Shamir, 2018; Sedghi
et al., 2016; Vempala & Wilmes, 2019). Such assumptions include bounds on the condition number
(Bakshi et al., 2019), approximation guarantees of the network by polynomials (Vempala & Wilmes,
2019), positivity of the second layer weights Diakonikolas et al. (2020), and others. In perhaps the
most general setting, Chen & Narayanan (2023); Chen et al. (2023) give a polynomial time learning
algorithm for learning single hidden layer ReLU networks with O(1) hidden nodes (i.e. runtime is
exponential in the number of nodes but polynomial in other parameters such as the input size and
error).

Random neural network learnability Though the class of neural networks may be challenging to
learn, various works study the average case setting where one is interested in learning random neural
networks or random features from neural networks. In fact, prior work has shown that the complexity
of such random neural networks, measured via statistical measures, continuity, or robustness, is
rather low though this is by no means a guarantee of learnability (Kalimeris et al., 2019; De Palma
et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2020; Valle-Perez et al., 2018). Various hardness results exist for this setting
of learning random neural networks. Das et al. (2019) gives SQ hardness results for learning neural
networks with sign activation that shows query complexity increasing exponentially with the depth
of the network. Daniely & Vardi (2020) show that neural networks with random weights are hard
to learn if the input distribution is allowed to depend on the weights based on reductions to random
K-SAT. Nevertheless, recent work by Daniely et al. (2023) shows that random constant depth neural
networks with ReLU activation can be learned in error Пө in time scaling as dpolylog(1/Пө) where d is
the size of the network.

Sample complexity and generalization bounds Separate from the question of computational
complexity of learning is the question of how many samples are needed to learn a function class.
Specific to (exactly or approximately) invariant neural network architectures, there exist papers
studying the sample complexity of learning convolutional neural networks (Du et al., 2018b; Zhou
& Feng, 2018; Cao & Gu, 2019) and graph neural networks (Zhang et al., 2020).
Various papers consider how generalization bounds improve when enforcing equivariance. These
include generalization bounds based on covering numbers or the complexity of the invariant function
space Sokolic et al. (2017); Petrache & Trivedi (2023), based on invariant kernel method algorithms
Bietti et al. (2021); Tahmasebi & Jegelka (2023); Elesedy (2021), and based on equivariant ver-
sions of norm-based PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds (Behboodi et al., 2022). For the group
of translations, there also exist papers studying generalization bounds for architectures with convo-
lutional layers though these architectures are not strictly invariant (Long & Sedghi, 2019; Zhou &
Feng, 2018). Similarly, there are various generalization bounds as well for the class of graph neural
networks (Lv, 2021; Verma & Zhang, 2019).

Other related topics Though not directly a statement of computational hardness, various papers
give no-go theorems for learning function classes by studying expressivity limitations of graph neu-
ral networks (Jegelka, 2022; Wu et al., 2020; Loukas, 2019). These expressivity results provide a
set of functions that a graph neural network cannot express and thus by definition also cannot learn
to arbitrary accuracy. The most well known set of results are related to limitations of graph neural
networks in distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs via the Weisfeiler-Lehman hierarchy (Xu et al.,
2018; Morris et al., 2019; Geerts & Reutter, 2022). Other work show expressivity limitations of
GNNs by studying their power in expressing invariant polynomials (Puny et al., 2023), identifying
graph biconnectivity (Zhang et al., 2023), counting substructures (Chen et al., 2020), and through
various other means.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Various works study the implicit bias of neural networks primarily to help address why neural net-
works can even learn in overparameterized settings (Vardi, 2023; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Ji & Telgar-
sky, 2020). Here, the aim of these works is to show that gradient descent will converge to specific
regularized functions that fit a given training set. Implicit bias results have been proven for linear
but multi-layer classes of convolutional neural networks (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Yun et al., 2020;
Le & Jegelka, 2022) and equivariant neural networks (Lawrence et al., 2021; Chen & Zhu, 2023).
Generally, these results show that gradient descent on the parameter space of such neural networks
is implicitly regularized under some norm or semi-norm depending on properties of the group. Ex-
tending these results to more realistic settings is likely challenging.
In Boolean learning theory, there are various results on the problem of learning a symmetric k-junta
(Mossel et al., 2003; Lipton et al., 2005; Kolountzakis et al., 2005). Here, we are promised that
the Boolean function only depends on k variables, and within that k variable subset, the function is
symmetric and thus only depends on the number of 1s in that subset. For this problem, Kolountzakis
et al. (2005) achieve a runtime nO(k log k) that is polynomial in n for fixed k. Note, that the functions
we study in the Boolean setting are assumed to be symmetric over the whole input space and not just
on a size k subset of the inputs bits which drastically simplifies the problem. In fact, the hardness of
the symmetric k-junta learning problem largely arises from challenges in finding which k bits are in
the support of the Boolean function.
Finally, in quantum machine learning, there has been a recent interest in studying quantum varia-
tional algorithms or quantum neural networks that are constrained under symmetries (Meyer et al.,
2023; Ragone et al., 2022; Skolik et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2019). Some recent theoretical work
has quantified the hardness and sample complexity associated with these models that are generally
linear though acting on high dimensional Hilbert spaces (Pesah et al., 2021; Schatzki et al., 2022;
Anschuetz & Kiani, 2022; Nguyen et al., 2022; Anschuetz et al., 2022). Since these quantum models
typically operate in a different regime than classical models and are typically focused on quantum
tasks, they are out of the scope of our current work.


B    E XTENDED BACKGROUND INTO LEARNING FRAMEWORKS

There are various models used to rigorously quantify the hardness of learning. We recommend the
review in Reyzin (2020) for an overview of the SQ formalism and its connections to other learning
models. Here, we briefly mention the PAC model and overview further the background into the SQ
framework from the main text.
Perhaps the most widely used framework for quantifying hardness of learning is the provably ap-
proximately correct (PAC) model (Valiant, 1984).
Definition 10 (PAC Learning (Mohri et al., 2018)). A concept class C is PAC-learnable if there
exists an algorithm such that for any Пө > 0 and Оҙ > 0, for all distributions D on X , and for any
target concept cвҲ— вҲҲ C, the algorithm takes at most m = poly(1/Пө, 1/Оҙ, n) samples drawn i.i.d. from
(x, c(x)) with x вҲј D, and returns a function f satisfying вҲҘf вҲ’ cвҲ— вҲҘD вүӨ Пө with probability at most
1 вҲ’ Оҙ. If the algorithm runs in time at most poly(1/Пө, 1/Оҙ, n), then C is efficiently PAC learnable.
The algorithm is a proper learner if it returns f вҲҲ C, and otherwise denoted an improper learner.

Proving computational hardness in the PAC model typically requires reducing learning tasks to
cryptographically or complexity theoretically hard problems. Unconditional hardness results for
learning with neural networks would imply P Мё= NP: Abbe & Sandon (2023) show that the task of
training neural networks via gradient descent is P-Complete, i.e. any poly-time algorithm in P can
be reduced to the task of training a given poly-sized neural network with stochastic gradient descent.
Given the above, the statistical query formalism sidesteps these challenges by constraining algo-
rithms to be composed of a set of noisy queries. Perhaps the most important restriction in the SQ
framework is that algorithms do not have access to individual data points but only noisy queries
averaged across the input/output distribution. The classic example of an efficient non-SQ algorithm
is Gaussian elimination for learning parities (Blum et al., 1994). Nevertheless, the SQ formalism
naturally captures most algorithms used in practice including gradient descent as shown for example
in Example 1 of the main text for gradients over the mean squared error loss.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For boolean functions, correlational statistical queries can capture any general statistical query since
any query can be split into its +1 or вҲ’1 output cases (Reyzin, 2020). For example, assume one
performs an SQ query with query function q : X Г— {вҲ’1, +1} вҶ’ [вҲ’1, +1], then

                                                        1+y                1вҲ’y
                   E(x,y)вҲјD [g(x, y)] = E g(x, +1)             + g(x, вҲ’1)          ,                (20)
                                                           2                2
which decomposes into two correlational statistical queries and two functions independent of the
target.
We remarked in the main text that generalizing real-valued hardness results proven in the CSQ
framework to the SQ framework is in general challenging. In fact, Vempala & Wilmes (2019) more
rigorously underscored this challenge (see their Proposition 4.1) by providing a rather unnatural, yet
efficient, SQ algorithm that learns any finite real-valued function class satisfying a non-degeneracy
assumption that the set of points f (x) = g(x) is measure zero for any pair of functions f, g in the
class. Namely, they show the following no-go theorem.
Theorem 11 (Limitations on SQ hardness for real-valued functions (Vempala & Wilmes, 2019)).
Given a concept class C of functions f : X вҶ’ R of size |C| where for all f, g вҲҲ C the set of inputs
where f (x) = g(x) is measure zero, the family C can be learned with O(log |C|) queries to SQ with
a constant error tolerance П„ .

Proof. We aim to choose a query g : C вҶ’ [вҲ’1, 1] which maps the target function f вҲҲ C to a
unique value in the range [вҲ’1, 1]. For our target function f вҲҲ C, let us call this value v. To specify
the form of this query, it suffices to send each pair (x, f (x)) to its corresponding unique value in
[вҲ’1, +1], i.e. output v for every input (x, f (x)). Since outputs of disjoint functions in C are equal
only on a support of measure zero, this mapping can be performed with probability one. Thus, we
can query the value v and receive an output, say v вҖІ up to error П„ . Repeating this procedure iteratively
to only include functions in the tolerance range [v вҖІ вҲ’ П„, v вҖІ + П„ ], we can select the target function
after O(log |C|) queries.

Loosely, the above theorem shows that real-valued classes of functions are only hard in SQ settings
when there exist sufficiently many hard functions with finitely many outputs. Chen et al. (2022a)
achieved such a result for two-hidden layer networks by constructing networks that round inputs to
the nearest boolean bitstring.

C    B OOLEAN STATISTICAL QUERY SETTING

As discussed in Sec. 3, the Boolean function setting provides a nice illustration of the types of results
obtainable via SQ lower bounds. For further background into the boolean SQ setting, we recommend
the review in Reyzin (2020). Here, we will prove Theorem 2 restated below for convenience.
Theorem 2 (Boolean SQ hardness). For a given symmetry group G with representation ПҒ : G вҶ’
                                                 2
                                          |Ok |      1/2
GL({вҲ’1, +1}n ), let вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘ :=
                               P
                                 Ok вҲҲOПҒ    2n            and let HПҒ be the class of symmetric
Boolean functions, defined as
    HПҒ = {f : {вҲ’1, +1}n вҶ’ {вҲ’1, +1} : вҲҖg вҲҲ G, вҲҖx вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}n : f (ПҒ(g) В· x) = f (x)} .                (4)
Any SQ learner capable of learning HПҒ up to sufficiently small classification error probability Пө
(Пө < 1/4 suffices) with queries of tolerance П„ requires at least П„ 2 вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘвҲ’2 /2 queries.

For a simple proof of the above statement, we will follow the proof technique in Appendix B of Chen
et al. (2022a). The above statement will follow as a consequence of the pairwise independence of
functions in HПҒ defined below.
Definition 12 (Boolean Case of Definition C.1 of Chen et al. (2022a)). Let C be a hypothesis class
mapping {вҲ’1, +1}n to {вҲ’1, +1}, and let D be a distribution on X . C is a (1 вҲ’ О·)-pairwise indepen-
dent function family if with probability 1 вҲ’ О· over the choice of x, xвҖІ drawn independently from D,
the distribution of (f (x), f (xвҖІ )) for f drawn uniformly at random from C is the product distribution
Unif({вҲ’1, +1}2 ).


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pairwise independent function families offer a convenient means to bound the number of queries
needed to distinguish the outputs of a given unknown function f вҲ— versus uniformly random outputs
from the function class.
Theorem 13 (Theorem C.4 of Chen et al. (2022a)). Let function class C mapping {вҲ’1, +1}n to
{вҲ’1, +1} be a (1 вҲ’ О·)-pairwise independent function family w.r.t. a distribution D on {вҲ’1, +1}n .
For any f вҲҲ C, let Df denote the distribution of (x, f (x)) where x вҲј D. Let DUnif(C) denote
the distribution of (x, y) where x вҲј D and y = f (x) for f вҲј Unif(C). Any SQ learner able
to distinguish the labeled distribution Df вҲ— for an unknown f вҲ— вҲҲ C from the randomly labeled
                                                                               2
distribution DUnif(C) using bounded queries of tolerance П„ requires at least П„2О· such queries.

Finally, we are ready to prove Theorem 2.

Proof of Theorem 2. Since the symmetric function is constant on orbits, we can represent any sym-
metric function as f : On вҶ’ {вҲ’1, +1} and the correlation between two functions f, g can be
written as                                      X
                      вҹЁf, gвҹ©SQ = E [f g] = 2вҲ’n        |Ok |f (xOk )g(xOk ).                   (21)
                                                    Ok вҲҲOПҒ

The probability pOПҒ : OПҒ вҶ’ [0, 1] of a uniformly random bitstring falling in orbit OK вҲҲ OПҒ is
equal to pOПҒ (Ok ) = |Ok |/2n . Note that the distribution of (f (xO ), f (xOвҖІ )) is equal to the uniform
distribution whenever xO Мё= xOвҖІ since we have a uniform distribution over all possible symmetric
functions. This occurs with probability
                                        X   |Ok |  2
                                 О·=                       = вҲҘpOПҒ вҲҘ2 .                                 (22)
                                                  2n
                                        Ok вҲҲOПҒ

Therefore, HПҒ is a (1 вҲ’ О·)-pairwise independent function family with parameter О· as above.
To apply Theorem 13, note that for a given function f вҲ— вҲҲ HПҒ , to distinguish Df вҲ— from DUnif(HПҒ ) ,
it suffices to return a function f that has classification error at most 1/4 with respect to f вҲ— . Since
                                                 2
distinguishing the two distributions requires П„2О· queries, we arrive at the final result.

D    C OMPLEXITY THEORETIC HARDNESS EXTENSION
In this section, we would like to show a reduction from the task of training an invariant neural
network on a given dataset to a previously NP hard problem. This extends the classic result of Blum
& Rivest (1988) showing that there exists a sequence of datasets such that determining whether or
not a 3-node neural network can fit that dataset is hard. Though we consider extending this to a
simple graph neural network here for simplicity, we remark that we chose this only for convenience
and similar extensions can be found for other classes of networks.
The particular NP hard problem we consider is the decision version of the learning halfspaces with
noise problem (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2009; Feldman et al., 2012).
Problem 1 (Learning halfspaces with noise (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2009)). Given a set of
N labeled examples {xi , yi }N                    n
                             i=1 where xi вҲҲ {0, 1} and yi вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1} and constants Оҙ, Пө where
0 < Оҙ вүӨ Пө < 1, we distinguish between the following two cases:

       вҖў Case 1: There exists a vector v вҲҲ Rn , constant Оё вҲҲ R, and set S вҠҶ [N ] of size at least
         |S| вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ)N such that yi (вҹЁv, xi вҹ© вҲ’ Оё) вүҘ 0 for all i вҲҲ S.
       вҖў Case 2: For all v вҲҲ Rn , Оё вҲҲ R, and sets S вҠҶ [N ] such that |S| вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Пө)N , there exists
         some i вҲҲ S such that yi (вҹЁv, xi вҹ© вҲ’ Оё) < 0.

Consider the following class of message passing GNNs with a single hidden layer and k channels
which acts on an adjacency matrix A вҲҲ {0, 1}nГ—n and node features x вҲҲ Rn :
                                                 k
                                                 X
                           fa,b,c (x, A) = c +         1вҠӨ relu (x + ai Ax) bi .                      (23)
                                                 i=1


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We will map the below problem of fitting the weights a, b, c of the GNNs above to a given dataset
consisting of a set of graphs and their corresponding outputs.
Problem 2. Given a labeled set of graphs, node features, and outputs {Ai , xi , yi }N
                                                                                    i=1 where Ai вҲҲ
{0, 1}nГ—n , xi вҲҲ Rn and yi вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1} and constants Оҙ, Пө where 0 < Оҙ вүӨ Пө < 1, distinguish
between the following two cases:

       вҖў Case 1: There exists weights a1 , . . . , ak , b1 , . . . , bk , c вҲҲ R and set S вҠҶ [N ] of size at least
         |S| вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ)N such that yi fa,b,c (xi , Ai ) вүҘ 0 for all i вҲҲ S.

       вҖў Case 2: For all weights a1 , . . . , ak , b1 , . . . , bk , c вҲҲ R, and sets S вҠҶ [N ] such that |S| вүҘ
         (1 вҲ’ Пө)N , there exists some i вҲҲ S such that yi fa,b,c (xi , Ai ) < 0.
Proposition 14 (NP hardness of GNN training). Training the GNN in Eq. (23) to solve Problem 2
is NP hard.


Proof. We show that solving Problem 2 is equivalent to solving Problem 1 which is previously
shown to be NP hard (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2009; Feldman et al., 2012). Given a dataset
{xi , yi }N             Pn 1 over n-bit Boolean strings, we
          i=1 for Problem                                       map this to a dataset over graphs
{Ai , xвҖІi , yiвҖІ }N
                 i=1 of  k=1 k = n(n +  1)/2 nodes where   x вҖІ
                                                             i = вҲ’1 for all inputs and yi = yiвҖІ are
the same for both datasets. Adjacency matrix Ai is constructed by including a disconnected k-
clique (including self loops) in the graph whenever [xi ]k = 1. Since there are n(n + 1)/2 nodes,
there are sufficient nodes to construct any such graph. E.g., for x = (1, 0, 1)вҠӨ , a corresponding
adjacency matrix is
                                         пЈ®                     пЈ№
                                           1 0 0 0 0 0
                                         пЈҜ0 0 0 0 0 0пЈә
                                         пЈҜ0 0 0 0 0 0пЈә
                                         пЈҜ                     пЈә
                                    A=пЈҜ                        пЈә.                              (24)
                                         пЈҜ0 0 0 1 1 1пЈә
                                         пЈ°0 0 0 1 1 1пЈ»
                                           0 0 0 1 1 1

We also assume that the GNNs have k = n channels. In this setting, we have that for any i вҲҲ [N ]
                                          n
                                          X
               fa,b,c (xвҖІi , Ai ) = c +         1вҠӨ relu (xвҖІi + aj Ai xвҖІi ) bj
                                          j=1
                                          n          n
                                                                                                            (25)
                                          X          X
                                =c+             bj         в„“1[вҲғ в„“ вҲ’ clique вҲҲ Ai ] relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ в„“aj ),
                                          j=1        в„“=1

where 1[вҲғ в„“ вҲ’ clique вҲҲ Ai ] is the indicator function for whether or not a в„“-clique is in the graph Ai .
The above is clearly a linear function in the vector ri вҲҲ {0, 1}n where [ri ]в„“ = 1[вҲғ в„“ вҲ’ clique вҲҲ Ai ].
Furthermore, the graph is chosen so that ri = xi . Thus, any choice of weights a, b, c corresponds
to a halfspace for xi .
It only remains to be shown that any such halfspace can be written in the form of Eq. (25). Note that

                            fa,b,c (xi , Ai ) = cвҖІ + [b1          b2   В·В·В·    bn ] M r i ,                  (26)

where cвҖІ is an updated constant and

                     relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ a1 )         2 relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ 2a1 )          В·В·В·     n relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ na1 )
                   пЈ®                                                                             пЈ№
                   пЈҜ relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ a2 )         2 relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ 2a2 )          В·В·В·     n relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ na2 ) пЈә
             M =пЈҜ           ..                      ..                 ..              ..        пЈә.         (27)
                   пЈ°         .                       .                    .             .        пЈ»
                       relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ an )       2 relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ 2an ) В· В· В·            n relu(вҲ’1 вҲ’ nan )

Setting ak = (1/2 вҲ’ k)вҲ’1 makes the above matrix have non-zero entries on the diagonal and every
entry above the diagonal. Such a matrix is invertible by Gaussian elimination so every possible
halfspace can be constructed by proper choice of the weights b1 , . . . , bn , cвҖІ .


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     GNN HARDNESS PROOFS
E.1   L OWER BOUND FOR E RD OМӢS вҖ“R EМҒNYI DISTRIBUTED GRAPHS

Here, we will consider a model over graphs of n nodes where adjacency matrices A вҲј
Unif({0, 1}nГ—n ) are drawn uniformly from all possible directed graphs. This distribution can be
viewed as an ErdoМӢsвҖ“ReМҒnyi G(n, p) over directed graphs including self edges with p = 0.5. Node
features are fixed in this model to x вҲҲ Rn where we set x = 1 in all instances (i.e., node features
are trivial). Note, that we consider Boolean functions here w.l.o.g. as {0, 1} valued as opposed to
{вҲ’1, +1} valued as in previous sections since using {0, 1} valued functions in this section makes
the story easier to follow.
Our aim is to prove Theorem 3 copied below.
Theorem 3 (SQ hardness of HER,n ). Any SQ learner capable of learning HER,n up to classifica-
tion error probability Пө sufficiently small (Пө < 1/4 suffices) with queries of tolerance П„ requires at
least в„Ұ П„ 2 exp(nв„Ұ(1) ) queries.

The function class HER,n that achieves the desired lower bound are Boolean valued functions that
depend on the counts of the degrees or number of neighbors of the nodes. To describe this class,
we first introduce some notation. For a given graph A вҲҲ {0, 1}nГ—n , let dA вҲҲ [n]n be a vector
with entry [dA ]i equal to the number of outgoing edges (or degree) for node i. From here, let
cA вҲҲ [n]n+1 denote the count of the degrees where entry [cA ]i counts the number of nodes that
have i вҲ’ 1 outgoing edges in A or more formally
                                               n
                                               X
                                    [cA ]i =         1 [[dA ]k = i вҲ’ 1] .                            (28)
                                               k=1

Note that cA is a length n + 1 vector since the number of outgoing edges can be anything from
{0, 1, . . . , n}. Also note that this vector is an invariant vector as permuting the nodes leaves the
counts invariant. Given a subset S вҠҶ [n + 1] and a bit b вҲҲ {0, 1}, the functions we aim to learn take
the form                                            X
                                    gS,b (A) = b +      [cA ]i mod 2,                             (29)
                                                      iвҲҲS
which are a sort of parity function supported over the elements of the degree counts cA in S. There-
fore, our hypothesis class H consists of 2n+2 functions:
                             HER,n = {gS,b : S вҠҶ [n + 1], b вҲҲ {0, 1}}.                               (30)

First, we will show below that the class HER,n is exponentially hard to learn in the SQ setting.
Later in Lemma 15, we show that the functions in H can be constructed by the GNN architecture
thus completing our proof.

Proof of Theorem 3. To simplify the function gS,b even further, let cbA вҲҲ {0, 1}n+1 be a boolean
valued version of cA where entry [b cA ]i = [cA ]i mod 2. Then the function gS,b is equivalently a
parity function in cbA :
                                     X                         Y
                      gS,b (A) = b +     [cA ]i mod 2 = (вҲ’1)b      (вҲ’1)[bcA ]i .             (31)
                                       iвҲҲS                              iвҲҲS

We will prove an SQ lower bound using Theorem 13 based on the (1 вҲ’ О·)-pairwise independence
property of the function class HER,n in Definition 12. Namely, note that for two graphs A, AвҖІ вҲҲ
{0, 1}nГ—n , if cbA Мё= cbAвҖІ , then the distribution of (gS,b (A), gS,b (AвҖІ )) for gS,b drawn uniformly from
HER,n is equal to the product distribution Unif({0, 1}2 ). This follows from the fact that gS,b (A) =
(вҲ’1)b iвҲҲS (вҲ’1)[bcA ]i is a parity function of the entries in cbA . Since HER,n spans uniformly over
       Q

all possible parity functions in {0, 1}n+1 , the pairwise independence properties follows from this
whenever cbA Мё= cbAвҖІ .
Thus, the parameter 1 вҲ’ О· in the pairwise independence is equal to the probability that cbA Мё= cbAвҖІ .
We will establish that this probability is at least 1 вҲ’ O(exp(вҲ’nв„Ұ(1) )) at the end of this proof thus


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


guaranteeing О· вҲ’1 = в„Ұ exp(nв„Ұ(1) ) . Once this is established, we can apply Theorem 13 and note

that for a given function f вҲ— вҲҲ HER,n , to distinguish Df вҲ— from DUnif(HПҒ ) as in Theorem 13, it
suffices to return a function f that has classification error at most 1/4 with respect to f вҲ— . Since
                                                2
distinguishing the two distributions requires П„2О· queries, we arrive at the final result by noting that
О· вҲ’1 = в„Ұ exp(nв„Ұ(1) ) .


To finish this proof, we must establish that
                                          cA Мё= cbAвҖІ ] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ O(exp(вҲ’nв„Ұ(1) )).
                      PAвҲјUnif({0,1}nГ—n ) [b                                                       (32)
We will show this result by proving that for some constant C > 0 and p < 1/2, for large enough n,
there are at least Cnp entries of cbAвҖІ such that the probability of those entry being even or odd is at
most 1/2 + o(1). To continue, let us denote this region
                   вҲҶp = {0, 1, . . . , n} вҲ© [n/2 вҲ’ Cnp , n/2 + Cnp ],    p < 1/2,                 (33)
                                                   p             p
as the set of integers within the range [n/2 вҲ’ Cn , n/2 + Cn ]. This range is chosen to coincide
with the largest entries of cA .
The degree of any node is independently distributed as binomial with distribution bin(n, 0.5). To
asymptotically expand i around the peak of the binomial coefficient, let us index i = n/2 + r for
given r such that i вҲҲ вҲҶp . Therefore, for any such n/2 + r = i вҲҲ вҲҶp , we have that any given node
j вҲҲ [n] has degree dk = i with probability

                                      вҲ’n      n          2
                       P[dk = i] = 2                 = вҲҡ (1 + O(1/n)).                        (34)
                                           n/2 + r       ПҖn
In the above, we use
                     the asymptotic approximation (Spencer, 2014) for the binomial coefficient
                 n
around its peak n/2  of
                                         r             2
                     n                      2 n          r         3   2
                    n+r   = (1 + O(1/n))       2 exp вҲ’       + O(r /n ) .                 (35)
                     2                     ПҖn            2n

Thus, the marginal distribution of any entry i вҲҲ вҲҶp of [cA ]i вҲј bin n, вҲҡ2ПҖn (1 + O(1/n)) is
also binomial distributed with probability converging to вҲҡ2ПҖn . For entry i вҲҲ вҲҶp , this implies that
               вҲҡ
E[cA ]i = O( n). From the Chernoff concentration bound for the binomial distribution, we also
have that for any i вҲҲ вҲҶp and for any Оҙ > 0:
                                                        (E[cA ]i )вҲ’1
                                              1/2+2Оҙ
     h                            i             n
   P |[cA ]i вҲ’ E[cA ]i | вүҘ n1/4+Оҙ вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                            = 2 exp вҲ’в„Ұ(n2Оҙ ) . (36)

                                                         2
By a union bound over all i вҲҲ вҲҶp , we therefore have that with exponentially high probability,
|[cA ]i вҲ’ E[cA ]i | вүӨ n1/4+Оҙ for all i вҲҲ вҲҶp .
Summarizing the previous results, we have that there are 2Cnp entries of [cA ] where for any entry
i вҲҲ вҲҶp , it holds that for some arbitrarily small Оҙ > 0
            2 вҲҡ                                    2 вҲҡ
           вҲҡ    n(1 + O(1/n)) вҲ’ n1/4+Оҙ вүӨ [cA ]i вүӨ вҲҡ    n(1 + O(1/n)) + n1/4+Оҙ .                   (37)
             ПҖ                                      ПҖ
Since the probability that [cA ]i is equal to any number m is at most O(nвҲ’1/4 ), the probability that
[cA ]i is odd is at most 1/2+O(nвҲ’1/4 ). We now aim to show that conditioned on other entries of cA ,
the probability that a given entry of cA is odd or even is roughly independent of this conditioning.
Given a set of known values Sknown вҠӮ вҲҶp equal to [cA ]k = mk for k вҲҲ Sknown , the marginal
distribution of any entry of [cA ]j for j вҲҲ
                                          / Sknown conditioned on [cA ]k for k вҲҲ Sknown is also
binomial. We now estimate
                        P the parameters of this binomial      distribution. Given the convergence
guarantee in Eq. (37), kвҲҲSknown [cA ]k = O(|Sknown |n1/2 ) = O(n1/2+p ) which is o(n) since
p < 1/2. Therefore for any set Sknown вҠҶ вҲҶp , there are at least n вҲ’ o(n) remaining nodes whose
degree or number of outgoing edges are left to distribute. These remaining nodes cannot have
degrees whose values fall in Sknown , but note that since |Sknown | вүӨ O(np ) and p < 1/2, there are


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



        вҲҡ
still в„Ұ(
       вҲҡ n) buckets (values of the possible degrees) remaining each with probability proportional to
Оҳ(1/ n) by Eq. (35). Therefore, from the convergence guarantee of Eq. (37), we have
                                                                            вҲҡ
                ([cA ]j | [cA ]k = mk , k вҲҲ Sknown ) вҲј bin n вҲ’ o(n), Оҳ(1/ n) .                 (38)

Thus, the conditional probability that [cA ]j is equal to any number m is at most O(nвҲ’1/4 ), and this
implies that the probability that [cA ]j is odd is at most 1/2 + O(nвҲ’1/4 ) even when conditioned on
entries in Sknown .
Finally, let us calculate the desired probability that cbA = cbAвҖІ . For ease of notation, let us index the
elements of вҲҶp as r1 , . . . , rN . We have for large enough n that
   cA = cbAвҖІ ] вүӨ P [[b
 P[b                 cA ]r1 = [b cAвҖІ ]r1 , . . . , [b
                                                    cA ]rN = [b
                                                              cAвҖІ ]rN ]

               = P [[b
                     cA ]r1 = [b cAвҖІ ]r1 ] P [b   cA ]r2 = [bcAвҖІ ]r2 | [b
                                                                        cA ]r1 = [b    cAвҖІ ]r1 Г—

                 Г— В· В· В· P [b
                            cA ]rN = [b cAвҖІ ]rN | [b   cA ]r1 = [bcAвҖІ ]r1 , . . . , [b
                                                                                     cA ]rN вҲ’1 = [b
                                                                                                  cAвҖІ ]rN вҲ’1
                                     |вҲҶp |                                                                     (39)
                   1          вҲ’1/4
               вүӨ       + O(n       )
                   2
               = O(exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(|вҲҶp |)))
               = O(exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(np ))).
Since PAвҲјUnif({0,1}nГ—n ) [b
                          cA Мё= cbAвҖІ ] = 1 вҲ’ PAвҲјUnif({0,1}nГ—n ) [b
                                                                 cA = cbAвҖІ ], this completes the
proof.

Finally, we need to show that the functions gS,b can be constructed as ReLU networks. Before
proceeding to give this construction, we should note that it is known that any Boolean function that
can be computed in time O(T (n)) can also be expressed by a neural network of size O(T (n2 ))
(Parberry, 1994; Shamir, 2018). Our construction will be specific to the GNN class we consider and
show that the boolean functions in gS,b are similarly efficiently constructible.
Lemma 15 (gS,b as GNN). For a GNN f (В·) of the form of Eq. (5) with hidden layer widths equal to
k1 = O(n) and k2 = O(n), there exist weights a, b вҲҲ Rk1 , u, v вҲҲ Rk2 , W вҲҲ Rk2 Г—k1 such that for
any S вҠҶ [n + 1], b вҲҲ {0, 1}, gS,b (A) = f (A; a, b, u, v, W ) for all inputs A вҲҲ {0, 1}nГ—n .

Proof. Let us fix a given S вҠҶ [n + 1], b вҲҲ {0, 1}. The function we want to represent is
                                                X
                                gS,b (A) = b +      [cA ]i mod 2,                                             (40)
                                                       iвҲҲS

where as a reminder, [cA ]i counts the number of nodes that have i вҲ’ 1 outgoing edges (see Eq. (28)).
For the construction, we will set k1 = k2 = n + 1. As a reminder, the two layers of the GNN take
the form:
                       (1)
                    [fa,b (A)]i = 1вҠӨ
                                   n Пғ (ai + bi Ax)          (output of channel i вҲҲ [k1 ])
                                     k2                                                                       (41)
                     (2)
                                     X
                    fu,v,W (h) =           ui Пғ(вҹЁW:,i , hвҹ© + vi ).
                                     i=1

Throughout this construction, the node features x = 1 are constant.
For the first layer, we will choose ai = 2 вҲ’ i and bi = 1 for all i. This first layer can only be a
function of dA = A1 where entry i is a count of the number of outgoing edges. Since entries in
dA take values in {0, 1, . . . , n}, we can equivalently write this first layer output as a function of the
counts cA . In fact, this first layer is linear as a function of cA and equal to
                                              1 2 В·В·В·          n     n+1
                                             пЈ®                             пЈ№
                                             пЈҜ0 1 В· В· В· n вҲ’ 1          n пЈә
                                             пЈҜ. . .            .       .. пЈә
                            h = M cA = пЈҜ .. ..
                                             пЈҜ          ..     ..       . пЈә cA ,
                                                                           пЈә                          (42)
                                             пЈ°0 0 В· В· В·        1       2   пЈ»
                                              0 0 В·В·В·          0       1

                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        h(x) for n = 8
                                        1


                                 h(x)
                                        0
                                            0           2           4          6       8
                                                                    x

                      of function h(x) used in constructing gS,b (A) as a GNN. For the construc-
Figure 2: Sample form P
tion, we will have x = iвҲҲS [cA ]i .


where the matrix M is clearly full rank and invertible since it strictly positive along the diagonal
and in entries above the diagonal.
                                                  P
Our aim in the second layer is to take the sum b + iвҲҲS [cA ]i and take its parity (i.e. mod 2). To
achieve this via sums of ReLUs Пғ we can consider the function h(В·) of the form below:
       h(x) = Пғ(x + b) вҲ’ 2Пғ(x + b вҲ’ 1) + 2Пғ(x + b вҲ’ 2) вҲ’ В· В· В· + (вҲ’1)n Пғ(x + b вҲ’ n).         (43)
                                                           P
A sample version of this plot is in Fig. 2. Setting x = b + iвҲҲS [cA ]i achieves the end goal with
O(n) hidden nodes.
To provide actual values for the second layer parameters, let 1S вҲҲ 0, 1n+1 denote the vector where
entry i is equal to 1 if i вҲҲ S and equal to 0 otherwise. Then, in the second layer, we have

        вҖў W:,i = (M вҲ’1 )вҠӨ 1S for all columns i вҲҲ [n + 1]
        вҖў a1 = 1 and ai = 2(вҲ’1)iвҲ’1 for all i вҲҲ {2, . . . , n + 1}
        вҖў vi = b вҲ’ i + 1 for all i вҲҲ [n + 1]

Using the values above, we have
                                                             k2
  (2)
                                                             X
fu,v,W (h) = Пғ(вҹЁ(M вҲ’1 )вҠӨ 1S , M cA вҹ© + b) +                        (вҲ’1)iвҲ’1 2Пғ(вҹЁ(M вҲ’1 )вҠӨ 1S , M cA вҹ© + b вҲ’ i + 1)
                                                             i=2
                                        !       k2
                                                                                                   !
                         X                      X                       X
                                                            iвҲ’1
             =Пғ b+             [cA ]i       +         (вҲ’1)        2Пғ          [cA ]i + b вҲ’ i + 1
                         iвҲҲS                    i=2                     iвҲҲS
             = h ([cA ]i ) .
                                                                                                                 (44)
   P
As iвҲҲS [cA ]i only takes values in {0, 1, . . . , n}, the above is supported on all of its inputs and this
completes the proof.

E.2     I NVARIANT H ERMITE POLYNOMIAL

Multivariate Hermite polynomials To handle the graph setting with scaling feature dimension,
we first extend the technical machinery related to Hermite polynomials to the invariant settings we
consider.
Recall from Diakonikolas et al. (2020) that the d-variate normalized Hermite polynomial is defined
for every multi-index J = (J1 , . . . , Jd ) вҲҲ Nd as:
                                                 d
                                                 Y                                                 Hei (x)
  HJ : Rd вҶ’ R : (x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ) 7вҶ’             HJj (xj ),         Hi : R вҶ’ R : x 7вҶ’         вҲҡ , i вҲҲ N,   (45)
                                                 j=1
                                                                                                       i!


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Hei is the usual probabilist Hermite polynomial.

Graph-invariant Hermite polynomial Fix a graph G on n vertices and let A := A(G) вҲҲ RnГ—n
be a graph shift operator (say the Laplacian). Define, for any multi-index J вҲҲ Nd :
                                                              n
                                                 1            X
                          HJA : RnГ—d вҶ’ R : X 7вҶ’ вҲҡ                    HJ ((AX)v ).                (46)
                                                             n v=1

We have the following orthogonality property:
Lemma
Pn      16 (Orthogonality of invariant Hermite polynomial). For a fixed A вҲҲ RnГ—n such that
        2                           A   A                                  вҖІ   d
  u=1 Avu = 1 for all v вҲҲ [n], вҹЁHJ , HJ вҖІ вҹ©L2 (N ) = ОҙJ=J В· cJ for all J, J вҲҲ N \{0} for some
                                                         вҖІ

cJ вҲҲ Оҳ(1) that depends only on A.

                      1       ПҒ
Proof. Let ОЈ = ОЈ(ПҒ) =             for some ПҒ вҲҲ (вҲ’1, 1). We will also use MehlerвҖҷs formula (Kibble,
                      ПҒ       1
1945) which states:
                                                 вҲһ
                              pN (0,ОЈ) (x, y)   X
                                              =     ПҒm Hm (x)Hm (y),                             (47)
                              pN (x)pN (y)      m=0
where pN (0,ОЈ) is the pdf of the bivariate normal distribution with mean 0 and covariance ОЈ and pN
is the pdf of the univariate standard normal distribution.
We first show orthogonality of Hermite polynomials evaluated on dependent random variables. For
all i, j вҲҲ N:
                                    Z Z
   E(x,y)вҲјN2 (0,ОЈ) [Hi (x)Hj (y)] =      Hi (x)Hj (y)pN (0,ОЈ) (x, y)dxdy                   (48)
                                     R R
                                                                     pN (0,ОЈ) (x, y)
                                    Z Z
                                  =      Hi (x)Hj (y)pN (x)pN (y) В·                  dxdy  (49)
                                     R R                             pN (x)pN (y)
                                    Z Z               вҲһ
                                                      X
                                  =      Hi (x)Hj (y)     ПҒm Hm (x)Hm (y)dP (x)dP (y)      (50)
                                     R     R                 m=0
                                     вҲһ
                                     X           Z                           Z
                                =          ПҒm           Hi (x)Hm (x)dP (x)     Hj (y)Hm (y)dP (y)
                                     m=0            R                           R
                                                                                                 (51)
                                     вҲһ
                                     X
                                =          ПҒm Оҙi=m Оҙj=m                                          (52)
                                  m=0
                                = ПҒi Оҙi=j .                                                      (53)

We are now ready to present the proof of Lemma 16. Pick J, J вҖІ вҲҲ Nd \{0}. We have:
                                    1 X
             вҹЁHJA , HJAвҖІ вҹ©L2 (N ) =        EXвҲјN nГ—d [HJ ((AX)v )HJ вҖІ ((AX)vвҖІ )]                  (54)
                                    n вҖІ
                                         v,v вҲҲ[n]
                                     1 X
                                 =       EZвҲјP [HJ (zv )HJ вҖІ (zvвҖІ )],                             (55)
                                     n вҖІ
                                         v,v вҲҲ[n]

where zv is the v-th row of Z вҲҲ RnГ—d and P is a multivariate normal distribution over RnГ—d with
mean 0 and covariance:
                                                                   if j Мё= j вҖІ

                                          0,
                   Cov(Zvj , ZvвҖІ j вҖІ ) = Pn                                                (56)
                                             u=1 Avu Av u =: ПҒvv , otherwise.
                                                       вҖІ        вҖІ


Furthermore, for any v and any j Мё= j вҖІ , Zvj is independent of ZvвҖІ j вҖІ . This is becausePcolumns of X
                                                                                           n
are independent from one another. Note that when v = v вҖІ and j = j вҖІ the variance is u=1 A2vu = 1
by our assumption on A.


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the dependence structure of P , one can write:
                                                   d
                                                   Y
          EZвҲјP [HJ (zv )HJ вҖІ (zvвҖІ )] =                     EZвҲјP [HJj (Zvj )HJjвҖІ (ZvвҖІ j )]                            (57)
                                                   j=1
                                                   d
                                                   Y
                                              =            E(Zvj ,ZvвҖІ j )вҲјN (0,ОЈ(ПҒvvвҖІ )) [HJj (Zvj )HJjвҖІ (ZvвҖІ j )]   (58)
                                                   j=1
                                                   d
                                                   Y
                                              =            ПҒJvvi вҖІ ОҙJi =JiвҖІ                                          (59)
                                                   j=1
                                                     |J|
                                              = ПҒvvвҖІ ОҙJ=J вҖІ .                                                        (60)

Therefore,
                                                                      1 X |J|
                       вҹЁHJA , HJAвҖІ вҹ©L2 (N ) = ОҙJ=J вҖІ В·                    ПҒvvвҖІ = ОҙJ=J вҖІ В· cJ ,                       (61)
                                                                      n вҖІ
                                                                         v,v вҲҲ[n]

                              |J|
where cJ = n1
                  P
                  v,v вҖІ вҲҲ[n] ПҒvv вҖІ .

Remark 17. The quantity ПҒvvвҖІ deserves an explanation. Essentially, ПҒvvвҖІ measures how similar two
nodes v and v вҖІ are, in term of composition of its incoming edges. Algebraically, it is the (vv вҖІ )-
th entry of the gram matrix AAвҠӨ . We can get the correct normalization of A in the premise of
                                                                                              1
Lemma 16 by starting with a graph G, adding a self-loop to each node of G and set A = (D вҖ  ) 2 M
where M is the adjacency matrix of G (with self-loops) and D is the in-degree matrix, we can
ensure that ПҒvvвҖІ вҲҲ [0, 1] for each v Мё= v вҖІ :
                                         n
                                         X                                    |Nv вҲ© NvвҖІ |
                             ПҒvvвҖІ =              Avu AvвҖІ u = p                                   вүӨ 1,                (62)
                                         u=1                                  deg(v) deg(v вҖІ )

where Nv is the set of vertices with an incoming edge to v вҲҲ [n].
This immediately gives a bound maxJ cJ вүӨ n2 . Finally, it is also worth noting that cJ does not
vanish under the above normalization, since adding self-loops before the normalization to G ensures
that ПҒvv = 1 for all v вҲҲ [n] even if v was an isolated vertex in the original graph. Therefore, without
loss of generality, we can assume that cJ вҲҲ Оҳ(1).
It is possible to use a different normalization, such as the Laplacian, as long as one can ensure that
ПҒvvвҖІ , cJ = Оҳ(1). The requirement that rows of A sums to 1 is also not strictly necessary but does
greatly simplify our exposition.

Note that we are not claiming a complete orthonormal basis for the space  L2 (RnГ—d , N nГ—d ). How-
ever, all of the functions we care about will lie in H(d) := span HJA JвҲҲNd . For a fixed n and
a function f вҲҲ H(d) , we define fЛҶJ = вҹЁf, HJA вҹ©L2 (N ) and the degree m part of f : f [m] (X) =
          fЛҶJ H A (X).
P
  |J|=m       J

Facts about gradients of Hermite polynomial also carry over to invariant Hermite polynomials:
Lemma 18. For a fixed graph G on n vertices and corresponding A, we have:
                            Pn p
   1. вҲӮXвҲӮ vj HM
              A
                (X) = вҲҡ1n vвҖІ =1 Mj HM вҲ’Ej ((AX)vвҖІ )AvвҖІ v , for all v вҲҲ [n], j вҲҲ [d], M вҲҲ
      Nd , where Ej is the vector with 1 at the j вҖІ -th position and 0 everywhere else.
                      A
      2. EXвҲјN nГ—d [вҹЁвҲҮHM (X), вҲҮHLA (X)вҹ©] = ОҙM =L В· |M |cM .

      3. EXвҲјN nГ—d [вҹЁвҲҮl HM
                        A
                          (X), вҲҮl HLA (X)вҹ©] = ОҙM =L В· |M |(|M | вҲ’ 1) . . . (|M | вҲ’ l + 1)cM .
                            Pn                |M |
In the above, cM = nвҲ’1          v вҖІ ,v вҖІвҖІ =1 ПҒv вҖІ v вҖІвҖІ .


                                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof.          1. We have:
                                                      n
                               вҲӮ    A        1 X
                                   HM (X) = вҲҡ     (вҲҮHM ((AX)vвҖІ ))j AvвҖІ v                                                        (63)
                              вҲӮXvj            n вҖІ
                                                    v =1
                                                      n
                                              1     X        p
                                            =вҲҡ                    Mj HM вҲ’Ej ((AX)vвҖІ )AvвҖІ v ,                                    (64)
                                               n
                                                    v вҖІ =1

         where Ej вҖІ is the vector with 1 at the j вҖІ -th position and 0 everywhere else. The second
         equality is a known fact for the multivariate Hermite polynomials (See Appendix C of
         Diakonikolas et al. (2020)).
     2. Sum the above over all pairs v, v вҖІ and take expectation to get:
                          A
           EXвҲјN nГ—d [вҹЁвҲҮHM   (X), вҲҮHLA (X)вҹ©]                                           (65)
                               пЈ®                                                      пЈ№
             n X d                 n
            X       1             X
          =           EXвҲјN nГ—d пЈ°      (вҲҮHM ((AX)vвҖІ ))j AvвҖІ v (вҲҮHL ((AX)vвҖІвҖІ ))j AvвҖІвҖІ v пЈ» .
            v=1 j=1
                    n            вҖІ вҖІвҖІ  v ,v =1
                                                                                                                                (66)

         By the orthogonality property of Hermite multivariate polynomial under dependent multi-
         variate Gaussian (equation 60), we can compute:
                                                                                                   |M |вҲ’1
                      EXвҲјN nГ—d [HM вҲ’Ej ((AX)vвҖІ )HLвҲ’Ej ((AX)vвҖІвҖІ )] = ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ ОҙM =L ,                                             (67)
         and,
                                                                  n                                                  d
                       A                               1          X                               |M |вҲ’1
                                                                                                                     X
          EXвҲјN nГ—d [вҹЁвҲҮHM (X), вҲҮHLA (X)вҹ©] =                                    AvвҖІ v AvвҖІвҖІ v ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ ОҙM =L                   Mj
                                                       n
                                                             v,v вҖІ ,v вҖІвҖІ =1                                          j=1
                                                                                              (68)
                                                                  n           n
                                                             |M | X   |M |вҲ’1
                                                                             X
                                                   = ОҙM =L В·         ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ     AvвҖІ v AvвҖІвҖІ v (69)
                                                              n вҖІ вҖІвҖІ         v=1
                                                                               v ,v =1
                                                                                   n
                                                                      |M |       X             |M |
                                                   = ОҙM =L В·                                  ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ .                         (70)
                                                                       n
                                                                               v вҖІ ,v вҖІвҖІ =1


     3. Recursively apply the first part to get:
                          вҲӮl
                                         H G (X)                                                                                (71)
                 вҲӮXv1 j1 , . . . , Xvl jl M
                           пЈ«               vпЈ«             пЈ¶ пЈ¶
                                                   p
                      n           l
                                           u
                  1  X         Y           u     X
                =вҲҡ                  AvвҖІ vp tпЈӯM вҲ’     EjpвҖІ пЈё пЈё HM вҲ’Pl ejp ((AX)vвҖІ ).                                             (72)
                           пЈ¬               u                пЈ·
                   n вҖІ
                           пЈӯ                                       p=1
                       v =1    p=1               вҖІ  p =1
                                                                       jp


         Summing indices and passing through the expectation to get:
                   EXвҲјN nГ—d [вҹЁвҲҮl HM  A
                                       (X), вҲҮl HLA (X)вҹ©]                                                                        (73)
                         пЈ«          пЈ«                пЈ¶ пЈ¶
                                              p                                 n
                                                                                                          !l
                   ОҙM =L пЈ¬   X             X           пЈ·X                       X                               |M |вҲ’l
                 =                  пЈӯM вҲ’        EjpвҖІ пЈё пЈё                              AvвҖІ v AvвҖІвҖІ v             ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ          (74)
                     n
                         пЈӯ
                           j ,...,j         вҖІ
                                            p =1         вҖІ вҖІвҖІ      v ,v         v=1
                               1   l
                                                             jp
                                                                  n
                                                              1 X |M |
                 =ОҙM =L |M |(|M | вҲ’ 1) . . . (|M | вҲ’ l) В·            ПҒvвҖІ vвҖІвҖІ .                                                  (75)
                                                              n вҖІ вҖІвҖІ
                                                                  v ,v =1


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   A
Corollary 19. Fix k, d, e вҲҲ N. Let p, q be linear combinations of HM : Rd вҶ’ R with M вҲҲ Nd
varying among all multi-indices of size k = |M |. Then,
                            вҲҮk p(X), вҲҮk q(X) = k! В· EXвҲјN nГ—d [p(X)q(X)].                                          (76)

                                        A                                                 A
                        P                                                   P
Proof. Let p(X) =         M :|M |=k bM HM (X) and q(X) =                      K:|K|=k fK HK (X). Then:
                                                                         X
                                EXвҲјN nГ—d [p(X)q(X)] =                              fM bM cM ,                     (77)
                                                                       M :|M |=k

                                   Pn              |M |
where as before, cM = nвҲ’1            v вҖІ ,v вҖІвҖІ =1 ПҒv вҖІ v вҖІвҖІ .

From the previous lemma,
                                               пЈ®*                                                            +пЈ№
                                                          X                              X
 вҹЁвҲҮk p(X), вҲҮk q(X)вҹ© = EXвҲјN nГ—d пЈ°                                   bM вҲҮk HM
                                                                          A
                                                                            (X),                 fM вҲҮk HK
                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                          (X) пЈ» (78)
                                                     M :|M |=k                         K:|K|=k
                                      X
                            =                          bM fM k!ОҙM =K cM                                           (79)
                                M,K:|M |=|K|=k
                                     X
                            = k!                bM fM cM                                                          (80)
                                   M :|M |=k

                            = k! В· EXвҲјN nГ—d [p(X)q(X)].                                                           (81)



E.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

The proof of Theorem 4 is derived from the construction in Diakonikolas et al. (2020). Hence, much
of the setup will be taken from their construction. However, care must be taken to use the proper
invariant Hermite polynomial basis we derived in the previous subsection. For completeness, we
extend their formalism here as needed and note where proofs are directly derived from their work.
We first verify that the orthogonal system of invariant Hermite polynomial subsumes 1-hidden-layer
GNNs. We formally show this below to continue the proof later on       in the basis of the invariant
Hermite polynomials. As a reminder, we defined H(d) := span HJA JвҲҲNd .
Lemma 20 (Inner product decomposition). For every k вҲҲ N and G вҲҲ Gn , FGd,k вҠӮ H(d) .

                                                                               P2k
Proof. Pick f вҲҲ FGd,k , with a corresponding W and a. Let g : Rd вҶ’ R : x 7вҶ’ c=1 ac Пғ(вҹЁx, wc вҹ©)
                                                             Pn
where wc is the c-th column of W . Then we have f (X) = v=1 g((AX)v ) where the subscript
represents the row of the corresponding matrix. Since ПҒ вҲҲ L2 (N ), g is in L2 (N ) and we can write
uniquely:                                     X
                                      g(x) =       gМӮJ HJ (x).                                 (82)
                                                                JвҲҲNd

Therefore,
                n                     n X
                X                     X                                         X          вҲҡ
      f (X) =         g((AX)v ) =                      gМӮJ HJ ((AX)v ) =               (gМӮJ n)HJA (X) вҲҲ H(d) .    (83)
                v=1                   v=1 JвҲҲNd                                  JвҲҲNd


Now we verify that the special function fG in our construction of the family of hard functions has
vanishing low degree moments:
Lemma 21 (Low degree moment vanishes). For any k вҲҲ N, for any G and appropriate A, fG вҲҲ
H(2) . Furthermore, (fЛҶG )J = 0 for every |J| < k.


                                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The first part follows from specializing Lemma 20 for d = 2. The second part follows from
the fact that the corresponding g function in the proof of Lemma 20 for f is the function fПҶ,Пғ in
Diakonikolas et al. (2020), whose low degree moments vanish.

It is also easy to verify that CGB вҠӮ FGd,k :
Lemma 22. For any k, d, n вҲҲ N, for some activation Пғ that is not a low-degree polynomial, CGB вҠӮ
FGd,k .

Proof. Pick B вҲҲ B arbitrarily and let h(X) = fG (XB). We have:
               h(X) = fG (XB) = 1вҠӨ          вҲ—   вҲ—   вҠӨ         вҲ—    вҲ—
                                 n Пғ (A(XB)W ) a = 1n Пғ (AX(BW )) a .                                         (84)

Since BW вҲ— is in RdГ—2k and aвҲ— is in R2k , we have h вҲҲ FGd,k . Functions in FkB also do not vanish, as
long as A does not have vanishing rank and the activation function Пғ is not a low-degree polynomial,
by the same argument as in Diakonikolas et al. (2020).

From Diakonikolas et al. (2020), we know the following facts about matrices in RdГ—2 :
Lemma 23 (Lemma 4.7 in Diakonikolas et al. (2020)). Fix c вҲҲ (0, 21 ). Then there is a set S вҠӮ RdГ—2
                     c                                                 1
of size at least 2в„Ұ(d ) such that for each A, B вҲҲ S, вҲҘAвҠӨ BвҲҘ2 вүӨ O(dcвҲ’ 2 ).
The following Lemma generalizes Lemma 4.6 in Diakonikolas et al. (2020):
Lemma 24. Fix a function H(2) вҲӢ p : RnГ—2 вҶ’ R and U , V вҲҲ RdГ—2 such that U вҠӨ U = V вҠӨ V =
12 . Then:
                                         вҲһ
                                         X   вҲҡ             m
                 вҹЁp(В·U )p(В·V )вҹ©L2 (N ) вүӨ    2 nвҲҘU вҠӨ V вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘp[m] вҲҘ2L2 (N ) ,         (85)
                                                   m=0
where p[m] is the degree m part of p.

Proof. Let f, g : RnГ—d вҶ’ R be defined as f (X) = p(XU ) and g(X) := p(XV ). Let f [m] , g [m]
and p[m] be the degree m part of the corresponding function.
From Corollary 19,
      вҲһ                                      вҲһ
     X    1                                 X
             вҹЁвҲҮm f [m] (X), вҲҮm g [m] (X)вҹ© =     EXвҲјN nГ—d [f [m] (X)g [m] (X)]                                 (86)
     m=0
         m!                                 m=0
                                                    = EXвҲјN nГ—d [f (X)g(X)]                                    (87)
                                                    = EXвҲјN nГ—2 [p(XU )p(XV )]                                 (88)
                                                      XвҲһ
                                                    =    EXвҲјN nГ—2 [p[m] (XU )p[m] (XV )]                      (89)
                                                        m=0
                                                         вҲһ
                                                        X   1
                                                    =          вҹЁвҲҮm
                                                                 Xp
                                                                   [m]
                                                                       (XU ), вҲҮm
                                                                               Xp
                                                                                 [m]
                                                                                     (XV )вҹ©.                  (90)
                                                        m=0
                                                            m!
Fix m вҲҲ R, for each indices v1 , . . . , vm вҲҲ [n], s1 , . . . , sm вҲҲ [d], in Einstein notation,
    (вҲӮv1 ,s1 . . . вҲӮvm ,sm f [m] )(X)(вҲӮv1 ,s1 . . . вҲӮvm ,sm g [m] )(X)                                        (91)
                         [m]                               [m]
  =вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm p     (XU )вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                         вҖІ p     (XV )Us1 j1 . . . Usm jm Vs1 j1вҖІ . . . Vsm jm
                                                                                                             вҖІ (92)
                                                                                                              (93)

Taking the sum over all v1 , . . . , vm вҲҲ [n], s1 , . . . , sm вҲҲ [d], while still in Einstein notation, to get:
      |вҹЁвҲҮm
         Xp
            [m]
                (XU ), вҲҮm
                        Xp
                          [m]
                              (XV )вҹ©|                                                                         (94)
   =|вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm p[m] (XU )вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                          вҖІ p
                                                              [m]
                                                                  (XV )(U вҠӨ V )j1 j1вҖІ . . . (U вҠӨ V )jm jm
                                                                                                        вҖІ |   (95)
                                 вҲҡ
   вүӨ2m вҲҘвҲҮm  Xp
                  [m]
                      (XU )вҲҘ22 В· nm вҲҘU вҠӨ V вҲҘm       2                                                         (96)
                                          вҲҡ                   m
   =m! В· EXвҲјN nГ—d [(p[m] (X))2 ] В· 2 nвҲҘU вҠӨ V вҲҘ2 ,                                                             (97)


                                                          30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                          q
where we used 3-variable Cauchy-Schwarz inequality |aijk bijk cijk | вүӨ                        a2iвҖІ j вҖІ kвҖІ b2iвҖІвҖІ j вҖІвҖІ kвҖІвҖІ c2iвҖІвҖІвҖІ j вҖІвҖІвҖІ kвҖІвҖІвҖІ to
obtain the inequality and Corollary 19 to obtain the last line.

Notice that in the previous derivation, inequality only occurs at the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality step.
We can do a more careful analysis to get:
Corollary 25. In the same setting as Lemma 24, we have:
    вҹЁp(В·U )p(В·V )вҹ©L2 (N )                                                                                                            (98)
    вҲһ             n              2
    X   1         X              X
=                                                 вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm p[m] (XU )вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                                                                       вҖІ p
                                                                                                           [m]
                                                                                                               (XV )(U вҠӨ V )j1 j1вҖІ . . . (U вҠӨ V )jm jm
                                                                                                                                                     вҖІ .
        m!
    m=0    v ,...,v =1
              1    m     j1 ,j1вҖІ ,...,jm ,jm
                                           вҖІ =1

                                                                                                                                     (99)

As the last ingredient, we need the following lemma that connects the family of hard functions to
lower bounds on CSQ algorithms:
Lemma 26 (Lemma 15 of Diakonikolas et al. (2020)). Let X be the input space and D some
distribution over X . For a finite set of functions C = {f : X вҶ’ R}, define:
                                                     X
                                   ПҒ(C) := 1/|C|2        вҹЁf, gвҹ©L2 (D) .           (100)
                                                                f,gвҲҲC

The correlational statistical query dimension is defined as:
                  SDA(C, D, П„ ) := max{m | ПҒ(CвҖІ ) вүӨ П„, вҲҖCвҖІ вҠӮ C, |CвҖІ |/|C| вүҘ 1/m}.                                                  (101)

Suppose that SDA(C, D, П„ ) вүҘ m for some C, D, П„ and m, then there is a small enough Пө such
that any CSQ algorithm that queries from an oracle of f вҲҲ C and learn a hypothesis h вҲҲ C withвҲҡ
вҹЁf вҲ’ hвҹ©L2 (D) вүӨ Пө either requires в„Ұ(m) queries or at least one query with precision more than П„ .

We can now proceed to the proof of the main theorem:
Theorem 27. Any correlational SQ algorithm that, for every concept g вҲҲ CGB learns a hypothesis
                                                                       в„Ұ(1)
h such that вҲҘg вҲ’ hвҲҘL2 (N ) вүӨ Пө for some small Пө > 0 requires either 2d      queries or queries of
                                в„Ұ(1)
                   вҲ’kв„Ұ(1)    вҲ’d
tolerance at most d       +2         .

Proof. This proof mirrors that in Diakonikolas et al. (2020). Fix c вҲҲ (0, 1/2). To upper bound
pairwise correlation between different functions in CGB , consider for any Bi Мё= Bj вҲҲ B:
                                                            вҲһ
                                                            X      вҲҡ                   [m]
                  вҹЁfG (В·Bi ), fG (В·Bj )вҹ©L2 (N ) вүӨ                (2 nвҲҘBiвҠӨ Bj вҲҘ2 )m В· вҲҘfG вҲҘ2L2 (N )                                 (102)
                                                            m=0
                                                             вҲһ
                                                            X       вҲҡ                   [m]
                                                        =         (2 nвҲҘBiвҠӨ Bj вҲҘ2 )m В· вҲҘfG вҲҘ2L2 (N )                                (103)
                                                            m>k
                                                                            вҲһ
                                                            вҲҡ               X   [m]
                                                        вүӨ (2 nвҲҘBiвҠӨ Bj вҲҘ2 )k   вҲҘfG вҲҘ2L2 (N )                                        (104)
                                                                                   m>k

                                                        вүӨ O(dk(cвҲ’1/2) )вҲҘfG вҲҘ2L2 (N ) .                                             (105)

In the above derivation, the first line uses Lemma 24; the second line uses Lemma 21; and the
last two lines use Lemma 23 and the fact that we can choose an appropriate parameter to make
вҲҘBiвҠӨ Bj вҲҘ2 < 1. Dividing both sides by вҲҘfG вҲҘL2 (N ) gives
                                                    B
                                        вҹЁgGBi , gG j вҹ©L2 (N ) вүӨ O(dk(cвҲ’1/2) ).                                                     (106)


Now, since BiвҠӨ Bi = 12 , we have вҲҘfG (В·Bi )вҲҘL2 (N ) = вҲҘfG вҲҘL2 (N ) and therefore вҲҘgGBi вҲҘL2 (N ) = 1.


                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     B
We are in a position to apply Lemma 26. Let П„ := maxBi Мё=Bj вҹЁgGBi , gG j вҹ©L2 (N ) . Computing average
pairwise correlation of CGB yields:
                         ПҒ(CGB ) = 1/|B| + (|B| вҲ’ 1)П„ /(2|B|) вүӨ 1/|B| + П„.                             (107)
                                                                            c
Finally, setting П„ вҖІ := 1/|B| + П„ gives SDA(CB       вҖІ
                                             G, N , П„ ) = 2
                                                            в„Ұ(d )
                                                                  and an application of Lemma 26
                           d,k
completes the proof for FG .
To get the proof for Fnd,k , by law of total expectation:
                       E(X,G)вҲјN Г—E [fn (XBi , G)fn (XBj , G)]                                          (108)
                   = |EE EN Г—E [fn (XBi , G)fn (XBj , G)|G]|                                           (109)
                      X
                   вүӨ      PrE (G) |EN [fG (XBi )fG (XBj )]|                                            (110)
                       GвҲҲGn
                                                           вҲҡ
                       X
                   вүӨ          PrE (G) В·         max (2          nвҲҘBiвҠӨ Bj вҲҘ2 )k       В· вҲҘfG вҲҘ2L2 (N )   (111)
                                              Bi Мё=Bj вҲҲB
                       GвҲҲGn

                   вүӨO(dk(cвҲ’1/2) )вҲҘfn вҲҘ2L2 (N Г—E) ,                                                     (112)
where in the third line, we use the fact that fG (Z) = fn (Z, G) and triangle inequality; in the
fourth line, we use Eq. (105) and in the last line, we use another instance of total expectation to get
вҲҘfn вҲҘL2 (N Г—E) = EGвҲјE вҲҘfG вҲҘL2 (N ) . It is worth pointing out that the only instance of G for which we
cannot apply Eq. (105) in the fourth line (assuming we use the normalized Laplacian as A(G)) is
when G is the empty graph. However, in that case, вҲҘfG вҲҘL2 (N ) = 0 since fG вүЎ 0 and the inequality
in the fourth line still holds.
Lastly, proceed identically to the proof for FGd,k to use Lemma 26 and get the final bound.

F     F RAME -AVERAGING HARDNESS PROOFS
Frame averaging. Let G be a subgroup of the permutation group Sn that acts on RnГ—d by per-
muting the rows and e its identity element. Let ПҒ : G вҶ’ GL(n) with ПҒ(g) the representation of g as
a matrix in RnГ—n . For any group element g вҲҲ G and X вҲҲ RnГ—d , we will write gX as a shorthand
for ПҒ(g)X where the product is matrix multiplication. A frame is a function F : RnГ—d вҶ’ 2G \{вҲ…}
satisfying F(gX) = gF(X) set-wise. For given frames F, we will show a hardness result for the
following class of functions:
            (
                                                1       X
    HF := f : RnГ—d вҶ’ R with f (X) = p                        aвҠӨ Пғ(W вҠӨ (g вҲ’1 X))1d |
                                              |F(X)| gвҲҲF (X)
                                                                                      )
                                                                                 W вҲҲ RnГ—k , a вҲҲ Rk ,   (113)

for given nonlinearity Пғ that is not a polynomial of low degree.

F.1   E XPONENTIAL LOWER BOUND FOR CONSTANT FRAME AND R EYNOLDS OPERATOR

Lemma 28 (Constant frame must be whole group). If F(X) is a constant function, i.e. F(X) is
independent of X, then F(X) = G вҲҖX.

Proof. When F(X) is a constant function, say F вҠҶ G for all X, then the frame property mandates
that F Мё= вҲ… and there is some f вҲҲ F . The frame property also tells us that since f вҲ’1 вҲҲ G (and G
is a group), f вҲ’1 F = F and thus e вҲҲ F . Pick any element g вҲҲ G and observe that since e вҲҲ F and
gF = F , g must also be in F . As this is true for all elements g вҲҲ G, F must be the whole group G
itself.

In the following, we will therefore assume that G is a polynomial-sized (in n) subgroup of Sn . We
will slightly modify Lemma 17 of (Diakonikolas et al., 2020) to show:


                                                           32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 29. For any 0 < c < 1/2, and small Пө вҲҲ (0, 1), for any polynomial-sized subset F вҠӮ Sn ,
                                       c
there exists a set B вҖІ of at least 2в„Ұ(n ) /|F |2 matrices in RnГ—2 such that for each pair B, B вҖІ вҲҲ B вҖІ
                  вҖІ
and for each g, g вҲҲ F , it holds that:

      1. (gB)вҠӨ (gB) = I;

      2. вҲҘ(gB)вҠӨ (g вҖІ B вҖІ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ) when B Мё= B вҖІ ; and

                     вҖІ       вҠӨ вҖІ            a1 b1
      3. when g Мё= g , (gB) (g B))ij =:              where bi вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ) and,
                                             b2 a2
                                                Fg,gвҖІ
                                          ai вҲ’ вҲҡ         вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ),                            (114)
                                              n 1вҲ’Пө
                                           вҲҡ      Fg,gвҖІ
                                       ai вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Пө        вүҘ вҲ’O(ncвҲ’1/2 ),                           (115)
                                                     n
          for i вҲҲ [2]. Here Fg,gвҖІ is the number of fixed points of g вҲ’1 g вҖІ (number of cycles of length
          one).

The proof is delayed to App. F.3 for a more streamlined read.

Family of hard functions. Recall the low-dimensional function from the proof of Theorem 4:
                          вҲ—
                         fexp : R2Г—d вҶ’ R with f (X) = (aвҲ— )вҠӨ Пғ((W вҲ— )вҠӨ X)1d                           (116)
for some special parameter aвҲ— вҲҲ R2k and W вҲ— вҲҲ R2Г—2k in Eq. (11). We now define the family of
hard functions, indexed by a set of matrices B вҠӮ RnГ—2 obtained from Lemma 29:
                                                     вҲ—      вҠӨ вҲ’1
                                              P
                                                gвҲҲG fexp (B g    X)
          n                                                                         o
      B
    CF = gB : R    nГ—d
                       вҶ’ R with gB (X) =         q                  | B вҲҲ B вҖІ вҠӮ RnГ—2 . (117)
                                                           вҲ— вҲҘ
                                                   |G| В· вҲҘfexp N

Theorem 30. For any feature dimension d = Оҳ(1) and width parameter k = Оҳ(n). Let G be
                                                                                            в„Ұ(1)
a subgroup of Sn with |G| = Оҳ(poly(n)). Pick a set B вҖІ4 вҠӮ RnГ—2 of size at least 2в„Ұ(d ) /|G|2
                                                                                     BвҖІ
according to Lemma 29 and normalize each function in the hard function family CF        to have вҲҘ В· вҲҘN
                                                                              вҖІ
              вҖІ                                                             B
norm 1. Let Пө > 0 be a sufficiently small error constant. Then for any g вҲҲ CF , any CSQ algorithm
                                              BвҖІ
that queries from oracles of concept f вҲҲ CF      and outputs a hypothesis h with вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ ПөвҖІ
                  в„Ұ(1)                                                          в„Ұ(1)     p
requires either 2n /|G|2 queries or at least one query with precision |G|2вҲ’n          + |G|nвҲ’в„Ұ(k) .

Proof. First we review properties of the constructed objects. By Lemma 29, gB and g вҖІ B вҖІ are almost
orthogonal for any B Мё= B вҖІ вҲҲ B вҖІ and g, g вҖІ вҲҲ G.
Then by Theorem 27 with matrix A = Id , for any B Мё= B вҖІ вҲҲ B вҖІ and any g, g вҖІ вҲҲ G, noting that
B вҠӨ (g вҲ’1 X) = (gB)вҠӨ X since a permutation matrix is orthonormal, we have
                          вҲ—
                  |EXвҲјN [fexp ((gB)вҠӨ X)fexp
                                        вҲ—
                                            ((g вҖІ B вҖІ )вҠӨ X)]| вүӨ O(nk(cвҲ’1/2) )вҲҘfexp
                                                                               вҲ—
                                                                                   вҲҘ2N ,              (118)
for the same c that was chosen in the statement of Lemma 29.
                                                                        вҖІ
Now we verify that вҲҘgB вҲҘN = в„Ұ(1) for each gB вҲҲ CFBA(G) . Let B = [x                            y] and Bg :=
gB, BgвҖІ := (g вҖІ )B.
          вҲҘgB вҲҘ2N                                                                                     (119)
                            пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
                                                                        вҲ—
              1                     вҲ—
                                X (fexp (BgвҠӨ X))2            X         fexp ((BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                                                                       вҲ—
                                                                                         (BgвҠӨвҖІ X)
      =     вҲ— вҲҘ2
                  EXвҲјN пЈ°                              +                                           пЈ»   (120)
          вҲҘfexp N                            |G|                                   |G|
                              gвҲҲG                          gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG
                   1            X              вҲ—
                                                   (BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                                           вҲ—
                                                               (BgвҠӨвҖІ X)

      =1 +         вҲ— вҲҘ2
                                         EXвҲјN fexp                                                    (121)
              |G|вҲҘfexp N     gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG

  4
    The different notation highlights the fact that we are using a slightly different set of matrices from
Lemma 23 and (Diakonikolas et al., 2020).


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we split the sum into two parts. In the first part, we examine            вҲҡ        g Мё= g вҖІ such that
             вҖІ            вҖІ
max(|вҹЁgx, g xвҹ©|, |вҹЁgy, g yвҹ©|) < c1 for some constant 0 < c1 < 1/ 3, and leave the remaining
cases for the other part. Collect the pairs g, g вҖІ in the first part into a set G1 . Then

                                    1                  X              вҲ—
                                                                          (BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                                                                  вҲ—
                                                                                      (BgвҠӨвҖІ X)

                                    вҲ— вҲҘ2
                                                                EXвҲјN fexp                                             (122)
                               |G|вҲҘfexp N          gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG1
                                  1                    X              вҲ—
                                                                          (BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                                                                  вҲ—
                                                                                      (BgвҠӨвҖІ X)

                         вүӨ        вҲ— вҲҘ2
                                                                EXвҲјN fexp                                             (123)
                             |G|вҲҘfexp N           gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG1
                              1        X
                         вүӨ                       вҲҘBgвҠӨ BgвҖІ вҲҘk2 ,                                                       (124)
                             |G|
                                     gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG
                                                             вҲ—
where k is the number of neurons in the hidden layer of fexp   . The second line comes from the
triangle inequality and the last line comes from Theorem 27.
We have,
                       вҲҘBgвҠӨ BgвҖІ вҲҘk2 вүӨ вҲҘBgвҠӨ BgвҖІ вҲҘkF                                                                    (125)
                                                   2                вҖІ        2   вҖІ   2 k/2

                                         = 2z + вҹЁgx, (g )xвҹ© + вҹЁgy, (g )yвҹ©                                             (126)
                                         вүӨ 3k/2вҲ’1 (2z)k + |вҹЁgx, (g вҖІ )xвҹ©|k + |вҹЁgy, (g вҖІ )yвҹ©|k .

                                                                                                                      (127)

The last line uses power mean inequality. By our assumptions,
                                                       вҲҡ
        k/2вҲ’1
                 X
                              вҖІ    k                (c1 3)k                    вҲҡ
       3              |вҹЁgx, (g )xвҹ©| < |G|(|G| вҲ’ 1)            < |G|(|G| вҲ’ 1)(c1 3)k                                   (128)
                   вҖІ
                                                       3
                     gМё=g вҲҲG

                                                  вҖІ
                                                                                     вҲҡ
and similarly 3k/2вҲ’1                                   k
                                                                                         3)k .
                             P
                                gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG |вҹЁgy, (g )yвҹ©| вүӨ |G|(|G| вҲ’ 1)(c1

Plugging back,

              1                X               вҲ—                                      вҲҡ
                                                   (BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                                           вҲ—
                                                               (BgвҠӨвҖІ X) вүӨ (|G| вҲ’ 1)(c1 3)k .

              вҲ— вҲҘ2
                                         EXвҲјN fexp                                                                    (129)
         |G|вҲҘfexp N       gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG1


Since |G| = poly(n) and k = Оҳ(n), the final expression is o(1) in n.
We now consider the remaining part which is reproduced here:
                    1          X                 вҲ—
                                                   ((gB)вҠӨ X)fexp
                                                             вҲ—
                                                                 ((g вҖІ B)вҠӨ X)

                     вҲ—  2              EXвҲјN fexp                                                                      (130)
              |G|вҲҘfexp вҲҘN     вҖІ   2      gМё=g вҲҲG \G1


Zooming in, we have:
     X                 вҲ—
                         (BgвҠӨ X)fexp
                                 вҲ—
                                     (BgвҠӨвҖІ X)

             EXвҲјN fexp                                                                                                (131)
    gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG2 \G1
                      вҲһ           d                      2
        X            X   1      X                        X
=
                         m! v ,...,v =1
    gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG2 \G1   m=0         1       m       j1 ,j1вҖІ ,...,jm ,jm
                                                                   вҖІ =1

                                       вҲ—                                     вҲ—
               вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm (fexp )[m] (В·)вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                                        вҖІ (f
                                                                             exp )
                                                                                  [m]
                                                                                      (В·)(BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )j1 j1вҖІ . . . (BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )jm jm
                                                                                                                              вҖІ

                                                                                                                      (132)
                     вҲһ          d                        2
        X            X 1      X                          X
=
                       m! v ,...,v =1
    gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲG2 \G1 m=k           1       m       j1 ,j1вҖІ ,...,jm ,jm
                                                                   вҖІ =1

                                       вҲ—                                     вҲ—
               вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm (fexp )[m] (В·)вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                                        вҖІ (f
                                                                             exp )
                                                                                  [m]
                                                                                      (В·)(BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )j1 j1вҖІ . . . (BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )jm jm
                                                                                                                              вҖІ ,

                                                                                                                      (133)


                                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second line comes from Corollary 25 and the last line is because all low-degree moment
    вҲ—
of fexp vanishes.
Further zooming in, for each g Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ G2 \G1 , each m вүҘ k and each v1 , . . . , vm вҲҲ [2], denote
                                                                                                  m
                              вҲ—
pJ as вҲӮv1 ,J1 . . . вҲӮvm ,Jm (fexp )[m] (В·) for each J вҲҲ [2]m , and the corresponding vector p вҲҲ R2 . We
have, using Einstein notation to sum over j1 , . . . jm , j1вҖІ , . . . , jm
                                                                         вҖІ
                                                                           :
                        вҲ—                                     вҲ—
вҲӮv1 ,j1 . . . вҲӮvm ,jm (fexp )[m] (В·)вҲӮv1 ,j1вҖІ . . . вҲӮvm ,jm
                                                         вҖІ (f
                                                             exp )
                                                                  [m]
                                                                      (В·)(BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )j1 j1вҖІ . . . (BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )jm jm      вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                                                                                              вҖІ , = p (B Bg вҖІ )
                                                                                                                          g
                                                                                                                               вҠ—m
                                                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                                    (134)

By Corollary 43, it suffices to show that C := BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ satisfies z вҠӨ Cz вүҘ 0 for all z вҲҲ R2 . However,
note that by concentration results of Lemma 29, for any small Пө вҲҲ (0, 1),

                                               вҲҡ

                                                                   FМ„g,gвҖІ
                              вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ© вҲҲ    1 вҲ’ ПөFМ„g,gвҖІ вҲ’ Оҙx , вҲҡ        + Оҙx                               (135)
                                                                    1вҲ’Пө
                                             вҲҡ

                                                                   FМ„g,g вҖІ
                              вҹЁgy, g вҖІ yвҹ© вҲҲ    1 вҲ’ ПөFМ„g,gвҖІ вҲ’ Оҙy , вҲҡ        + Оҙy                               (136)
                                                                    1вҲ’Пө
                              вҹЁgx, g вҖІ yвҹ© = Пө1                                                                (137)
                                        вҖІ
                              вҹЁgy, g xвҹ© = Пө2 ,                                                                (138)

for Оҙx , Оҙy вүҘ 0, max(Оҙx , Оҙy , |Пө1 |, |Пө2 |) < O(ncвҲ’1/2 ) and FМ„g,gвҖІ = Fg,gвҖІ /n with Fg,gвҖІ denotes the
number of fixed points of g вҲ’1 g вҖІ as in Lemma 29. Note that 1 вүҘ FМ„g,gвҖІ > c1 is bounded away
вҲҡ 0 (by definition of G1 and concentration result in Lemma 29). Choose Пө small enough that
from
  1 вҲ’ ПөFМ„g,gвҖІ =: c2 , c2 вҲ’ Оҙx , c2 вҲ’ Оҙy are all bounded away from 0 when n is large enough. Thus, for
any z вҲҲ R2 ,

              z вҠӨ Cz вүҘ z12 (c2 вҲ’ Оҙx ) + z22 (c2 вҲ’ Оҙy ) + z1 z2 (Пө1 + Пө2 )                                     (139)
                                                        2
                                                                          (Пө1 + Пө2 )2

                                            Пө1 + Пө2            2
                     = (c2 вҲ’ Оҙx ) z1 вҲ’              z2 + z2 c2 вҲ’ Оҙy вҲ’                   ,                     (140)
                                           c2 вҲ’ Оҙx                         c2 вҲ’ Оҙx

which is clearly nonnegative for large enough n as c2 is bounded away from 0. We conclude that
pвҠӨ (BgвҠӨ BgвҖІ )вҠ—m p is nonnegative and thus removing these terms leads to a lower bound on вҲҘgB вҲҘ2N .
For pairwise correlation, we have:

                                   1            X
                                                   вҲ—
       |вҹЁgB , gB вҖІ вҹ©N | вүӨ            вҲ—   2 EXвҲјN   fexp ((gB)вҠӨ X)fexp
                                                                 вҲ—
                                                                     ((g вҖІ B вҖІ )вҠӨ X)                          (141)
                            |G| В· вҲҘfexp вҲҘN      вҖІ      g,g вҲҲG
                                   1       X
                                                             вҲ—
                        вүӨ            вҲ—   2             EXвҲјN fexp ((gB)вҠӨ X)fexp
                                                                           вҲ—
                                                                               ((g вҖІ B вҖІ )вҠӨ X)                (142)
                            |G| В· вҲҘfexp вҲҘN вҖІ  g,g вҲҲG

                        вүӨ O(nk(cвҲ’1/2) )|G|.                                                                   (143)

Now we replace each gB by its normalization to make вҲҘgB вҲҘ2N = 1. Note that this only decreases
(or increases by at most a constant factor) the correlation between different hard functions since
вҲҘgB вҲҘ2N = в„Ұ(1). We are in position to apply Lemma 26. Let П„ := maxBi Мё=Bj |вҹЁgBi , gBj вҹ©L2 (N ) |.
                                              вҖІ
Computing average pairwise correlation of CGB yields:
                                    вҖІ
                             ПҒ(CGB ) = 1/|B вҖІ | + (1 вҲ’ 1/|B вҖІ |)П„ вүӨ 2/|B вҖІ | + П„.                             (144)
                                                              вҖІ                 c
Finally, setting П„ вҖІ := 2/|B вҖІ | + П„ gives SDA(CB     вҖІ
                                                G ,N,П„ ) = 2
                                                            в„Ұ(n )
                                                                  /|G|2 and an application of
Lemma 26 completes the proof.



                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2   S UPERPOLYNOMIAL LOWER BOUNDS

Throughout, we will use the notation вҠҶk to denote a subset of size k. The technique from this part
comes mainly from (Goel et al., 2020). Define:
                                         пЈ«                                  пЈ¶
                                               X                        вҲҡ
   fS : RnГ—d вҶ’ R, where fS (X) = 1вҠӨ    d
                                         пЈӯ           ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, XS вҹ©/ k)пЈё ,           S вҠҶk [n].
                                              wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                                                                                              (145)
where ПҮ is the parity function ПҮ(w) = i wi , and XS вҲҲ X k , or alternatively XS вҲҲ RkГ—d , denotes
                                        Q
                                                  Pk
the rows of X indexed by S. Here, вҹЁw, XS вҹ© := i=1 wi (XS )i,: = w В· XS and Пғ : Rd вҶ’ Rd is an
activation function. Throughout, we will set k вүӨ log2 n so that the above network has at most O(n)
hidden nodes. For any z вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}n , let X в—Ұ z be the matrix in RnГ—d whose v-th row is zv Xv,: .
We will use the following lemma, which is a basic consequence of properties proven in Goel et al.
(2020), but include the proofs here to be self-contained.
Lemma 31. For all S Мё= T вҠҶk [n], g вҲҲ G, and z вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}n , we have:
      1. fS (g В· (X в—Ұ z)) = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fS (g В· X) = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fgвҲ’1 В·S (X).

      2. вҲҘfS вҲҘL2 (N ) вүҘ в„Ұ(eвҲ’Оҳ(k) ) and вҹЁfS , fT вҹ©L2 (N ) = 0.

Proof. Fix S Мё= T вҠҶk [n].

      1. By definition:
                                         d
                                         X      X                             вҲҡ
                              fS (X) =                   ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, (X;,j )S вҹ©/ k)                  (146)
                                         j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k

         where X:,j is the j-th column of X. G acts on the rows of X, i.e. (gX)i,: = XgвҲ’1 i,: .
         Therefore, letting the order of S be fixed, we have (gX)S = XgвҲ’1 S,: .
         We have, for any g вҲҲ G and any z вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}n :
                              d
                              X      X                                         вҲҡ
         fS (g В· (X в—Ұ z)) =                   ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, ((g В· (X в—Ұ z));,j )S вҹ©/ k)                 (147)
                              j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                              d
                              X      X                                        вҲҡ
                          =                   ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, ((X в—Ұ z);,j )gвҲ’1 В·S вҹ©/ k)                  (148)
                              j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                              d
                              X      X                                            вҲҡ
                          =                   ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, (X;,j )gвҲ’1 В·S в—Ұ zgвҲ’1 В·S вҹ©/ k)              (149)
                              j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                                          d
                                          X      X                                                        вҲҡ
                          = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)                   ПҮ(w в—Ұ zgвҲ’1 В·S )Пғ(вҹЁw в—Ұ zgвҲ’1 В·S , (X;,j )gвҲ’1 В·S вҹ©/ k)
                                          j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                                                                                                   (150)
                                          d
                                          X      X                                  вҲҡ
                          = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)                   ПҮ(w)Пғ(вҹЁw, (X;,j )gвҲ’1 В·S вҹ©/ k)            (151)
                                          j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k

                            = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fgвҲ’1 В·S (X)                                           (152)
                            = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fS (g В· X).                                           (153)
         In the above derivation, we use the definition of fS to get the first line. The second line
         comes from the fact that permuting by g, then taking the subset S is equivalent to taking
         the subset g вҲ’1 В· S. The third line comes from the fact that each element of z is a scalar.
         The fourth line comes from the fact that ПҮ(w) = ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z) В· ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (w в—Ұ zgвҲ’1 В·S ). The
         fifth line is a change of variable w 7вҶ’ w в—Ұ zgвҲ’1 В·S . Finally, the last line comes from the
         definition of fS , and noting that the dependence of fS on S only comes from which row of
         X is selected by S; thus, fgвҲ’1 В·S (X) = fS (g В· X).


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     2. We have, for any S Мё= T :
                    вҹЁfS , fT вҹ©L2 (N ) = EXвҲјL2 (N ) [fS (X)fT (X)]                                            (154)
                                        = EzвҲјUnif({вҲ’1,1}n ) EX [fS (X в—Ұ z)fT (X в—Ұ z)]                        (155)
                                        = EzвҲјUnif({вҲ’1,1}n ) EX [fS (X)fT (X)ПҮS (z)ПҮT (z)]                    (156)
                                        = EX [fS (X)fT (X)]EzвҲјUnif({вҲ’1,1}n ) [ПҮS (z)ПҮT (z)]                  (157)
                                        =0                                                                   (158)
         by sign-invariance of N and orthogonality of parity functions under Unif({вҲ’1, 1}n ).
         When S = T , the same argument as Goel et al. (2020) Theorem 3.8 shows that fS does
         not vanish.



Now, define the family of hard functions as:
                       пЈұ                                                                         пЈј
                       пЈІ                  1                                                      пЈҪ
             HS,F := fЛңS : X 7вҶ’ p
                                                           X
                                                                   fS (g В· X) | [n] вҠҮk S вҲҲ S         ,       (159)
                       пЈі               |F(X)|            gвҲҲF (X)
                                                                                                 пЈҫ

for some set S depending on F and G. The subsets in S such that these hard functions are orthogonal
will determine the size of the family of hard functions, and therefore the CSQ dimension lower
bound.
Definition 32 (Sign-invariant frame). A frame F is sign-invariant if F(X) = F(X в—Ұz) for almost
all X (under the given data distribution) and for all z вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1}n .
Lemma 33. If F is any sign-invariant frame, then there exists S with |S| вүҘ в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) )/M (n)
such that the functions in HS,F are pairwise orthogonal, where M (n) is the size of the largest
orbit of [n]

          m where m = в„Ұ(log n) under G. If moreover |F(X)| = 1 for almost all x, then
|S| = в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) ).

Proof. We have for any S Мё= T :
                                1
вҹЁfЛңS , fЛңT вҹ©L2 (N ) = EXвҲјN
                                              X
                                                      fS (g В· X)fT (g вҖІ В· X)                                 (160)
                             |F(X)|
                                       g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (X)
                                                      1             X
                = EzвҲјUnif{вҲ’1,1}n EXвҲјN                                           fS (g В· (X в—Ұ z))fT (g вҖІ В· (X в—Ұ z))
                                                  |F(X в—Ұ z)|
                                                               g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (Xв—Ұz)
                                                                                                             (161)
                                            1
                = EzвҲјUnif{вҲ’1,1}n EXвҲјN
                                      |F(X в—Ұ z)|
                            X
                                   ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fgвҲ’1 В·S (X)ПҮ(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (z)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (X)                      (162)
                             g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (Xв—Ұz)
                                            1
                = EzвҲјUnif{вҲ’1,1}n EXвҲјN
                                        |F(X)|
                           X
                                  ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)fgвҲ’1 В·S (X)ПҮ(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (z)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (X)                       (163)
                             g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (X)
                                1
                = EXвҲјN
                             |F(X)|
                                                               X
                         fgвҲ’1 В·S (X)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (X)                       EzвҲјUnif{вҲ’1,1}n ПҮgвҲ’1 В·S (z)ПҮ(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 В·T (z)
                                                           g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (X)
                                                                                                             (164)

Here, we have used that the frame is sign-invariant to replace F(X в—Ұ z) with simply F(X), and
rearrange the expectations accordingly. Now, if we have no further assumptions on F, then we


                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


require S and T to be m = в„Ұ(log n)-sized subsets in different orbits (in other words, S Мё= gT for
all g вҲҲ G). Then, by Lemma 31, g вҲ’1 S Мё= (g вҖІ )вҲ’1 T for any g and g вҖІ , and the inner expectation over z
(and therefore the entire expression) is 0. This yields a lower bound on |S| of в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) ))/M (n),
from choosing one log n-sized subset from each orbit.
If we moreover have that F has size one almost everywhere, then S Мё= T suffices to ensure orthog-
onality, and we can set |S| = nm where m = Оҳ(log n) by letting S be all Оҳ(log n)-sized subsets
of [n]. Note that if subsets are size Оҳ(log n), the hidden width of the network is polynomial and
furthermore, if m вүӨ log2 n then the width is O(n).

Remark 34. Note that the definition of frame always allows one to choose a singleton frame F(X)
for any X whose stabilizer is trivial under the action of G on RnГ—d . For any other X with nontrivial
stabilizer, since G is a subgroup of the permutation group, X must have at least 2 equal entries and
thus lies in a manifold of dimensions strictly smaller than n Г— d. Density of N thus ensures that
PrXвҲјN [|F(X)| = 1] = 1 as long as we choose the singleton frame at every X without self-
symmetry. A practical choice of frame in this case, which is also sign-invariant, is the frame F(X)
which is the set of all permutations that lexicographically sort X by absolute value. It is not hard to
see that with probability 1 under N , there is only 1 permutation that sorts X.
Remark 35. The case of sign-invariant frames includes F(X) = G, the Reynolds operator.
Corollary 36. Let F be a sign-invariant frame. For any c > 0, any CSQ algorithm that queries
from an oracle of concept f вҲҲ HS,F and outputs a hypothesis h with вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ Оҳ(1) needs at
least в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) )/M (n)) queries or at least one query with precision o(nвҲ’c/2 ).
Corollary 37. Let F be a sign-invariant singleton frame. For any c > 0, any CSQ algorithm that
queries from an oracle of concept f вҲҲ HS,F and outputs a hypothesis h with вҲҘf вҲ’ hвҲҘN вүӨ Оҳ(1)
needs at least в„Ұ(nв„Ұ(log n) ) queries or at least one query with precision o(nвҲ’c/2 ).


Proof. These corollaries are immediate applications of Theorem 4.1 and Lemma 2.6 from Goel et al.
(2020) to Lemma 33.


It remains to show that the norms of the hard functions in HS,F do not vanish. We show this below
for sign-invariance, almost surely polynomial frames.
Lemma 38. Let HS,F be the hard functions derived in Lemma 33 from the class of hard func-
tions HS in Eq. (145) (which comes from Goel et al. (2020), but with an extra input dimension).
Let E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) denote the average squared norm of functions uniformly drawn from HS and
                  S

let MH S,F
            = max Лң fS вҲҲHS,FE[fЛңS (X)2 ] denote the maximum squared norm of the hard functions
in HS,F . If MHS,F / E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) = O(poly(n)), then there exists a constant c > 0 and
                                   S
subset C вҠӮ HS,F of size |C| = в„Ұ(|HS,F |/ poly(n)) many functions whose norms are at least
c E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) .
                S


Proof. We use a second moment method argument to prove the above statement. Let the ran-
dom variable Z denote the squared norm E[(fЛңS (X))2 ] of a function drawn from the distribution
Unif(HS,F ) which is uniform over all functions in HS,F . The Paley-Zygmund inequality states
that for any given Оё вҲҲ [0, 1]
                                                              E[Z]2
                                  P(Z > ОёE[Z]) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оё)2             .                           (165)
                                                              E[Z 2 ]

The probability above calculates the portion of functions in Unif(HS,F ) which have non-vanishing
norm.
Now, we calculate the first two moments of Z over the |HS,F | = nk functions in the class where


k = Оҳ(log n) as in the construction in Goel et al. (2020). For the first moment,


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 1
                                     EXвҲјN [fЛңS (X)2 ]
                           X
EXвҲјN [Z] =                                                                                                         (166)
               |HS,F |
                         fЛңS вҲҲHS,F
                        пЈ®                                               пЈ№
                вҲ’1
              n            X        1      X
           =       EXвҲјN пЈ°                         fS (g В· X)fS (g вҖІ В· X)пЈ»               (167)
              k                  |F(X)| вҖІ
                         SвҠҶk [n]       g,g вҲҲF (X)
                        пЈ®              пЈ«                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                вҲ’1
              n              1      X       X                    X
           =       EXвҲјN пЈ°              пЈӯ          fS (X)2 +              fS (g В· X)fS (g вҖІ В· X)пЈёпЈ»
              k           |F(X)|                                 вҖІ
                                                SвҠҶk [n]       gвҲҲF (X)                  gМё=g вҲҲF (X)
                                                                                                                   (168)
                                пЈ®                                                  пЈ№
                  вҲ’1
                n              1                   X          X
           вүҘ         EXвҲјN пЈ°                                          fS (g В· X)2 пЈ»
                k           |F(X)|
                                                gвҲҲF (X) SвҠҶk [n]
                                                          пЈ®                                                         пЈ№
                             вҲ’1
                           n           X             пЈҜ 1                        X                                    пЈә
                     вҲ’                          EXвҲјN пЈҜ                                       fgвҲ’1 S (X)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (X)пЈә
                                                     пЈҜ                                                               пЈә
                           k                         пЈ° |F(X)|
                                                                          g,g вҖІ вҲҲF (X)
                                                                                                                     пЈ»
                                      SвҠҶk [n]
                                                                        g вҲ’1 SМё=(g вҖІ )вҲ’1 S
                                                                                                                   (169)
                        пЈ®                                                          пЈ№
                вҲ’1
              n              1                     X          X
           =       EXвҲјN пЈ°                                            fS (g В· X)2 пЈ»
              k           |F(X)|
                                                gвҲҲF (X) SвҠҶk [n]


                          вҲ’1
                                                                                Оҙg,gвҖІ вҲҲF (X)

                        n              X              X
                     вҲ’                                               EXвҲјN                    f вҲ’1 (X)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (X)          ,
                        k                                                        |F(X)| g S
                                      SвҠҶk [n]        g,g вҖІ вҲҲG
                                                g вҲ’1 SМё=(g вҖІ )вҲ’1 S
                                                                                                                   (170)

where in the third line, we had the inequality вүҘ since we ignore g Мё= g вҖІ such that g вҲ’1 S = (g вҖІ )вҲ’1 S
(the summands in this case is fgвҲ’1 S (X)2 вүҘ 0 so ignoring them gives a lower bound) and then use
reverse triangle inequality |a + b| вүҘ |a| вҲ’ |b|.
The first term is
                пЈ®                                                пЈ№          пЈ®           пЈ№
   вҲ’1                                                               вҲ’1
 n                   1         X         X                        n           X
        EXвҲјN пЈ°                                   fS (g В· X)2 пЈ» =       EXвҲјN пЈ°   fS (X)2 пЈ» = E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) .
 k                |F(X)|                                          k                                       S
                             gвҲҲF (X) SвҠҶk [n]                                                    SвҠҶk [n]
                                                                                                                   (171)
Now we show that the second term is 0. For a fix S вҠӮk [n], g, g вҖІ вҲҲ G such that g вҲ’1 S Мё= (g вҖІ )вҲ’1 S,
we have:

                     Оҙg,gвҖІ вҲҲF (X)

          EXвҲјN                    fgвҲ’1 S (X)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (X)
                      |F(X)|
                                          Оҙg,gвҖІ вҲҲF (Xв—Ұz)

         =EzвҲјUnif({вҲ’1,1}n ) EXвҲјN                         fgвҲ’1 S (X в—Ұ z)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (X в—Ұ z)
                                           |F(X в—Ұ z)|
                     Оҙg,gвҖІ вҲҲF (X)


         =EXвҲјN                    fgвҲ’1 S (X)f(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (X)Ez ПҮgвҲ’1 S (z)ПҮ(gвҖІ )вҲ’1 S (z)
                      |F(X)|
         =0,

where we have used the fact that the frame F is sign-invariant and the decomposition result from
Equation (1) of (Goel et al., 2020). Thus the second term is 0.


                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the second moment, we have
                                        1
                                                            E[fЛңS (X)2 ]2
                                                  X
                          E[Z 2 ] =
                                      |HS,F |
                                                fЛңS вҲҲHS,F
                                        1                                                        (172)
                                                              max E[fЛңS (X)2 ]2
                                                  X
                                 вүӨ
                                      |HS,F |               fЛңS вҲҲHS,F
                                                fЛңS вҲҲHS,F
                                    2
                                 = MH S,F
                                          .
Thus, applying Paley-Zygmund, we have
                                        E[Z]2                    2         вҲ’2
    P Z > Оё E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оё)2    2
                                              вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оё)2 E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) MH    .                (173)
                          S             E[Z ]                          S    S,F



Setting c = (1 вҲ’ Оё)2 completes the proof.
Corollary 39. Assuming that the activation is ReLU or sigmoid, the subset of non-vanishing func-
tions in HS,F is superpolynomial in n.

Proof. It suffices to show that MHS,F / E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) is O(poly(n)).
                                                              S


                                                                              eвҲ’Оҳ(k) = в„Ұ poly(n)вҲ’1

Theorem 3.8 of Goel et al. (2020) guarantees that      E[fS2 ] Unif(H ) вүҘ в„Ұ
                                                                     S
(since k = Оҳ(log n)).
To upper bound MHS,F , we uniformly bound, for each fЛңS вҲҲ HS,F ,
                         пЈ®пЈ«                                                             пЈ¶ пЈ№
                                                d                                        2
                                  1                                  вҹЁw, (g В· X:,j )S вҹ© пЈё пЈә
EXвҲјN [fЛңS (X)2 ] = EXвҲјN пЈ°пЈӯ p
                                        X      X       X
                                                             ПҮ(w)Пғ         вҲҡ
                         пЈҜ
                                                                                           пЈ»
                                |F(X)| gвҲҲF (x) j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k                  k


                                                                                                  (174)
                         пЈ®                                                                           пЈ№
                                                         d    X                                    2
                          p                       X X                         вҹЁw, (g В· X:,j )S вҹ©
                  вүӨ EXвҲјN пЈ° |F(X)|2k                                   ПҮ(w)Пғ         вҲҡ                пЈ»
                                                gвҲҲF (X) j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                                                                                       k
                                                                                                 (175)
                         пЈ®                                                                 пЈ№
                                                   d                                   2
                          p                      X X      (вҹЁw, (g В· X:,j )S вҹ©) пЈ»
                                                                  X
                  вүӨ EXвҲјN пЈ° |F(X)|2k                                                              (176)
                                                                    k
                                    gвҲҲF (X) j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k
                         пЈ®                                                 пЈ№
                          p           X X    d    X X
                  вүӨ EXвҲјN пЈ° |F(X)|2k                          (g В· X:,j )2s пЈ»                     (177)
                                                gвҲҲF (X) j=1 wвҲҲ{вҲ’1,1}k sвҲҲS
                        h                     i
                  вүӨ EXвҲјN |F(X)|3/2 22k dkx2[1] вүӨ poly(n)EX [x2[1] ]                              (178)

where x[1] is the largest entry in absolute value of X. In the above, we use Cauchy-Schwarz in-
equality for the second and fourth line, while the third line uses the fact that ReLU(x)2 вүӨ x2 for all
x вҲҲ R. Since with probability 1, |F(X)| is at most polynomial in n by our assumption, it suffices
to show that the order (either largest or smallest) statistic x[1] has small moment when X is a iid
Gaussian random vector of length n Г— d.
Bounding this moment is a classical study in concentration inequalities. By an inequality of Ta-
lagrand (Chatterjee, 2014; Talagrand, 1994), we know that Ex [x2[1] ] вҲ’ (Ex [x[1] ])2 вүӨ C/ log(nd)
                                                               p
for some constant C. The first moment is also bounded by O( log(nd)) and thus Ex [x2[1] ] вүӨ
O(log(nd)).
Thus MHS,F = O(poly(n)) and our conclusions follow.


                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3   P ROOF OF EXTRA TOOLS

Lemma 40 (Sub-Gaussian concentration for inner-product with permuted vector). Let G вүӨ Sn with
at least 2 elements and fix arbitrary g Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ G. Then for any c вҲҲ (0, 1/2):
                             вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ©

                        Pr               вҲ’ Вөg,gвҖІ вүҘ в„Ұ(nc ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )),                     (179)
                         x      вҲҘxвҲҘ
                  h             i
                    Fg,gвҖІ Fg,gвҖІ
for some Вөg,gвҖІ вҲҲ вҲҡn+1     , вҲҡn , i.e. Вөg,gвҖІ = Оҳ(Fg,gвҖІ nвҲ’1/2 ), and where Fg,gвҖІ is the number of fixed
points in g вҲ’1 g вҖІ (i.e. the number of cycles of length 1 in its cycle representation).

Proof. Let
                                                       вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ©
                                             f (x) =               ,                             (180)
                                                         вҲҘxвҲҘ
where x вҲј N (0, In ).
Note that
                                      1                  1 вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ©
                            вҲҮf (x) =    (xh + xhвҲ’1 ) вҲ’                    x,                      (181)
                                    вҲҘxвҲҘ                 вҲҘxвҲҘ вҹЁx, xвҹ©
where xh consists of x with entries reordered by h = g вҲ’1 g вҖІ , i.e. [xh ]i = [x]hвҲ’1 (i) . Via triangle
inequality,
                                                 3
                                    вҲҘвҲҮf (x)вҲҘ вүӨ      вҲҘxвҲҘ вүӨ 3.                                      (182)
                                                вҲҘxвҲҘ
Thus, by Gaussian Lipschitz concentration (Lemma 2.2 of (Pisier, 1986)), we have that:
                          вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ©

                     Pr               вҲ’ Ef (x) вүҘ в„Ұ(n ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )).
                                                      c
                                                                                                  (183)
                     x       вҲҘxвҲҘ

Finally, we compute Вө := Ex f (x). To do this, note that for every i Мё= j вҲҲ [n],
                                            xi xj      (вҲ’xi )xj
                                       Ex         = Ex          = 0,                             (184)
                                            вҲҘxвҲҘ2        вҲҘxвҲҘ2
by a change of variable formula x 7вҶ’ (x1 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 , вҲ’xi , xi+1 , . . . , xn ).

At the same time, for every i Мё= j вҲҲ [n],
                                                 n
                               x2i       x2j   1X     x2  1
                         Ex        = Ex      =     Ex k = Ex вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ,                              (185)
                              вҲҘxвҲҘ2      вҲҘxвҲҘ2   n     вҲҘxвҲҘ2 n
                                                        k=1
by a change of variable that swaps xi and xj using a permutation Jacobian matrix with determinant
Вұ1.
             F   вҖІ                                                       вҲ’1 вҖІ
Thus Вө = g,g n Ex вҲҘxвҲҘ2 , where Fg,g is the number of fixed points of g
                                     вҖІ                                     g . We appeal to elemen-
tary analysis of Gaussian vectors (for instance, Chandrasekaran et al. (2012)) to obtain:
                                     вҲҡ О“((n + 1)/2)         вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                         Ex вҲҘxвҲҘ2 = 2                   вҲҲ [n/ n + 1, n],                        (186)
                                            О“(n/2)
where О“ is EulerвҖҷs Gamma function. Thus, we have

                                               Fg,gвҖІ Fg,gвҖІ
                                       ВөвҲҲ вҲҡ           , вҲҡ                                        (187)
                                               n+1        n
Lemma 41. Let x вҲҲ Rn be a unit vector iid uniformly distributed over the n-dimensional unit
sphere. Let G вүӨ Sn and g Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ G. Let Fg,g be the number of fixed points of h := g вҲ’1 g вҖІ вҖҷs action
on [n]. Then for all c вҲҲ (0, 1/2) and small Пө вҲҲ (0, 1):

                                  вҖІ      Fg,gвҖІ           cвҲ’1/2
                       Pr вҹЁgx, g xвҹ© вҲ’ вҲҡ           вүҘ в„Ұ(n        ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )),                (188)
                        x               n 1вҲ’Пө
                                    вҲҡ

                                         Fg,gвҖІ
                 Pr вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ© вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Пө         вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )).                   (189)
                 x                          n

                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Recall that an alternative way to sample unit vectors i.i.d. uniformly from the hypersphere is
                                                                              вҖІ
                                                  z
to first sample z вҲј N (0, In ) and then set x := вҲҘzвҲҘ 2
                                                       . Thus, we study вҹЁgz,g
                                                                          вҲҘzвҲҘ2
                                                                                zвҹ©
                                                                                   .
                                                                                                2

To do this, note that concentration of вҲҘzвҲҘ2 is well studied (Proposition 2.2 and Corollary 2.3 of
Barvinok (2005)), for any 0 < Пө < 1:
                               r
                                    n                  p
           max Pr вҲҘzвҲҘ2 вүҘ                 , Pr вҲҘzвҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Пө)n         вүӨ exp(вҲ’Пө2 n/4).       (190)
                   z              1вҲ’Пө      z


Concentration of the random variable вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ©/вҲҘzвҲҘ2 was studied in Lemma 40 as:
                      h                                       i
                 Pr n |вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ©/вҲҘzвҲҘ2 вҲ’ Вөg,gвҖІ | вүҘ в„Ұ(nc+1/2 ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )),           (191)
                zвҲјN
                          вҲҡ               вҲҡ
for some Вөg,gвҖІ вҲҲ [Fg,gвҖІ / n + 1, Fg,gвҖІ / n]. Since вҲҡ1n вҲ’ вҲҡn+11
                                                                  вҲҲ O(nвҲ’3/2 ) and Fg,gвҖІ вүӨ n, we
can also write:
                             вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ© Fg,gвҖІ

                       Pr                вҲ’ вҲҡ вүҘ в„Ұ(nc ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )),                    (192)
                        x       вҲҘxвҲҘ          n
and
                            вҹЁgx, g вҖІ xвҹ© Fg,gвҖІ

                      Pr                вҲ’ вҲҡ вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(n ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )).
                                                      c
                                                                                          (193)
                       x       вҲҘxвҲҘ          n
We have by union bound:
     вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ©                              вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ©

                   Fg,gвҖІ       cвҲ’1/2                        Fg,gвҖІ  c
                                                                                  p
Pr         2     вҲ’ вҲҡ     > в„Ұ(n       ) вүӨ Pr               > вҲҡ + в„Ұ(n ) + Pr[вҲҘzвҲҘ2 < (1 вҲ’ Пө)n]
       вҲҘzвҲҘ2       n 1вҲ’Пө                         вҲҘzвҲҘ2          n
                                                                                 (194)
                                               вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )) + exp(вҲ’Пө2 n/4)                       (195)
                                                                     2c
                                               вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n )).                                       (196)

On the other side,
     вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ© вҲҡ                                вҹЁgz, g вҖІ zвҹ©
                                                                                          r
                      Fg,gвҖІ        cвҲ’1/2                        Fg,gвҖІ      c                 n
Pr              вҲ’ 1вҲ’Пө       < вҲ’в„Ұ(n       ) вүӨ Pr               < вҲҡ     вҲ’ в„Ұ(n ) + Pr вҲҘzвҲҘ2 >
       вҲҘzвҲҘ22           n                            вҲҘzвҲҘ2          n                         1вҲ’Пө
                                                                                    (197)
                                                         вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )) + exp(вҲ’Пө2 n/4)             (198)
                                                                               2c
                                                         вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n )).                             (199)


Lemma 42 (Kronecker product of PSD matrices is PSD). For some m, n вҲҲ N. Fix A вҲҲ RmГ—m and
B вҲҲ RnГ—n not necessarily symmetric. If for all x вҲҲ Rm , xвҠӨ Ax вүҘ 0 and for all y вҲҲ Rn , y вҠӨ By вүҘ
0 then for all z вҲҲ Rmn , z вҠӨ (A вҠ— B)z вүҘ 0, where вҠ— is the Kronecker product.

Proof. Write z = (z [1] , . . . , z [m] ) where z [i] вҲҲ Rn for each i вҲҲ [m], then we have:
                                                    m     n
                                                               [i]              [iвҖІ ]
                                                   X     X
                           z вҠӨ (A вҠ— B)z =                    zj (Ai,iвҖІ Bj,j вҖІ )zj вҖІ                 (200)
                                               i,iвҖІ =1 j,j вҖІ =1
                                                  m             n
                                                                             [i]        [iвҖІ ]
                                                X               X
                                           =             Ai,iвҖІ              zj Bj,j вҖІ zj вҖІ          (201)
                                               i,iвҖІ =1           j,j вҖІ =1
                                                X m
                                           =             Ai,iвҖІ Ci,iвҖІ ,                              (202)
                                               i,iвҖІ =1
               Pn       [i]       [iвҖІ ]
where Ci,iвҖІ = j,j вҖІ =1 zj Bj,j вҖІ zj вҖІ . Now it is not hard to see that C is symmetric. At the same
time, for any w вҲҲ Rm ,
                   n           n                       n     n
                                        [i]     [iвҖІ ]                  [i]            [iвҖІ ]
                  X           X                       X     X
       wвҠӨ Cw =         wi wiвҖІ        zj Bj,j вҖІ zj вҖІ =            (wi zj )Bj,j вҖІ (wiвҖІ zj вҖІ ).  (203)
                   i,iвҖІ =1      j,j вҖІ =1                      i,iвҖІ =1 j,j вҖІ =1



                                                         42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By property of B, the inner sum is nonnegative and thus wвҠӨ Cw is nonnegative. Therefore we
conclude that C is symmetric positive semi-definite and thus admits a spectral decomposition:
                                                              r
                                                              X
                                                      C=            О»k v [k] (v [k] )вҠӨ ,                                (204)
                                                              k=1

for some set of vectors v [k] and nonnegative О»k вүҘ 0, k вҲҲ [r] for some r.
Thus,
              m                              m                r                        m X
                                                                                         r
                                                                          [k] [k]                       [k]      [k]
              X                              X                X                        X
                       Ai,iвҖІ Ci,iвҖІ =                  Ai,iвҖІ         О»k vi viвҖІ =                     О»k vi Ai,iвҖІ viвҖІ .   (205)
             i,iвҖІ =1                        i,iвҖІ =1           k=1                     i,iвҖІ =1 k=1


By property of A and the fact that О»k are nonnegative, the inner sum is nonnegative and we get our
conclusion.
Corollary 43 (PSD of tensor power). For any m, n вҲҲ N, if A вҲҲ RmГ—m is such that xвҠӨ Ax > 0 for
         m        вҠ—n            вҠӨ вҠ—n                      mn
all x вҲҲ R , then A satisfies: z A z > 0 for all z вҲҲ R

Proof. Apply Lemma 42 n вҲ’ 1 times.

Proof of Lemma 29. We use Corollary D.3 from (Diakonikolas et al., 2017) copied below:
Lemma 44 (Corollary D.3 from (Diakonikolas et al., 2017)). Let x, y вҲҲ Rn be two unit vectors iid
uniformly distributed over the n-dimensional unit sphere. Then:

                                    Pr [|вҹЁx, yвҹ©| вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )] вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )),                                         (206)
                                    x,y

for any c вҲҲ (0, 1/2).

Let g, g вҖІ вҲҲ F be two arbitrary permutations that act on Rn by permuting the vector. Since the
uniform distribution over the n-dimenional unit sphere is invariant to permutation of the indices, its
pushforward via g and g вҖІ is still uniform. Therefore, we have, for any g, g вҖІ вҲҲ F :

                                   Pr [|вҹЁgx, g вҖІ yвҹ©| вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )] вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c )).                                     (207)
                                   x,y

                 c
Draw T = 2в„Ұ(n ) /|F |2 such iid vectors to form a set S вҠӮ Rn . We have, by union bound:

                          Pr            [вҲғi Мё= j вҲҲ [T ], вҲғg, g вҖІ вҲҲ F, |вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xj вҹ©| вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )]                   (208)
                         x1 ,...,xT
                          X             X
                     вүӨ                         Pr [|вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xj вҹ©| вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )]                                      (209)
                                                xi ,xj
                         i,jвҲҲ[T ] g,g вҖІ вҲҲF
                               c
                     вүӨ2в„Ұ(n ) exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c ))                                                                              (210)
                                           2c
                     вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n )).                                                                                     (211)

On the other hand, let Fg,gвҖІ be the number of fixed points of g вҲ’1 g вҖІ for some g Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ F , we also
want to union bound using Lemma 41, for any small constant Пө вҲҲ (0, 1):

                                                                        Fg,gвҖІ
                  Pr        вҲғi вҲҲ [T ], вҲғg Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ F, вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xi вҹ© вҲ’ вҲҡ       вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )    (212)
              x1 ,...,xT                                               n 1вҲ’Пө

               X X                                     Fg,gвҖІ
            вүӨ                  Pr вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xi вҹ© вҲ’ вҲҡ            вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 ) вүҘ в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 )]     (213)
              iвҲҲ[T ] gМё=g вҖІ вҲҲF
                               xi                   n 1вҲ’Пө
                           c
            вүӨ3 В· 2в„Ұ(n ) exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c ))                                                                                   (214)
                                   2c
            вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n )).                                                                                              (215)


                                                                     43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly,
                                                        вҲҡ

                                                               Fg,gвҖІ
    Pr       вҲғi вҲҲ [T ], вҲғg Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ F, вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xi вҹ© вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Пө       вүӨ вҲ’в„Ұ(ncвҲ’1/2 ) вүӨ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n2c ))
 x1 ,...,xT                                                     n
                                                                                             (216)
                                                                                       c
Therefore, for every small Пө вҲҲ (0, 1), there exists a set S вҠӮ Rn of size T = 2в„Ұ(n ) /|F |2 such that
for every x Мё= y вҲҲ S, for every g Мё= g вҖІ вҲҲ F , we have:
                                                    вҲҘgxвҲҘ2 = 1                                       (217)
                            max(|вҹЁgx, gyвҹ©|, |вҹЁgx, g вҖІ yвҹ©|) вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ),                            (218)
                                                  Fg,gвҖІ
                                вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xi вҹ© вҲ’ вҲҡ        вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ),                            (219)
                                                 n 1вҲ’Пө
                                              вҲҡ      Fg,gвҖІ
                             вҹЁgxi , g вҖІ xi вҹ© вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Пө       вүҘ вҲ’O(ncвҲ’1/2 ).                           (220)
                                                      n
Pair elements of S (as column vectors) together arbitrarily to obtain a set B вҖІ of matrices in RnГ—2 of
size T /2. Each element of B вҖІ has two columns, each one of these columns is a distinct vector in S.
We have, for any B =: (x1,1 , x1,2 ), B вҖІ =: (x2,1 , x2,2 ) вҲҲ B вҖІ , and for any g, g вҖІ вҲҲ F ,
                                                 s X
             вҠӨ вҖІ вҖІ                  вҖІ вҖІ вҠӨ
      вҲҘ(gB) (g B )вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘ(gB)(g B ) вҲҘF =                     (вҹЁgx1i , g вҖІ x2j вҹ©)2 вүӨ O(ncвҲ’1/2 ).   (221)
                                                      i,jвҲҲ[2]


The remaining conditions in Lemma 29 are also straightforward to check.

G    L EARNING INVARIANT POLYNOMIALS
Here, we aim to extend the algorithm of Andoni et al. (2014) to the setting of invariant polynomials.
This algorithm is an SQ algorithm, but not a CSQ algorithm.
First, let us review the GROWING-BASIS algorithm. Assume inputs x вҲҲ Rn are distributed ac-
cording to some product distribution D = P  Вө1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Вөn . The goal of the algorithm is to learn the
coefficients of some polynomial f вҲ— (x) = S aS HS (x) where S = (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn ) is a tuple of
positive integers which indicate the degree of the polynomial in the i-th variable. The monomials in
the polynomial take the form
                                   X                                n
                                                                    Y
                       f вҲ— (x) =       aS HS (x), where HS (x) =          HSi (xi ),                (222)
                                   S                                i=1

where HSi is the Si -th
                    R degree polynomial in an class of polynomials orthogonal under the distribu-
tion D: вҹЁHi , Hj вҹ© = Hi (x)Hj (x)Вөi (x)dx = 0 for all i Мё= j. An example of such an orthogonal set
of polynomials are the Legendre polynomials which are orthogonal under the uniform distribution
over [вҲ’1, 1].
Next, to rigorously obtain a separation on invariant function classes, we need to define a few objects.
We will often simplify notation or definitions for ease of readability; the presentation of this material
in its full mathematical rigor can be found in various textbooks, e.g. Derksen & Kemper (2015).

Independent generators Let g1 , . . . , gr be invariant functions    P and KОұa field, either RQor C. The
                                                                                                 r    Оұi
ring of polynomial K[g1 , . . . , gr ] is the set of all sums           ОұвҲҲNr cОұ g where g Оұ =    i=1 gi .
                     r
Assume that {gi }i=1 are independent in the sense that for all i вҲҲ [r], there is no polynomial
P вҲҲ K[g1 , . . . , giвҲ’1 , gi+1 , . . . , gr ] that agrees with gi as a function Kn вҶ’ K. It is not hard to
see that if a member of K[g1 , . . . , gr ] can be evaluated as a function Kn вҶ’ K then they are also
invariant functions. The converse is not true, in general, as some invariant functions may not be
written as polynomials over certain generators. However, some special groups have nice, finitely
many generators whose polynomial ring spans almost the whole space of invariant functions. De-
P by F
note        d,r
                 := K[g1 , . . . , gr ]вүӨd the set of all polynomials in gi вҖҷs with degree at most d, i.e.,
                       Оұ
             Оұi вүӨd cОұ g .
          P
   ОұвҲҲNr |    i


                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vector space of bounded degree polynomials generated by a finite set A different way of
thinking about F d,r is as a vector space. Let V d (g1 , . . . , gr ) be the (r + 1)d -dimensional vector
space over the field k, whose canonical basis is the set {eI }IвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d . It is not hard to show that
                                                                                               Qd
V d (g1 , . . . , gr ) is isomorphic to K[g1 , . . . , gr ]вүӨd by identifying eI to the monomial i=1 gIi where
g0 вүЎ 1. This perspective as a vector space allows for a nice calculus tool: let P be aR product distribu-
tion over Kr (tuples of length r, with each entry an element in K) and вҹЁf, gвҹ©P := f gМ„dP. Here, we
once again think of gi вҖҷs as functions Kn вҶ’ K and so are elements in F d,r . Applying Gram-Schmidt
orthogonalization to basis elements of V d (g1 , . . . , gr ) generates another set of orthogonal (in вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©P )
elements H1 , . . . H(r+1)d .5 Note that there are still (r + 1)d such orthogonal functions since Gram-
Schmidt preserves dimensionality of the input and ouput vector spaces. This process in analogous
to that constructing the Hermite and Legendre polynomials for Gaussian in uniform distributions
respectively. When P is a product distribution, we can reindex this basis as {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d .

Sparse polynomial Before giving any formal results, we must state some technical preliminary
restrictions that must be set for learning to be possible. Our learning setting restricts F d,r to only
contain polynomials in g1 , . . . , gr with at most k terms in the expansion using {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d . In
other words, when viewed as vectors in V d (g1 , . . . , gr ) under the basis {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d , only k
elements are non-zero. Call this new set F d,r,k .
We should also note that for technical reasons, we restrict the outputs of the polynomials to be nor-
malized within some bounded range to properly normalize the function with respect to the error
metric and allow for the SQ query bounds to also properly query such functions. In the GROWING-
BASIS algorithm, one must make queries to estimate вҹЁHv , f вҲ— вҹ© and вҹЁHv , (f вҲ— )2 вҹ©. Given any sta-
tistical query function has output bounded in the range [вҲ’1, +1], to measure the correlations, we
must choose a query function that divides by the maximum value of |Hv (f вҲ— )2 | in some high prob-
ability region D вҠҶ Kr with measure P(D) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ o(1) and outputs zero elsewhere. This way,
statistical query functions whose outputs are bounded in the range [вҲ’1, +1] can effectively cal-
culate the proper correlations needed in the algorithm.6 Thus, we introduce a normalization term
MМӮd,k = maxxвҲҲD,vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d |Hv (f вҲ— )2 | and introduce this quantity into the query tolerance to
allow for proper estimation of relevant variables. This normalization plays a similar role to the
quantity Md,k in Andoni et al. (2014) for their guarantees of sampling complexity. When the target
function f вҲ— is properly bounded, it is not too hard to see that this quantity is also easily bounded.
For example, when |f вҲ— | = O(1) in the range [вҲ’1, +1]n , MМӮd,k is at most a constant for inputs drawn
from the uniform distribution over the interval [вҲ’1, +1] since the Legendre polynomials are also ap-
propriately bounded. In general, functions can always be normalized by dividing by an appropriate
constant.
Finally, the GROWING-BASIS algorithm depends on a parameter П„d that controls how much higher
order terms show up in the square of a polynomial. More formally, let Hi : K вҶ’ K denote the i-th
orthogonal polynomial for some given distribution on K. For any such orthogonal polynomial, we
have the decomposition (see equation 2.1 of Andoni et al. (2014))
                                                          2t
                                                          X
                                         Ht (x) = 1 +           ct,j Hj (x).                                   (223)
                                                          j=1

Let ct = ct,2t , then П„d = mintвүӨd ct . This quantity is generally bounded for common distributions,
e.g., when Ht are the Hermite or Legendre polynomials then П„d = в„Ұ(1) (Andoni et al., 2014).
With this set up, we are ready to state and prove our main result for this section:
Theorem 45 (Adapted from theorems 2.1 and 2.2 of Andoni et al. (2014)). Let K be a field,
g1 , . . . , gr be independent functions Kn вҶ’ K that are invariant to a group G acting alge-
    5
      We also note that it is technically more efficient to apply this procedure to each of the generators indi-
vidually. That is, apply Gram-Schmidt to the space [1, gi , . . . , gid ]. Since there is a product distribution, this
procedure constructs orthogonal polynomials in each basis which can then be combined to construct orthogonal
polynomials in K[g1 , . . . , gr ].
    6
      We note that there are likely more effective means of handling this normalization requirement, by e.g.,
composing multiple queries together to calculate the relevant quantities. However, we do not consider this
strengthening here for sake of simplicity.


                                                         45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


braically on K[g1 , . . . , gr ] as defined above. Let P be a product distribution and define the in-
ner product вҹЁp, qвҹ©P := Eg:=(g1 ,...,gr )вҲјP [p(g)q(g)]. Let {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d be the output of Gram-
Schmidt on F d,r with respect to this inner product. Further assume that the polynomial quotient
H2m,0,...,0 /(Hm,0,...,0 )2 (ignoring remainders) is П„d for every m вҲҲ [вҢҠd/2вҢӢ]. Let F d,r,k be the
space of polynomials in F d,r that is k sparse in Hi basis. Then any CSQ algorithm with oracle
access to вҹЁВ·, f вҲ— вҹ©P for some f вҲ— вҲҲ F d,r,k that outputs a hypothesis h вҲҲ F d,r,k while achieving
mean square error вҲҘh вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘP < O(1) must make either at least (r + 1)d calls to the oracle or
require precision less than O(rвҲ’c ) for any c > 0. However, GROWING-BASIS can learn h with
error вҲҘh вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘP < O(1) using only O(krd(1/П„d )d ) calls to oracles вҹЁВ·, f вҲ— вҹ©P and вҹЁВ·, (f вҲ— )2 вҹ©P with
precision в„Ұ(П„dd /(krdMМӮd,k )).

Proof. The CSQ lower bound can be obtained by invoking standard correlational statistical queries
dimension bound form orthogonal polynomials (Diakonikolas et al., 2020; Goel et al., 2020; Reyzin,
2020; SzoМҲreМҒnyi, 2009). Specifically, by correctness of Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization, the set of
basis elements {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d also form a pairwise orthogonal set, which each themselves have
norm 1 under вҹЁp, qвҹ©P . thus CSQ dimension of f вҲ— вҲҲ F d,r,k is immediately lower bounded by в„Ұ(rd )
and the conclusion for CSQ algorithms follow.
The SQ upper bound via GROWING-BASIS can be obtained by observing that Andoni et al.
(2014)вҖҷs proof still works verbatim when the main ingredients are there: a product distribution,
an inner product with an orthornormal basis, and access to oracle вҹЁВ·, (f вҲ— )2 вҹ©P . Note that although
the GROWING-BASIS algorithm is presented error free, we allow small errors, by making a thresh-
olding in Step 2 and 8 of Andoni et al. (2014) equal to the error tolerance Пө. This way, we are
guaranteed to miss only terms with low correlation and thus bounded effect on the final mean square
error. To be more precise, every time we made an error on the cutoff of step 8, we lose as most a
fraction of the precision that amounts to П„dd where as stated before П„d is the coefficient of H2n,0,...,0
in (Hn,0,...,0 )2 . Intuitively, when losing a monomial in the final product, the norm of the monomial
can multiplicatively compound over each variable. П„d is the lowest possible amount each variable
can contribute to this loss (See (Andoni et al., 2014), Lemma 2.3). Finally, we also must divide the
query tolerance by a factor MМӮd,k to account for the normalization of the target function as discussed
earlier.

Corollary 46. In the same setting as QTheorem 45,
                                                Pif instead, we are interested in polynomials that
                                        r
are k-sparse in the canonical basis { i=1 giОұi | i Оұi = 1} (recall that F d,r,k was sparse in the
orthogonal basis {Hv }vвҲҲ({0}вҲӘ[r])d ). Then the query complexity of GROWING-BASIS becomes at
most O(krd2d ) with precision в„Ұ(1/(krd2d )) whenever П„d = в„Ұ(1) and targets are normalized so
that MМӮd,k = O(1).

Proof. By the same argument as Lemma 2.1 of (Andoni et al., 2014), any change of basis in the
vector space of polynomials of bounded degree incur at worst a multiplicative factor 2d in the spar-
sity parameter. Since the new function class is k-sparse in the canonical basis, it is k2d -sparse in the
orthogonal basis. Apply Theorem 45 to this new sparsity level to get the desired result.

This separation is weaker than when there is sparsity in the orthogonal basis. However, there is still
a polynomial (in r) separation between CSQ and SQ if d and k are set to be constant independent of
r and a superpolynomial separation when d = Оҳ(log(n)).
Finally, for the above theorem to give a meaningful separation, we list some example groups for
which there is a simple distribution D over inputs such that the push-forward distribution P = П•# D
via the map П• : x := (x1 , . . . , xn ) 7вҶ’ (g1 (x), . . . gr (x)) is a product distribution.
Example 5. Consider inputs X вҲҲ RnГ—3 which correspond to n points in R3 . Ordered point clouds
are symmetric under the action X В· U for matrix U вҲҲ O(3) in the orthogonal group. Let inputs X
have entries drawn i.i.d. Gaussian. Consider generators g1 , . . . , gn where gi (x) = вҲҘXi,: вҲҘ2 , which
is the sum of the squares of the i-th row of X and clearly invariant to orthogonal transformations.
The pushforward distribution after the mapping X 7вҶ’ [g1 (X), . . . , gn (X)] is a product distribution
over Chi-squared random variables ПҮ2 (3)n .


                                                   46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               0.6
                             Train Set       MSE                                     100
                             Test Set        0/1 Error
               0.5


                                                                  Error (log axis)
Error                                                                                10 3
               0.4                                                                   10 6
               0.3                                                                   10 9            Train Set         MSE
                                                                                                     Test Set
                     0       500    1000 1500      2000                                      0       250     500 750         1000
                                    Epoch                                                                   Epoch
                                                                                                                   B
                         (a) GNN learning HER,n                                                  (b) CNN learning CF

Figure 3: Replication of experiments as in Fig. 1, except here, we consider a minimal architecture
consisting of a single layer of graph or cyclic convolution followed by a single hidden layer MLP.
This is the minimal number of layers needed to learn the desired function classes for the architectures
considered. For the CNN plot, the jumps in the train set MSE are due to perturbations in the loss at
very low values near computer precision.


                          optimizer = Adam          optimizer = SGD                         optimizer = RMSprop          data
                                                                                                                         Train Set
               0.8                                                                                                       Test Set
               0.7                                                                                                       metric
                                                                                                                         MSE
               0.6                                                                                                       0/1 Error
 Error Value


               0.5
               0.4
               0.3

                     0        100    200       0         100    200                     0          100    200
                               epoch                      epoch                                     epoch

Figure 4: Replication of experiments in Fig. 1a with different optimizers show that the performance
of the GNN is virtually the same across the various optimizers. Performance is averaged over 10
runs. For each run, the learning rate is chosen by perturbing the default learning rate by a random
multiplicative factor in the range [0.1, 10].


Example 6. Consider inputs x вҲҲ Cn drawn from U [C вҲ© {|z| = 1}]n uniformly from unit norm
complex
     P numbers      P in deach
                             entry. The power sum symmetric polynomials consist        of a generating ba-
                                                                                  iОё
sis     i xi , ...,  i xi . Another way to parameterize each xj is as xj = e where Оё is distributed
U [0, 2ПҖ], for all j вҲҲ [n]. Thus xtj can also be parameterized by eiОё with the exact same distribution
                                                                 P            P d
of Оё вҲј U [0, 2ПҖ], for all j вҲҲ [n], t вҲҲ [d]. The distribution of   i xi , ...,  i xi is therefore a product
                      Pn
distribution (Law( i=1 Zi ))d where Zi вҲј U [C вҲ© {|z| = 1}].These generators and input distribu-
tions come from the classical text of Macdonald (1979). Here, as long as r вүӨ n, r only depends on
d and not n. Plugging this r into Theorem 45 gives straightforward bounds that are independent of
n-the original number of variables, but does not give meaningful separation in Corollary 46.

As a reminder, we also have an example in the main text for the sign group (Lim et al., 2022).


H              E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

GNN experiments were performed using the Pytorch Geometric library for implementing geometric
architectures (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). The hard functions were drawn from HER,n (see Eq. (7))


                                                             47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where subset S вҠҶ [n] was drawn uniformly from all the possible subsets of size вҢҠn/2вҢӢ and b
was either 0 or 1 with equal probability. For our experiments, we set n = 15 and trained on
n2 = 225 datapoints. The overparameterized GNN used during training consisted of 3 layers of
graph convolution followed by a node aggregation average pooling layer and a two layer ReLU
MLP with width 64. The graph convolution layers used 32 channels.
For the CNN experiments, we constructed the hard functions in Eq. (17) setting n = 50 and k = 10.
Here, matrices B вҲҲ B were drawn randomly from all possible n Г— 2 orthogonal matrices by taking a
QR decomposition of a random n Г— 2 matrix with Gaussian i.i.d. elements. For sake of convenience,
we did not divide by the norm of the function. The CNN architecture implemented consisted of three
layers of fully parameterized cyclic convolution each with 100 output channels. This was followed
by a global average pooling layer and and a two layer ReLU MLP of width 100. The network was
given 10n = 500 training samples and was trained with the Adam optimizer with batch size 32.
Experiments in the main text considered architectures which were overparameterized in terms of
the number of layers with respect to the target function. For sake of completeness, we include in
Fig. 3 results for merely sufficiently parameterized networks which consist of a single convolution
layer, pooling and single hidden layer MLP. The results in Fig. 3 are consistent with those observed
in Fig. 1. Additionally, to further confirm that these results are robust to hyperparameter choices
for the optimizer, we repeated the GNN learning experiments with the choice of optimizer varying
between Adam, SGD, and RMSprop (Paszke et al., 2019). Fig. 4 shows the results for these different
optimizers. For each optimizer, 10 simulations were performed where for each simulation, the
learning rate was chosen by multiplying the default learning rate by a random number in the range
[0.1, 10].
All experiments were run using Pytorch on a single GPU (Paszke et al., 2019). Default initialization
schemes were used for the initial network weights. In our experiments, we used the Adam optimizer
and tuned the learning rate in the range [0.0001, 0.003]. For CNN experiments, to increase stability
of training in later stages, we added a scheduler that divided the learning rate by two every 200
epochs. Plots are created by combining and averaging five random realizations of each experiment.


                                                48
