Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DIFFERENTIABLE BRAIN SIMULATOR BRIDGING
BRAIN SIMULATION AND BRAIN - INSPIRED COMPUTING

 Chaoming Wang1∗ , Tianqiu Zhang1∗ , Sichao He2 , Hongyaoxing Gu3 , Shangyang Li1 , Si Wu1†
 1
   School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
  Bejing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
  Center of Quantitative Biology, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
 2
   School of Software Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University
 3
   Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 ∗                                     †
   The authors contributed equally       Corresponding author
 {wangchaoming,syli,siwu}@pku.edu.cn,tianqiuakita@stu.pku.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT

         Brain simulation builds dynamical models to mimic the structure and functions
         of the brain, while brain-inspired computing (BIC) develops intelligent systems
         by learning from the structure and functions of the brain. The two fields are
         intertwined and should share a common programming framework to facilitate
         each other’s development. However, none of the existing software in the fields
         can achieve this goal, because traditional brain simulators lack differentiability
         for training, while existing deep learning (DL) frameworks fail to capture the
         biophysical realism and complexity of brain dynamics. In this paper, we introduce
         BrainPy, a differentiable brain simulator developed using JAX and XLA, with the
         aim of bridging the gap between brain simulation and BIC. BrainPy expands upon
         the functionalities of JAX, a powerful AI framework, by introducing complete
         capabilities for flexible, efficient, and scalable brain simulation. It offers a range
         of sparse and event-driven operators for efficient and scalable brain simulation, an
         abstraction for managing the intricacies of synaptic computations, a modular and
         flexible interface for constructing multi-scale brain models, and an object-oriented
         just-in-time compilation approach to handle the memory-intensive nature of brain
         dynamics. We showcase the efficiency and scalability of BrainPy on benchmark
         tasks, and highlight its differentiable simulation for biologically plausible spiking
         models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Brain simulation aims to elucidate brain functions by building dynamical models that mimic the
structure and dynamics of the brain (Gerstner et al., 2014), while brain-inspired computing aims
to develop intelligent systems by learning from the structure and computational principles of the
brain (Mehonic & Kenyon, 2021). The two fields are intertwined and their developments can
facilitate each other. For example, brain simulation can provide BIC with models of neurons,
synapses, networks, and inspirational information processing principles; while BIC can provide brain
simulation with efficient algorithms for optimizing model parameters, simulation tools for running
large-scale networks, and a testing bed for validating hypothesized neural mechanisms. Ideally, the
two fields should share a common programming framework, so that they can benefit from each other’s
development by sharing models, mathematical tools, and emerging findings.
However, up to now, none of the existing software in the two fields can fully achieve this goal.
Traditional brain simulators, such as NEURON (Hines & Carnevale, 1997), NEST (Gewaltig &
Diesmann, 2007), and Brian2 (Goodman & Brette, 2008; Stimberg et al., 2019), are designed for
simulating brain dynamics models with high fidelity and accuracy. They rely on customized numerical
solvers and data structures that are not compatible with automatic differentiation, and hence cannot
support training models with standard gradient-based methods. On the other hand, by leveraging the
automatic differentiation functionality of deep learning (DL) frameworks like PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2019) and TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), existing BIC libraries, such as snnTorch (Eshraghian et al.,


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2021), Norse (Pehle & Pedersen, 2021), and SpikingJelly (Fang et al., 2020), provide convenient
interfaces for building and training spike neural networks (SNNs). They are, however, not designed
to capture the unique and important features of brain dynamics, and hence are not suitable to simulate
large-scale brain networks with realistic biophysical properties.
In this paper, we propose BrainPy as an innovative solution to bridge this gap. Unlike traditional
brain simulators, BrainPy leverages the power of the JAX (Frostig et al., 2018), allowing seamless
integration with AI models. However, BrainPy goes beyond integration and introduces dedicated
optimizations that unleash the full potential of a flexible, efficient, and scalable brain simulator
within the JAX ecosystem. To capture the sparse and event-driven nature of brain computation,
BrainPy provides a wide range of customized primitive operators. For enhanced flexibility in model
construction across various brain organization scales, BrainPy offers a modular and composable
interface. To handle the complexity of synaptic computations, BrainPy introduces a novel abstraction
for executing diverse synaptic projections. Additionally, to tackle the memory-intensive demands of
brain dynamics, BrainPy employs an object-oriented just-in-time (JIT) compilation approach. Lever-
aging the automatic differentiation capabilities of JAX, BrainPy represents a unique differentiable
brain simulator that bridges the gap between brain simulation and BIC fields. We demonstrate the
efficiency and scalability of BrainPy on several brain simulation and BIC tasks and showcase its
ability to train biologically plausible spiking models with differentiability.


2    R ELATED W ORKS
Brain Simulators. Different brain simulators normally have different focuses. NEURON (Hines &
Carnevale, 1997) allows users to define detailed biophysical models of neurons and synapses, with
complex morphology and ion channels. NEST (Gewaltig & Diesmann, 2007) focuses on large-scale
network models of point neurons and synapses, with simplified dynamics and connectivity patterns.
Brian2 (Stimberg et al., 2014; 2019) targets being flexible and intuitive, allowing users to easily define
dynamical models, environment interactions, and experimental protocols. Currently, the dominant
programming approach in brain simulation is descriptive language (Blundell et al., 2018), by which
users can use text (Stimberg et al., 2019; Vitay et al., 2015), JSON (Dai et al., 2020; Dura-Bernal
et al., 2019), or XML (Gleeson et al., 2010) files to describe the model, and then translate the
descriptive information into high-efficient C++ or CUDA code. The main advantage of this approach
is the clear decoupling between mathematical description from its implementation details. However,
this advantage comes with expensive costs, which include, for instance, the lack of flexibility and
generality of defining new models not covered by the predefined constructs and functions of the
custom language, the difficulty of integrating and interfacing with other tools and frameworks not
using the same format, and the high learning cost for the unfamiliar syntax of the custom language.
These limitations prevent the application of existing brain simulators to BIC models.
BIC Libraries. SNNs are the current dominating models in BIC for their advantages in biological
interoperability and energy efficiency. A number of programming libraries have been developed for
SNNs, such as NengoDL (Rasmussen, 2018), BindsNet (Hazan et al., 2018), snnTorch (Eshraghian
et al., 2021), Norse (Pehle & Pedersen, 2021), SpikingJelly (Fang et al., 2020), and BrainCog (Zeng
et al., 2022). These libraries utilize DL frameworks, such as PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and
TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), to achieve the training of SNNs on various tasks that cannot be done
in traditional brain simulators. So far, BIC libraries have mainly focused on the combination of spiking
neurons with DL models, e.g., spiking convolutional neural networks and spiking recurrent neural
networks. However, these libraries fall short of high-fidelity brain simulation. First, DL frameworks
lack the dedicated components for sparse, event-driven, and scalable computation required for brain
dynamics models. Second, BIC libraries designed for machine learning tasks often lack the essential
capabilities to support realistic neuronal and synaptic simulations based on experimental data. The
brain encompasses intricate biochemical and biophysical processes that span vast scales in both space
and time. Unfortunately, current BIC libraries without these dedicated optimizations face significant
challenges in accurately modeling such complex biophysical characteristics.


3    T HE D ESIGN OF B RAIN P Y
BrainPy is designed to take the combined advantages of brain simulators and DL frameworks. This
innovative tool is specifically engineered to leverage the strengths of JAX (Frostig et al., 2018), a


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A                             B                               C                          D
            JAX Integration                Core Designs                Integrated Functions       Object-oriented JIT

                                       Sparse & Event-driven
                                             Efficiency                      Simulation

                                            Dynamical                                                Just-In-Time
                                                                                                     Compilation
                   Flax                      System                           Training
                                                                                                    < BrainPy object >
                                             Flexibility

          Neural       Training                                               Analysis
         Network      algorithms
                                       JIT conn & Projection
                                            Scalability                                             CPU   GPU     TPU


                               Figure 1: The overview of BrainPy architecture.


powerful AI framework, while simultaneously expanding upon it to enable flexible, efficient, and
scalable simulation of various brain dynamics models.
By building upon JAX, BrainPy inherits the robust computational capabilities and extensive library
support that JAX provides (see Figure 1A). This enables seamless integration of DL techniques, such
as neural network architectures and gradient-based optimization algorithms, into its brain simulation
framework. BrainPy facilitates smooth interoperation with existing JAX-based machine learning
libraries (Babuschkin et al., 2020). Users can easily transform models from other libraries into
BrainPy objects. For example, by utilizing the brainpy.dnn.FromFlax functionality, a Flax (Heek
et al., 2020) model can be treated as a BrainPy module. Conversely, users can convert BrainPy models
into formats compatible with other libraries. The brainpy.dnn.ToFlax feature, for instance,
enables the interpretation of a dynamical system in BrainPy as a Flax recurrent cell, allowing brain
models developed in BrainPy to be utilized within a machine-learning context.
However, BrainPy goes beyond being a mere extension of JAX. It introduces novel and fundamental
features to empower users to simulate and analyze the intricate dynamics of the brain (refer to
Figure 1B and Section 4). (1) BrainPy provides flexibility in modeling brain dynamics. The brain
exhibits a unique multi-scale organization characterized by hierarchical modularity. To address
this, BrainPy offers a modular and composable interface specifically designed for brain dynamics
programming. With this interface, users can easily define and customize complex brain models across
multiple levels of organization, from low-level ion channels, neurons, and synapses to high-level
networks and systems. (2) BrainPy prioritizes efficiency in simulating brain dynamics. Brain dy-
namics involve unique properties such as event-driven computation and sparse connections. BrainPy
abstracts these operations into primitive operators and gives a full set of primitive operators that
achieve major speedups, from two to five orders of magnitude faster than traditional dense operators.
(3) BrainPy tackles the scalability challenges of the brain’s large-scale structure. The brain consists of
massively interconnected neurons arranged in complex networks and circuits. To handle this, BrainPy
offers specialized support, including just-in-time connectivity operators with zero memory footprint,
automatic synapse merging for network topology optimization, and parallelization strategies for
distributed computing.
Leveraging its distinctive brain simulation capabilities and seamless integration with DL techniques,
BrainPy offers an integrated platform for comprehensive simulation, training, and analysis of brain
dynamics models (see Figure 1C). Firstly, it enables efficient simulation of models at various scales
of organization. These simulations can be executed in parallel across multiple threads, processors,
and devices, facilitating parameter explorations and enhancing performance. Secondly, BrainPy
supports the training of diverse model types based on neural data or behavioral tasks. For example,
reservoir computing models can be trained using BrainPy’s online and offline learning algorithms,
and detailed spiking neural networks and rate-based recurrent neural networks can be trained using its
back-propagation-based algorithms. Thirdly, BrainPy offers automatic analysis interfaces that unravel
the underlying mechanisms of simulated or trained models. For instance, low-dimensional analyzers
can perform phase plane and bifurcation analysis. On the other hand, high-dimensional analyzers
facilitate slow point computation and linearization analysis for high-dimensional systems. Lastly,
BrainPy achieves exceptional running speed through the utilization of JIT compilation. Through
a novel object-oriented JIT transformation, BrainPy enables whole-graph optimization of class-
based models into executable processes using JAX and XLA on CPU, GPU, or TPU devices during
simulation, training, and analysis tasks (see Figure 1D).


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the specific optimizations implemented in BrainPy for brain modeling, and
highlight the advancements achieved at the operator, model, and compilation levels to facilitate its
goal of unifying models in brain simulation and BIC.

4.1   D EDICATED OPERATORS FOR SPARSE AND EVENT- DRIVEN COMPUTATION

Compared to DNN models, brain dynamics models perform computation in a different way. They
usually have sparse connections (neurons in a network are typically interconnected with a probability
smaller than 0.2 (Potjans & Diesmann, 2012)) and perform event-driven computations (synaptic
states are updated only when the presynaptic spiking event occurs (Ros et al., 2006; Roy et al.,
2019)). These unique features greatly hinder the running efficiency of brain dynamics models if
conventional dense array operators are used (see Section 5.1). Traditional brain simulators utilize
a specific data structure and accompanying event-driven computation code to address this problem
(Kunkel et al., 2012; Jordan et al., 2018). Nevertheless, this solution is confined to predetermined
simulation scenarios, restricting its applicability to other domains. Moreover, it lacks compatibility
with automatic differentiation, a crucial element of the backpropagation algorithm, thereby impeding
efficient training of brain dynamics models using gradient-based optimization algorithms.
To unify brain simulation and BIC programming workflows, BrainPy abstracts these specialized func-
tions in brain simulation as reusable primitive operators, so that they can be flexibly fused, chained,
or combined to define any complex computations of brain models as desired by the user. Particularly,
BrainPy provides a set of sparse and event-driven operators in its brainpy.math.sparse and
brainpy.math.event modules, respectively. Sparse operators can not only store synaptic connec-
tivity compactly by avoiding the memory usage of unnecessary zeros, but also compute synaptic
currents efficiently by using only nonzero entries. Although modern numerical computing libraries
have provided diverse routines for sparse computation, they are prone to encountering problems
such as duplicate memory storage of identical synaptic projections and redundant memory access of
homogeneous synaptic weights. In contrast, BrainPy’s sparse operators prioritize the optimization
of sparse computations specifically for brain dynamics modeling. As a result, they offer superior
memory efficiency and significantly faster speeds compared to sparse computation routines designed
for general domains. Moreover, event-driven operators in BrainPy can further take advantage of
the discontinuous nature of spikes by only performing computations when spiking events arrive.
They can lead to significant improvements in efficiency (typically orders of magnitude faster, see
Section 5.1), as it does not constantly update the state of the system when no spike arrives.
In comparison to traditional brain simulators, our approach of encapsulating the characteristic brain
operations as primitive operators streamlines the support of gradient-based optimization algorithms
— which are typically used in training BIC models nowadays. Notably, all dedicated operators in
BrainPy offer general implementations for both forward- and reverse-mode automatic differentiation,
so that brain dynamics models building upon these operators can be differentiable to be used for
gradient-based optimization tasks (see Section 5.3).

4.2   S CALABLE SIMULATION WITH JIT CONNECTIVITY OPERATORS

Simulating large-scale brain organizations is notoriously challenging since both computing resources
and device memory have a near quadratic scaling requirementas the number of neurons increases. For
the human brain, which consists of approximately 86 billion neurons, storing the Boolean synaptic
connectivity pattern would necessitate nearly 100 terabytes of memory storage. This requirement
poses a challenge even for modern supercomputer centers. Moreover, supercomputers are expensive,
energy-intensive, and less accessible to a broad range of researchers. This poses significant obstacles
for researchers seeking to engage in large-scale brain modeling endeavors.
To address this challenge, BrainPy introduces a JIT connectivity algorithm with extremely low
sampling complexity (see Appendix C). JIT connectivity is a method (Lytton et al., 2008; Carvalho
et al., 2020; Knight & Nowotny, 2020) used for simulating large-scale brain networks with static
synaptic parameters. In this method, synaptic connections are determined by a fixed connectivity
rule, and synaptic weights remain unchanged during simulation. Instead of storing the synaptic
connectivity, the JIT connectivity algorithm regenerates connectivity parameters when a presynaptic


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


neuron fires. BrainPy provides a comprehensive range of JIT connectivity operators crafted for
performing matrix-matrix multiplication and matrix-vector multiplication within the brainpy.math
.jitconn module. Compared to standard dense or sparse matrix multiplication operators, BrainPy’s
JIT operators enable simulations with neural networks two to three orders of magnitude larger on a
single device (Section 4.2), paving an easy avenue for large-scale brain simulation for researchers.

4.3        I NTEGRATING MODELS IN BRAIN SIMULATION AND AI BY DECOUPLING THE DYNAMICS
           FROM THE COMMUNICATION

Encapsulating characteristic brain operations as primitive operators is an initial step toward integrating
brain simulation and AI models. To further this integration, we need a unified perspective for linking
major DL components with brain simulation models. The main obstacle hindering this perspective is
managing the complex nature of synaptic computation.
BrainPy introduces a unique abstraction that effectively captures and simplifies the complexity
of synaptic computations. In BrainPy, a synapse projection between two neuron populations is
decomposed into four key components, each encompassing various implementation variants. They
are (1) synaptic dynamics, such as alpha, exponential, or dual exponential dynamics; (2) synaptic
connectivity patterns, including dense or sparse connections; (3) synaptic output models, such as
conductance-based, current-based, or magnesium blocking effects; and (4) synaptic plasticity rules,
including short-term plasticity or long-term spike timing dependent plasticity. This decomposition
enables BrainPy to offer general implementations for executing diverse synaptic computations.
Among the various implementations, two special cases called AlignPre and AlignPost projections
offer superior advantages. Both projections assume homogeneous parameters governing synaptic
dynamics within a projection1 . It is important to note that these projections are not approximations.
They accurately compute the same dynamics as the original projections while providing new benefits.

A                                                                      B
Presynaptic
  current                        𝐼 ∈ ℝ!
                                                                           ①
Presynaptic
 potential
                                 𝑉 ∈ ℝ!            Synaptic
                                                Communications
                                                                                  Dense
                                            𝑤!! 𝑤!#      ⋯       𝑤!"
Presynaptic                      𝑧 ∈ ℝ!
   spikes                                   𝑤#! 𝑤##      ⋯       𝑤#"       ②
                     delay 𝑡 !
                                            ⋮    ⋮       ⋮        ⋮

Synaptic                                    𝑤"! 𝑤"#      ⋯       𝑤""
                                 𝑠 ∈ ℝ"#!                                      Convolution
 delays                                              𝑊 ∈ ℝ!∗!

                                                                           ③
 Synaptic
 variables                       𝑔 ∈ ℝ!


Figure 2: Synaptic projections in BrainPy. (A) The AlignPre and AlignPost projections offer a
decoupled interface for managing dynamics and the communication between dynamics. (B) The
synaptic communication allows for diverse implementations, including the utilization of DL models.

Minimal device memory consumption. In general, a projection requires storing and updating
pmn synaptic variables, where m and n are the numbers of pre- and post-synaptic neurons, and
p is the connection probability. However, AlignPre and AlignPost projections only require m
and n variables, respectively, aligning with the dimensions of the pre- and post-synaptic neuron
groups (please refer to Appendix D for the reduction details and Figure S7 for the computing
workflow). Another aspect that showcases the memory efficiency of AlignPre and AlignPost
projections is their ability to automatically merge duplicate synapse variable creation and updating
across multiple projections. AlingPre is particularly suitable for handling one-to-many connections
since it keeps a trace of synaptic dynamics induced by pre-synaptic neurons (Figure S7C). This
trace can be shared and reused across multiple post-synaptic groups if the synaptic parameters
   1
     We utilize the exponential
                           P synapse model to exemplify the homogeneity. The dynamics of the model is
described by ġ = −g/τ + k δ(t − tk ), where g the conductance, τ the time constant, tsp  k the pre-synaptic
spike. We consider the projection homogeneous if the value of τ remains consistent across all synapses.


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(typically, time constants) are the same across these projections. On the other hand, the AlignPost
projection is highly advantageous for many-to-one connections (Figure S7D). This is because all
synaptic interactions with identical time constants can be converged into a single trace of variables for
modeling the postsynaptic currents. We showcase the advantages of this automatic synaptic merging
by constructing a large-scale spiking network model consisting of 30 brain areas, inspired by the
work of Joglekar et al. (2017). Our findings reveal that this technique not only decreases device
memory usage but also significantly reduces compilation and simulation time (see Appendix F).

Decoupling brain dynamics from its communication. Furthermore, the AlignPre and
AlignPost projections offer a novel perspective on the incorporation of conventional DL com-
ponents within brain simulation models. As depicted in Figure 2A, there is a distinct separation
between the dynamics and the communication between these dynamics. The model dynamics align
precisely with the dimensional of pre- and post-synaptic neuron groups, exhibiting strong element-
wise and memory-intensive properties. The communication between pre- and post-synaptic groups is
facilitated by a communication matrix. Standard brain models implement such communication via
sparse matrices, while DL models like linear transformations, convolutions, and normalizations can
also serve as alternative communication mechanisms for propagating brain dynamics (Figure 2B).

4.4   F LEXIBLE MODELING WITH A MULTI - SCALE MODEL BUILDING INTERFACE

  A   Potassium Channel    B        HH Neuron       C      E/I Network        D         Visual System
                                       K



                                      HH                                          V1
                                                                                       V2
                                                                                                 TEo
                               Na               L                                           V4
                                                                                                       TEpd


Figure 3: Multi-scale model building interface of BrainPy. Here bp is referred to brainpy package.

Brain dynamics models have key features of modularity, multi-scale organization, and hierarchy
(Meunier et al., 2010). To match these characteristics, BrainPy implements a modular, composable,
and flexible programming interface centered around the brainpy.DynamicalSystem class. The
key idea underlying this multi-scale model-building paradigm is that models at any level of resolution
can be defined as brainpy.DynamicalSystem classes, and higher-level models (e.g., networks or
systems) can be constructed by hierarchically combining lower-level models (e.g., ion channels or
neurons). Figure 3 presents an illustrative example of hierarchical model composition. It demonstrates
the recursive construction of a model, progressing from channels (Figure 3A) to neurons (Figure 3B),
networks (Figure 3C), and finally systems (Figure 3D). It is important to note that while tools
like NetPyNE (Dura-Bernal et al., 2019) also enable hierarchical composition, BrainPy clearly
distinguishes it through its unique flexibility and customizability. Specifically, BrainPy allows users
to flexibly control the depth of composition based on their specific requirements, ensuring seamless
alignment with the aforementioned brain characteristics. Additionally, for user convenience, BrainPy
offers a wide range of commonly used models such as channels, neurons, synapses, populations, and
networks, serving as building blocks to simplify the construction of large-scale models.

4.5   O BJECT- ORIENTED JIT C OMPILATION
Brain dynamics models are intrinsically memory-intensive. For example, the computation within
the classical leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron primarily consists of element-wise operations
such as addition, multiplication, and division. In contrast to DNN models that are typically filled
with computation-intensive operators, the memory-intensive nature of brain dynamics models poses


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


significant challenges for efficient simulation using native Python. To overcome this, BrainPy heavily
leverages JAX (Frostig et al., 2018) and XLA (Artemev et al., 2022) for JIT compilation. JIT
compilation executes models outside of the Python interpreter and optimizes memory-intensive
operators by automatic kernel fusion. This fusion technique effectively reduces off-chip memory
access, kernel launching overhead, and CPU-GPU switching delays, making XLA an ideal choice for
compiling brain dynamics models. Particularly, BrainPy integrates a collection of object-oriented JIT
transformations into its multi-scale model-building interface. These transformations are built upon
JAX’s implementation of a function-oriented JIT interface, as detailed in Appendix G. By leveraging
these transformations, any multi-scale BrainPy model can be effortlessly converted into an optimized
XLA process, compatible with CPU, GPU, and TPU platforms.


5     D EMONSTRATIONS

In this section, we showcase BrainPy’s efficiency and scalability in brain simulation and BIC tasks.
We also highlight its differentiable simulation capability by training a biologically plausible spiking
network model on working memory tasks.

5.1   E FFICIENCY OF B RAIN P Y

      A                                   B


      C                                   D


Figure 4: Event-driven operators in BrainPy enable the efficient running of brain simulation models.
(A, B) Speed comparison between different operators that perform the matrix-vector multiplication
for synaptic computation on both CPU (A) and GPU (B) devices. (C, D) Speed comparison of
different brain simulators when simulating the COBA-LIF (C) and COBA-HH networks (D).

We first showcase the performance of our event-driven operators (refer to Section 4.1) by using
brainpy.math.event.csrmv operator, which is used to compute y = Mv, where M ∈ Rm∗n
is the synaptic connectivity, v ∈ Rn the presynaptic spikes, and y ∈ Rm the postsynaptic currents.
Unlike the alternative dense matrix-vector multiplication, it takes advantage of the CSR representation
to store M. Different from the corresponding sparse operator, it makes full use of the event property
of the v and computes only at positions corresponding to the spiking event (see Appendix B).
Therefore, brainpy.math.event.csrmv is capable of significantly reducing temporal and spatial
costs associated with synaptic computations. In practice, we compare brainpy.math.event
.csrmv with the corresponding sparse and dense operators in JAX and PyTorch. Each operator
performs the synaptic computation in 1 s (10,000 times with the time step 0.1 ms), where we randomly
sample spiking events in v so that presynaptic neurons can fire with frequencies at 10 Hz, 100 Hz,
and 1000 Hz. The comparison results show that the event-driven operator achieves two to five orders
of magnitude faster than other operators on both CPU and GPU devices (Figure 4A and Figure 4B).
Moreover, with the lower firing frequency, the event-driven operator runs faster. This is in contrast to
its counterparts whose computing times are independent of the number of incoming spiking events.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To verify the efficiency of BrainPy on realistic brain simulation models, we further compare BrainPy
with several mainstream brain simulation frameworks, including NEURON (Hines & Carnevale,
1997), NEST (Gewaltig & Diesmann, 2007), Brian2 (Stimberg et al., 2019), ANNArchy (Vitay et al.,
2015), and BindsNet (Hazan et al., 2018). We use EI balance networks with the LIF neuron (i.e., the
COBA-LIF model (Vogels & Abbott, 2005)) and the Hodgkin-Huxley neuron (i.e., the COBA-HH
model (Brette et al., 2007)) as benchmarks. The E/I balanced network typically exhibits sparse
and event-driven properties, and is highly suitable to apply brainpy.math.event.csrmv for its
computation. As shown in Figure 4C and Figure 4D, BrainPy shows the best performance on the
COBA-LIF model, and such speed superiority becomes more pronounced in the COBA-HH network.

5.2   S CALABILITY OF B RAIN P Y

We evaluate the scalability of BrainPy by focusing on our JIT connectivity operators (refer to Sec-
tion 4.2). We investigate the memory usage and execution speed of dense, sparse, and JIT connectivity
operator brainpy.math.jitconn.mv_prob_uniform when performing the matrix-vector multi-
plication y = Jv. Here, J represents the connection matrix with a connectivity probability of p, and
the weights at nonzero positions are sampled from a normal distribution N (µ, σ 2 ) using the seed s. J
is stored as a dense matrix in the dense operator, a CSR sparse matrix in the sparse operator, and four
scalars (p, µ, σ, s) in the JIT connectivity operator. Our experiments reveal that as the matrix size
increases, the JIT connectivity operator maintains nearly constant memory consumption (Figure 5A)
and executes with one to two orders of magnitude greater speed compared to the corresponding dense
and sparse operators (Figure 5B). This emphasizes the potential for performing large-scale brain
simulations on limited computing devices.

A                                  B                                 C


D                                  E                                 F


Figure 5: JIT connectivity operators enable large-scale brain dynamics modeling. (A, B) The memory
usage (A) and speed (B) comparison between BrainPy’s JIT connectivity operator with JAX’s sparse
and dense operators for performing the matrix multiplication. (C) Scaling up the COBA-LIF network
with the JIT connectivity operator. (D, E) The empirical relationship between the classification
performance and the reservoir size using KTH (D) and MNIST (E) datasets. (F) The inference speed
comparison of the reservoir model using the dense, sparse, and JIT connectivity operators.
To demonstrate its utility in realistic brain simulation, we implement a large-scale version of the
aforementioned COBA-LIF network (Vogels & Abbott, 2005) using the proposed JIT connectivity
operator (Appendix N). We have successfully scaled up this EI balance network model to over 4
million neurons and 80 incoming synapses per neuron on a single GPU device. The memory and
computing time scale linearly with network size (Figure 5C, Figure S16B, and Figure S16C).
Furthermore, these large-scale operators can be applied in brain-inspired reservoir models (Lukoše-
vičius, 2012) as their input and recurrent weights are fixed during training, which aligns well with the
capabilities of JIT connectivity operators. To assess its performance, we conducted experiments to
scale up the reservoir size (see Appendix H). Initially, we evaluate the model on the KTH dataset (An-
tonik et al., 2019), and find that the model’s performance improves constantly with an increase
of the reservoir size (Figure 5D). In a previous study (Antonik et al., 2019), a reservoir with only
16,384 hidden units achieved a testing accuracy of 91.3%. In contrast, our implementation with JIT


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


connectivity operators allows easy scaling up to a reservoir with 30,000 nodes, resulting in a superior
accuracy of up to 94.4%. We also verified this scaling experiment using the MNIST dataset. When
the reservoir layer size was set to 50,000 nodes, the network achieved an accuracy of 98.9% (Figure
5E), on par with the state-of-art machine learning algorithms. Additionally, the reservoir model using
the JIT connectivity operator is twice as fast during inference compared to the sparse implementation.
It also performs better than the dense implementation when the reservoir model has over 10,000
nodes (Figure 5F).

5.3   T RAINING FUNCTIONAL BRAIN DYNAMICS MODELS

      A   Fixation   Sample       Delay      Test
                                                     E


          500 ms     500 ms       1000 ms   500 ms

      B                                              F


                                                                          Accuracy
                                                         Loss
      C                       D                      G


Figure 6: BrainPy helps to train a data-driven, biologically realistic SNN model for performing a
working memory task. (A) The delayed match-to-sample working memory task. (B) Two examples
that show the match case (the motion orientations are consistent between sample and test periods)
and the non-match case. (C, D) Neuron firing patterns in the model. (E) The AMPA and GABA
synapse dynamics in the model. (F) The loss and accuracy of the model when training on the DMS
task. (G) An example of the spiking dynamics of the network after training.
Finally, we evaluate the differentiable simulation capability of BrainPy for biological brain networks.
Particularly, we apply the back-propagation algorithm to train a data-driven SNN model of the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) (refer to Appendix I) with a working memory task (Figure 6A and Figure 6B).
We use the generalized leaky integrate-and-fire (GIF) model to fit the spiking patterns of PFC neurons
as observed in experiments (Mihalas & Niebur, 2009). After fitting, most PFC neurons exhibit tonic
spiking with spike frequency adaptation (Figure 6C), while the remaining have characteristic bursting
features (Figure 6D). Furthermore, we consider the exponential synapse model to model AMPA and
GABA synapses (Figure 6E). We train the network to solve the delayed match-to-sample (DMS)
task, where the network must indicate whether sequentially presented sample and test stimuli (500
ms sample period; 1000 ms delay period) match exactly (Figure 6A). In this task, the network must
maintain the stimulus information for an extended time period (> 1000 ms), then compare the held
information to the test stimulus to make a decision. We find that our biologically grounded GIF
network can successfully solve this task requiring long-term dependencies. Within a few epochs, the
testing accuracy rapidly increases to nearly 100% (Figure 6F). The post-training spiking dynamics of
the network also exhibit comparable patterns to the neural activity of PFC neurons recorded from
monkeys performing the same DMS task (see Figure 6G and data in Constantinidis et al. (2016)).

6     C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, BrainPy provides a differential brain simulator that serves as a bridge between the
worlds of brain simulators and DL frameworks. By leveraging dedicated optimizations, it enables
flexible, efficient, and scalable brain simulation capabilities within the JAX framework. Additionally,
its seamless integration with the JAX machine learning ecosystem facilitates the incorporation of
AI models into brain simulation. Through the unique combination of these two strengths, BrainPy
emerges as a powerful tool for exploring the complexities of the brain and a comprehensive platform
for interdisciplinary research between brain simulation and BIC.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We put all the codes in our supplementary materials for reproducing our experiment results which are
mainly demonstrated in Section 5. Other results in the appendix are also included in our codes. We
provide a README file for our code directory structure and running guidance. For the details of
Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 , a complete description of the model and training parameters are given
in Appendix H and Appendix I.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Innovation 2030-Brain Science and Brain-
inspired Intelligence Project (No. 2021ZD0200204). We thank Yifeng Gong from Beijing Institute of
Technology for his valuable contributions during his internship in Si Wu’s lab.

R EFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
 Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale
 machine learning. In 12th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation
 (OSDI 16), pp. 265–283, 2016.

Denis Alevi, Marcel Stimberg, Henning Sprekeler, Klaus Obermayer, and Moritz Augustin.
  Brian2cuda: flexible and efficient simulation of spiking neural network models on gpus. Frontiers
  in Neuroinformatics, 16:883700, 2022.

Piotr Antonik, Nicolas Marsal, Daniel Brunner, and Damien Rontani. Human action recognition with
  a large-scale brain-inspired photonic computer. Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–8, 2019.

Artem Artemev, Tilman Roeder, and Mark van der Wilk. Memory safe computations with xla
  compiler. ArXiv, abs/2206.14148, 2022.

Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter Buchlovsky, David
  Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Claudio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin, Chris
  Jones, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael
  King, Lena Martens, Hamza Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, John Quan, George
  Papamakarios, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Rosalia Schneider, Eren Sezener,
  Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Wojciech Stokowiec, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind JAX
  Ecosystem, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind.

Inga Blundell, Romain Brette, Thomas A Cleland, Thomas G Close, Daniel Coca, Andrew P
  Davison, Sandra Diaz-Pier, Carlos Fernandez Musoles, Padraig Gleeson, Dan FM Goodman, et al.
  Code generation in computational neuroscience: a review of tools and techniques. Frontiers in
  neuroinformatics, pp. 68, 2018.

Romain Brette, Michelle Rudolph, Ted Carnevale, Michael Hines, David Beeman, James M Bower,
  Markus Diesmann, Abigail Morrison, Philip H Goodman, Frederick C Harris, et al. Simulation
  of networks of spiking neurons: a review of tools and strategies. Journal of computational
  neuroscience, 23(3):349–398, 2007.

Nathalie Azevedo Carvalho, Sylvain Contassot-Vivier, Laure Buhry, and Dominique Martinez.
  Simulation of large scale neural models with event-driven connectivity generation. Frontiers in
  Neuroinformatics, 14, 2020.

Albert Compte, Nicolas J.-B. Brunel, Patricia S. Goldman-Rakic, and X. J. Wang. Synaptic mech-
  anisms and network dynamics underlying spatial working memory in a cortical network model.
  Cerebral cortex, 10 9:910–23, 2000.

Christos Constantinidis, Xue-Lian Qi, and Travis Meyer. Single-neuron spike train recordings from
  macaque prefrontal cortex during a visual working memory task before and after training. CRCNS.
  org, 2016.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kael Dai, Sergey L Gratiy, Yazan N Billeh, Richard Xu, Binghuang Cai, Nicholas Cain, Atle E
  Rimehaug, Alexander J Stasik, Gaute T Einevoll, Stefan Mihalas, et al. Brain modeling toolkit:
  An open source software suite for multiscale modeling of brain circuits. PLOS Computational
  Biology, 16(11):e1008386, 2020.
Salvador Dura-Bernal, Benjamin A Suter, Padraig Gleeson, Matteo Cantarelli, Adrian Quintana,
  Facundo Rodriguez, David J Kedziora, George L Chadderdon, Cliff C Kerr, Samuel A Neymotin,
  et al. Netpyne, a tool for data-driven multiscale modeling of brain circuits. Elife, 8:e44494, 2019.
Jason K Eshraghian, Max Ward, Emre Neftci, Xinxin Wang, Gregor Lenz, Girish Dwivedi, Mo-
  hammed Bennamoun, Doo Seok Jeong, and Wei D Lu. Training spiking neural networks using
  lessons from deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.12894, 2021.
Wei Fang, Yanqi Chen, Jianhao Ding, Ding Chen, Zhaofei Yu, Huihui Zhou, Yonghong Tian, and other
 contributors. Spikingjelly. https://github.com/fangwei123456/spikingjelly,
 2020. Accessed: YYYY-MM-DD.
Roy Frostig, Matthew Johnson, and Chris Leary. Compiling machine learning programs via high-level
  tracing. 2018.
Wulfram Gerstner, Werner M Kistler, Richard Naud, and Liam Paninski. Neuronal dynamics: From
 single neurons to networks and models of cognition. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Marc-Oliver Gewaltig and Markus Diesmann. Nest (neural simulation tool). Scholarpedia, 2(4):
 1430, 2007.
Padraig Gleeson, Sharon Crook, Robert C Cannon, Michael L Hines, Guy O Billings, Matteo
  Farinella, Thomas M Morse, Andrew P Davison, Subhasis Ray, Upinder S Bhalla, et al. Neuroml:
  a language for describing data driven models of neurons and networks with a high degree of
  biological detail. PLoS computational biology, 6(6):e1000815, 2010.
Dan FM Goodman and Romain Brette. Brian: a simulator for spiking neural networks in python.
 Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 2:5, 2008.
Joachim Hass, Loreen Hertäg, and Daniel Durstewitz. A detailed data-driven network model of
  prefrontal cortex reproduces key features of in vivo activity. PLoS Computational Biology, 12,
  2016.
Hananel Hazan, Daniel J. Saunders, Hassaan Khan, Devdhar Patel, Darpan T. Sanghavi, Hava T.
  Siegelmann, and Robert Kozma. Bindsnet: A machine learning-oriented spiking neural networks
  library in python. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 12:89, 2018. ISSN 1662-5196. doi: 10.
  3389/fninf.2018.00089. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
  fninf.2018.00089.
Jonathan Heek, Anselm Levskaya, Avital Oliver, Marvin Ritter, Bertrand Rondepierre, Andreas
  Steiner, and Marc van Zee. Flax: A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX, 2020. URL
  http://github.com/google/flax.
Michael L Hines and Nicholas T Carnevale. The neuron simulation environment. Neural computation,
 9(6):1179–1209, 1997.
Madhura R. Joglekar, Jorge F. Mejías, Guangyu Robert Yang, and Xiao-Jing Wang. Inter-areal
 balanced amplification enhances signal propagation in a large-scale circuit model of the primate
 cortex. Neuron, 98:222–234.e8, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
 CorpusID:4572302.
Jakob Jordan, Tammo Ippen, Moritz Helias, Itaru Kitayama, Mitsuhisa Sato, Jun Igarashi, Markus
  Diesmann, and Susanne Kunkel. Extremely scalable spiking neuronal network simulation code:
  From laptops to exascale computers. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 12, 2018. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3646839.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba.          Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.          CoRR,
  abs/1412.6980, 2014.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


James C. Knight and Thomas Nowotny. Larger gpu-accelerated brain simulations with procedural
  connectivity. Nature Computational Science, 1:136 – 142, 2020.
Susanne Kunkel, Tobias C. Potjans, Jochen M. Eppler, Hans Ekkehard Plesser, Abigail Morrison, and
  Markus Diesmann. Meeting the memory challenges of brain-scale network simulation. Frontiers
  in Neuroinformatics, 5, 2012. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  6261003.
Mantas Lukoševičius. A practical guide to applying echo state networks. In Neural Networks, 2012.
William W. Lytton, Ahmet Omurtag, Samuel A. Neymotin, and Michael L. Hines. Just-in-time
 connectivity for large spiking networks. Neural Computation, 20:2745–2756, 2008.
Nikola T Markov, Maria M Ercsey-Ravasz, AR Ribeiro Gomes, Camille Lamy, Loic Magrou, Julien
  Vezoli, Pierre Misery, Arnaud Falchier, Rene Quilodran, Marie-Alice Gariel, et al. A weighted and
  directed interareal connectivity matrix for macaque cerebral cortex. Cerebral cortex, 24(1):17–36,
  2014.
Adnan Mehonic and A. J. Kenyon. Brain-inspired computing needs a master plan. Nature, 604:255 –
  260, 2021.
David Meunier, Renaud Lambiotte, and Edward T Bullmore. Modular and hierarchically modular
  organization of brain networks. Frontiers in neuroscience, 4:200, 2010.
Stefan Mihalas and Ernst Niebur. A generalized linear integrate-and-fire neural model produces
  diverse spiking behaviors. Neural Computation, 21:704–718, 2009.
Emre O. Neftci, Hesham Mostafa, and Friedemann Zenke. Surrogate gradient learning in spiking
 neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based optimization to spiking neural networks.
 IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36:51–63, 2019.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Christian Pehle and Jens Egholm Pedersen. Norse - A deep learning library for spiking neural
  networks, January 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4422025. Docu-
  mentation: https://norse.ai/docs/.
Philipp Plank, A. Rao, Andreas Wild, and Wolfgang Maass. A long short-term memory for ai
  applications in spike-based neuromorphic hardware. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4:467 – 479,
  2021.
Tobias C. Potjans and Markus Diesmann. The cell-type specific cortical microcircuit: Relating
  structure and activity in a full-scale spiking network model. Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY), 24:
  785 – 806, 2012.
Daniel Rasmussen. Nengodl: Combining deep learning and neuromorphic modelling methods.
  Neuroinformatics, 17:611–628, 2018.
Eduardo Ros, Richard R. Carrillo, Eva M. Ortigosa, Boris Barbour, and Rodrigo Agís. Event-
  driven simulation scheme for spiking neural networks using lookup tables to characterize neuronal
  dynamics. Neural Computation, 18:2959–2993, 2006.
Kaushik Roy, Akhilesh R. Jaiswal, and Priyadarshini Panda. Towards spike-based machine intelli-
  gence with neuromorphic computing. Nature, 575:607 – 617, 2019.
H. Francis Song, Guangyu Robert Yang, and Xiao-Jing Wang. Training excitatory-inhibitory recurrent
  neural networks for cognitive tasks: A simple and flexible framework. PLoS Computational
  Biology, 12, 2016.
Marcel Stimberg, Dan FM Goodman, Victor Benichoux, and Romain Brette. Equation-oriented
 specification of neural models for simulations. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 8:6, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marcel Stimberg, Romain Brette, and Dan FM Goodman. Brian 2, an intuitive and efficient neural
 simulator. Elife, 8:e47314, 2019.
David Sussillo and L. F. Abbott. Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural networks.
  Neuron, 63:544–557, 2009.
Harvey A Swadlow. Efferent neurons and suspected interneurons in s-1 forelimb representation
  of the awake rabbit: receptive fields and axonal properties. Journal of Neurophysiology, 63(6):
 1477–1498, 1990.
Julien Vitay, Helge Ülo Dinkelbach, and Fred H Hamker. Annarchy: a code generation approach to
  neural simulations on parallel hardware. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 9:19, 2015.
Tim P. Vogels and L. F. Abbott. Signal propagation and logic gating in networks of integrate-and-fire
  neurons. The Journal of Neuroscience, 25:10786 – 10795, 2005.
Xiao-Jing Wang. Probabilistic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron, 36
  (5):955–968, 2002.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1708.07747, 2017.
Mingqing Xiao, Qingyan Meng, Zongpeng Zhang, D.K. He, and Zhouchen Lin. Online training
 through time for spiking neural networks. ArXiv, abs/2210.04195, 2022.
Yi Zeng, Dongcheng Zhao, Feifei Zhao, Guobin Shen, Yiting Dong, Enmeng Lu, Qian Zhang,
  Yinqian Sun, Qian Liang, Yuxuan Zhao, Zhuoya Zhao, Hongjian Fang, Yuwei Wang, Yang Li, Xin
  Liu, Chen-Yu Du, Qingqun Kong, Zizhe Ruan, and Weida Bi. Braincog: A spiking neural network
  based brain-inspired cognitive intelligence engine for brain-inspired ai and brain simulation. ArXiv,
  abs/2207.08533, 2022.


                                                 13
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A    E NVIRONMENT SETTINGS
    In this paper, all evaluations and benchmarks were conducted in a Python 3.10 environment, which
    was installed on a system running Ubuntu 22.04.2 LTS. For CPU experiments, we used Intel(R)
    Xeon(R) W-2255 CPU @ 3.70GHz, 64GB RAM @ 3200MHz. For GPU experiments, we used the
    NVIDIA RTXTM A6000 GPU with CUDA 11.7.
    For brain simulation, we compared the running performance of BrainPy with state-of-art brain
    simulators, including NEURON (Hines & Carnevale, 1997) in version 8.2.0, NEST (Gewaltig &
    Diesmann, 2007) at version 3.6, Brian2 (Stimberg et al., 2019) at version 2.5.1, ANNArchy (Vitay
    et al., 2015) in version 4.7.2, and BindsNet (Hazan et al., 2018) in version 0.3.2,
    For brain-inspired computing, we compared BrainPy with several spiking neural networks (SNN)
    training packages, including snnTorch (Eshraghian et al., 2021) in version 0.6.1, SpikingJelly (Fang
    et al., 2020) in version 0.0.0.0.14, and Norse (Pehle & Pedersen, 2021) in version 1.0.0.
    When comparing the performance of dedicated operators in BrainPy with conventional operators
    in modern deep learning frameworks, we used PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) at version 2.0, and
    JAX (Frostig et al., 2018) at version 0.4.10.

    B    E VENT- DRIVEN MATRIX - VECTOR MULTIPLICATION
    Event-driven matrix-vector multiplication y = Mv in BrainPy is used for synaptic computation,
    where v is the presynaptic spikes, M the synaptic connection matrix, and y the postsynaptic current.
    Specifically, it performs matrix-vector multiplication in a sparse and efficient way by exploiting the
    event property of the input vector v. Instead of multiplying the entire matrix M by the vector v,
    which can be wasteful if v has many zero elements, event-driven matrix-vector multiplication in
    BrainPy only performs multiplications for the non-zero elements of the vector, which are called
    events. This can reduce the number of operations and memory accesses, and improve the running
    performance of matrix-vector multiplication.
    In particular, BrainPy implements brainpy.math.event.csrmv, in which the connection matrix
    M is stored as the compressed sparse row (CSR) sparse matrix. The computation of this operator
    requires several parameters:

          1. data: The weights of M contain the non-zero elements in the row-major order.
          2. indices: The array contains the column indices of the non-zero elements in the matrix M.
          3. indptr: The array contains the starting index of each row.
          4. events: The presynaptic spiking vector v.
          5. shape: A tuple with two integers representing the shape of the matrix M.

    brainpy.math.event.csrmv makes full use of the event property of v, and computes only at
    positions where the spike in v is True. The pseudo-code of this operator can be written in Listing S1.
1 def csrmv(data, indices, idnptr, events, outs):
2   for i, event in enumerate(events):
3     if event:
4       for j in range(idnptr[i], idnptr[i + 1]):
5         outs[indices[i]] += data[j]
    Listing S1: The Python pseudo-code of brainpy.math.event.csrmv, where data, indices,
    and idnptr corresponds to the matrix M, events indicates the vector v, and outs represents the
    postsynaptic current y.


    C    M ATRIX - VECTOR MULTIPLICATION WITH THE JUST- IN - TIME
         CONNECTIVITY

    Synaptic connectivity storage imposes a memory bottleneck for large-scale neuronal network simula-
    tions, as it scales quadratically with the number of neurons. Previous studies have demonstrated that


                                                     14
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    static synaptic parameters in brain modeling can be dynamically regenerated during runtime, thereby
    circumventing the space costs of connectivity Lytton et al. (2008); Carvalho et al. (2020); Knight &
    Nowotny (2020).
    We investigate the dynamic regeneration of synaptic connectivity information in a matrix-vector
    product operation y = Mv, where M is the synaptic connection matrix to be regenerated, v is the
    presynaptic spike vector, and y is the postsynaptic current vector.
    A common connectivity schema is the fixed probability connection, where each neuron in the
    presynaptic population connects to each neuron in the postsynaptic population with a fixed probability
    p. The postsynaptic targets of any presynaptic neuron can thus be drawn from a Bernoulli process
    with success probability p.
    A naive way of drawing from the Bernoulli process is to sample repeatedly from the uniform
    distribution U [0, 1] and create a synapse if the sample is smaller than p. However, this is highly
    inefficient for sparse connectivity (p ≪ 1).
    A more efficient way of drawing the sampling is using the geometric distribution Geo[p] (Knight
    & Nowotny, 2020). Instead of sampling at every possible connection position, we can sample the
    distance between two consecutive connection positions, avoiding unnecessary sampling at failed
    positions. The geometric distribution can be sampled in constant time by inverting the cumulative
    density function of the corresponding continuous distribution to obtain log(U[0,1])
                                                                             log(1−P ) . However, this
    sampling method is still costly on CPU and GPU devices due to the existence of log operation.
    We propose to sample the distance between two consecutive connection positions using the uniform
    random integers from 1 to ⌊ p2 − 1⌋. The expectation of U [1, ⌊ p2 − 1⌋] is p1 , ensuring that the sampling
    has the desired connection probability of p. In practice, sampling from U [1, ⌊ p2 − 1⌋] is one order of
    magnitude faster than sampling from Geo[p]. The corresponding Python pseudo-code of our proposed
    solution is shown in Listing S2.
1   import math, random
2
3  def jitconn_prob_homo(events, prob, weight, seed, outs):
4    random.seed(seed)
 5   max_cdist = math.ceil(2/prob - 1)
 6   for event in events:
 7     if event:
 8       post_i = random.randint(1, max_cdist)
 9       while post_i < len(outs):
10         outs[post_i] += weight
11         post_i += random.randint(1, max_cdist)
    Listing S2: The Python pseudo-code of our just-in-time connectivity operator, where events
    indicates the presynaptic spikes v, prob, weight, and seed corresponds to the matrix M, and
    outs represents the postsynaptic current y. The seed parameter guarantees the reproducibility and
    consistency of matrix regeneration across multiple invocations of this function. Note here, all nonzero
    elements in the matrix M have the save value weight.


    D    S YNAPTIC PROJECTIONS WITH A L I G N P R E AND A L I G N P O S T
    AlignPre holds true because with homogeneous synaptic parameters, the spike train coming from
    the same presynaptic neuron will lead to the same synaptic dynamics. As a result, all synapses
    originating from the same presynaptic neuron can share a single dynamical variable. Moreover, the
    AlignPre projection is suitable for all types of synapse models.
    In contrast, the applicability of AlignPost is limited to synapse models that exhibit exponential
    dynamics or are composed of exponential components. For the exponential synapse, the conductance
    g of a post-synaptic neuron is updated according to g ← g + 1 whenever a spike arrives and regardless
    of which presynaptic neuron emitted this spike (refer to Appendix E for details).
    AlignPre is capable of modeling scenarios where the pre-synaptic neuron group projects to multiple
    downstream post-synaptic neuron groups. This mechanism imposes a constraint on the size of synapse


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A                                                                                 B
     Presynaptic                                  𝑧 ∈ ℝ#                               Presynaptic                                 𝑧 ∈ ℝ#
        spikes                                                                            spikes
                                                            %
                                                  delay 𝑡                                                                         delay 𝑡 %
      Synaptic                                                                            Delay
      variables                                   𝑠 ∈ ℝ#                                                                          𝑧 ∈ ℝ#
                                                                                          spikes
                                ×                      𝐼 ∈ ℝ!            𝑥 ∈ ℝ!                                    ×                   𝐼 ∈ ℝ! 𝑠 ∈ ℝ!       𝑥 ∈ ℝ!
                   𝑤!! 𝑤!#          ⋯       𝑤!"                                                      𝑤!! 𝑤!#           ⋯    𝑤!"

                   𝑤#! 𝑤##          ⋯       𝑤#"                                                      𝑤#! 𝑤##           ⋯    𝑤#"
       Synaptic                                    =                                     Synaptic                                  =
       weights      ⋮    ⋮          ⋮        ⋮                                           weights     ⋮      ⋮          ⋮     ⋮

                   𝑤$! 𝑤$#          ⋯       𝑤$"                                                      𝑤$! 𝑤$#           ⋯    𝑤$"

                             𝑊 ∈ ℝ!∗#                  Synaptic     Postsynaptic                                𝑊 ∈ ℝ!∗#               Synaptic Synaptic Postsynaptic
                                                       currents       neurons                                                          currents variables neurons


 C                                                                                 D
                                                                 post1                               pre1


                   pre                                           post2                               pre2                                       post


                                Synaptic                         post3                               pre3                  Synaptic
                                variables                                                                                  variables



Figure S7: Overview of Synaptic Projections. (A) The workflow of the AlignPre model. (B)
The workflow of the AlignPost model. (C) The AlignPre model is suitable for one-to-many
connection. (D) The AlignPost model is suitable for many-to-one connection.


variables, ensuring alignment with the number of pre-synaptic neuron groups. Consequently, if these
projections share the same delay, only a single synapse variable is stored for all these projections.
The operational sequence of AlignPre unfolds as follows: Initially, it receives spikes from the pre-
synaptic neuron group. By considering the delay times, it retrieves spikes that occur after the specified
delay and then proceeds to compute synapse variables through synaptic dynamics. Subsequently,
the synapse variables traverse the synaptic communication layer and synaptic output layer, where
they are transformed into synaptic currents, aligned in accordance with the number of post-synaptic
neuron groups. These synaptic currents are then transmitted to the post-synaptic neuron groups for
further computations.
AlignPost, on the other hand, is designed to handle scenarios in which the post-synaptic neuron
group receives input from multiple upstream pre-synaptic neuron groups. In this case, the size of the
synaptic variables is adjusted to match the number of post-synaptic neuron groups. The operational
sequence of AlignPost closely resembles that of AlignPre, with the notable difference being that
the calculation of synaptic variables occurs after the synaptic communication layer. Specifically,
AlignPost combines delayed pre-synaptic spikes with synaptic weights to update synaptic variables.
Subsequently, these updated synaptic variables undergo computation through the synaptic output
layer, resulting in synaptic currents that are then conveyed to the post-synaptic neurons.

E       E XPONENTIAL SYNAPSE MODEL ENABLES THE A L I G N P O S T PROJECTION
For the exponential synapse, the conductance g of a post-synaptic neuron is governed by
                                                                           n
                                                                           X             t − tsp
                                                                                              j
                                                                g(t) =             exp(−         ),                                                               (1)
                                                                             j
                                                                                            τ

where n is the total number of spikes the post-synaptic neuron received at the current time t, tsp
                                                                                                j the
spiking time of the received j-th spike, and τ the synaptic time constant.
Eq (1) can be rewritten as a differential equation:
                                                                         g(t) X
                                                                ġ = −       +  δ(t − tsp
                                                                                       i,k ),                                                                     (2)
                                                                          τ
                                                                                       i,k


                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where i is the index of the connected pre-synaptic neuron, and tsp
                                                                i,k is the time of k-th spike of the
pre-synaptic neuron i.
In the discrete version, Eq (2) is equivalent to the following equations:
                                     g(t) = exp(−∆t/τ )g(t − ∆t),                                    (3)
and whenever a pre-synaptic spike arrives, g(t) undergoes an update according to:
                                           g(t) ← g(t) + 1.                                          (4)

Therefore, the exponential dynamics property enables us to track and record information using a
single variable for each post-synaptic neuron.


F    M ULTI - AREA SPIKING NEURAL NETWORK

We build a spiking network model which is inspired by Joglekar et al. (2017) with 30 brain areas.
Simulations are performed using a network of leaky integrate-and-fire neurons, with the local circuit
and long-range connectivity structure derived from (Markov et al., 2014). Each of the five areas
consists of 4000 neurons, with 3200 excitatory and 800 inhibitory neurons.
For each neuron, the membrane potential dynamics are described by the following equations:
                                     dV
                                 τ      = −(V (t) − Vrest ) + RG(t)                                  (5)
                                     dt
when V (t) > Vth , the neuron generates a spike and V (t) is set to Vreset . V is the membrane potential,
Vrest is the resting membrane potential, Vreset is the reset membrane potential, Vth is the spike
threshold, τ is the time constant, R = 1 Ω is the resistance, and G(t) is the time-variant synaptic
inputs.
For the synapse, we use conductance-based synaptic interactions. Particularly, G(t) is given by:
                                          X
                                G(t) = −      gji (t) (Vi − Ej ) ,                               (6)
                                               j

where Vi is the membrane potential of neuron i. The synaptic conductance from neuron j to neuron
i is represented by gji (t), while Ej signifies the reversal potential of that synapse. For excitatory
synapses, Ej was set to 0 mV, whereas for inhibitory synapses, it was -80 mV.
The dynamics of the synaptic conductance is given by:
                                dgji     gji          X
                                     =−        + gmax   δ(t − tkj ),                                 (7)
                                 dt     τdecay
                                                           k

where tkj is the spiking time of the presynaptic spike. Whenever a spike occurred in neuron j, the
synaptic conductance gji experienced an immediate increase by a fixed amount gmax . Subsequently,
the conductance gji decayed exponentially with a time constant of τdecay = 5 ms for excitation and
τdecay = 10 ms for inhibition.
The connection density is set according to the experimental connectivity data (Markov et al., 2014).
The inter-areal connectivity is measured as a weight index, called the extrinsic fraction of labeled
neurons (Markov et al., 2014). The intra-area connectivity is set according to the setting in a standard
EI balance network (Brette et al., 2007).
Moreover, we introduce distance-dependent inter-areal synaptic delays by assuming a conduction
velocity of 3.5 m/sec (Swadlow, 1990) and using a distance matrix based on experimentally measured
wiring distances across areas (Markov et al., 2014).
We build this multi-area model using the synaptic projection with and without AlignPost. Then we
measure the memory usage after constructing the model, the compilation time during JIT compilation,
and the execution time when simulation the model. The experimental data is avaliable in Figure S8.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     A


                     B


                     C
                                                                                                         PPT模板下载：www.1ppt.com/moban/     行业PPT模板：www.1ppt.com/hangye/
                                                                                                         节日PPT模板：www.1ppt.com/jieri/      PPT素材下载：www.1ppt.com/sucai/
                                                                                                         PPT背景图片：www.1ppt.com/beijing/    PPT图表下载：www.1ppt.com/tubiao/
                                                                                                         优秀PPT下载：www.1ppt.com/xiazai/     PPT教程： www.1ppt.com/powerpoint/
                                                                                                         Word教程： www.1ppt.com/word/        Excel教程：www.1ppt.com/excel/
                                                                                                         资料下载：www.1ppt.com/ziliao/         PPT课件下载：www.1ppt.com/kejian/
                                                                                                         范文下载：www.1ppt.com/fanwen/         试卷下载：www.1ppt.com/shiti/
                                                                                                         教案下载：www.1ppt.com/jiaoan/     PPT论坛：www.1ppt.cn


Figure S8: The evaluation of memory usage, model compilation time, and model execution time for
the multi-are spiking neural network model using synaptic projection with and without the automatic
merging of the AlignPost projection.


G    OO TRANSFORMATION COMPARISON

The JIT compilation interface of JAX/XLA is designed to work with pure Python functions, which is
not compatible with the modular and composable programming interface in BrainPy for building
brain dynamics models (see Section 4.4). To bridge this gap, we provide brainpy.math.jit for
automatic object-oriented JIT transformation.
In this object-oriented transformation, variables that will change during execution should be declared
as brainpy.math.Variable (otherwise, they will be treated as constants and compiled into the
transformed models). Then, a single line calling model_transformed = brainpy.math.jit
(model) will transform the model object into a function compatible with JAX’s functional JIT
interface, before final compilation into an optimized XLA process model_transformed. Through
this streamlined approach, BrainPy’s object-oriented JIT compilation furnishes a robust infrastructure
to maximize the performance of diverse brain dynamics models.


                                                 18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Although Flax and Haiku provide functionality for managing state variables, they do not focus
     specifically on the needs of brain dynamics modeling. In Flax, the initialization of state variables is
     mixed into the computation, making it hard to separate variables from computing logic. In Haiku,
     state variables have a complex syntax for declaration and calculation, which increases the difficulties
     for users to use these time-dependent variables in complex brain dynamical systems.
     The following codes compares the OO programming of Haiku, Flax, and BrainPy, and it highlight
     how straightforward the BrainPy is:
 1 import haiku as hk
 2 import jax.numpy as jnp
 3 import jax.random as jr
 4
 5 def stateful_f():
 6   counter = hk.get_state("counter", shape=[], dtype=jnp.int32, init=jnp.
       ones)
 7   hk.set_state("counter", counter + 1)
 8
 9 f = hk.without_apply_rng(hk.transform_with_state(stateful_f))
10 params, state = f.init(rng=jr.PRNGKey(1))
11 for i in range(3):
12   _, state = f.apply(params, state)
13   print(f’After {i + 1} iterations, State: {state}’)
                            Listing S3: The Haiku’s object-oriented JIT interface.

 1 from flax import linen as nn
 2 import jax.numpy as jnp
 3 import jax.random as jr
 4
 5 class F(nn.Module):
 6   @nn.compact
 7   def __call__(self):
 8     counter = self.variable(’state’, ’counter’, lambda s: jnp.ones(s, jnp
       .int32), ())
 9     counter.value += 1
10
11 f = F()
12 variables = f.init(jr.PRNGKey(1))
13 for i in range(3):
14   _, variables = f.apply(variables, mutable=[’state’])
15   print(f’After {i + 1} iterations, State: {dict(variables["state"])}’)
                             Listing S4: The Flax’s object-oriented JIT interface.

 1   import brainpy as bp
 2   import brainpy.math as bm
 3
 4 class F:
 5   def __init__(self):
 6     self.counter = bm.Variable(bm.ones((), dtype=bm.int32))
 7
 8     @bm.cls_jit
 9     def __call__(self):
10       self.counter += 1
11
12 f = F()
13 for i in range(3):
14   _ = f()
15   print(f’After {i + 1} iterations, State: {f.counter}’)
                           Listing S5: The BrainPy’s object-oriented JIT interface.

     The Pythonic approach of BrainPy makes the object-oriented JIT much more accessible for neurosci-
     entists without deep ML expertise and lowers the barriers compared to Flax or Haiku.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    T HE RESERVOIR COMPUTING MODEL
Reservoir model. The dynamics of the reservoir model used here is given by (Lukoševičius, 2012):
                  x(t) = (1 − α) · x(t − 1) + α · f (Win u(t) + Wrec x(t − 1)),                      (8)
                  y(t) = Wout x(t)                                                                   (9)
where x(t) is the reservoir state, y(t) the readout value, Win and Wrec are input and recurrent
connection matrices, respectively, Wout the readout weight matrix which can be trained by either
offline learning or online learning algorithms, α ∈ (0, 1] the leaky rate, u(t) the input at time step t,
and f the nonlinear activation function.

Model implementation. Win and Wrec are fixed and randomly initialized, and they are highly
suitable to be implemented with the just-in-time connectivity operators.
Since Win is usually initialized with the uniform distribution U [−s, s], we implement the input oper-
ation Win u(t) with brainpy.math.jitconn.mv_prob_uniform(vector, w_low, w_high
, conn_prob, seed), where vector corresponds to the input u(t), w_low corresponds to −s,
w_high corresponds to s, conn_prob corresponds to the connection probability of the input matrix
Win , and seed the random seed controlling the reproducibility of the input matrix.
Wrec is usually initialized with the normal distribution
                                                      √    N (0, σ) with a desirable spectral radius
ρ. Usually, we have the relationship of σ = ρ/ m ∗ p, where p is the connection probabil-
ity of the matrix, m the matrix size, and ρ the spectral radius of the recurrent weight Wrec .
Therefore, we implement the recurrent matrix operation Wrec x(t − 1) with brainpy.math.
jitconn.mv_prob_normal(vector, w_mu, w_sigma, conn_prob, seed), where vector
 corresponds to the reservoir state x(t − 1), w_mu is 0, w_sigma corresponds to σ, conn_prob
corresponds to the connection probability of the recurrent matrix Wrec , and seed the random seed
controlling the reproducibility of the recurrent matrix.

Training methods. The training objective of reservoir models is to find the optimal Wout that
minimizes the square error between y(t) and ytarget (t). The common way to learn the linear output
weight Wout is using the ridge regression algorithm (Lukoševičius, 2012). However, ridge regression
is an offline learning method in which the parameters are learned given all samples of data. When
training reservoir models with a large amount of samples, ridge regression usually is halted by
the limited memory space of devices. Therefore, we use the FORCE learning method (Sussillo &
Abbott, 2009) to train the model. Contrary to ridge regression, FORCE learning is an online learning
algorithm that learns the linear readout weight using only local information in time. This learning
mechanism can update the parameters of a model one sample of data at a time, which can significantly
reduce computational costs and enable training a large-scale reservoir to be possible.


             Table S1: The parameter table of the reservoir model on different datasets.
            Parameter                       KTH dataset               MNIST dataset
            Win connection probability [0.01, 0.005]            0.1
            Wrec connection probability [0.001, 0.0002, 0.0001] [0.1, 0.01]
            Distribution of Win         Uniform distribution    Uniform distribution
            Distribution of Wrec        Normal distribution     Normal distribution
            Spectral radius ρ           1.0                     1.3
            Input scaling s             0.1                     0.3
            Leaky rate α                0.9                     0.6
            Number of training epoch    10                      5
            FORCE learning rate         0.1                     0.1


Experiment details. We conducted several experiments to investigate the performance of large-
scale reservoir models on different datasets. First, we evaluate the performance of the model on
the KTH dataset (Antonik et al., 2019), a widely used benchmark dataset for action recognition in
computer vision research. This dataset contains spatiotemporal patterns that can be captured by


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reservoir models. Then we evaluate the reservoir model on the MNIST dataset, which is a static
image dataset without temporal information. All parameter selections for classifying two datasets are
shown in Table S1.
We set the connection probabilities of Win and Wrec as follows: For the KTH dataset, Win has
a connection probability of 0.01 for size ∈ [2000, 4000, 8000, 10000, 20000] and 0.005 for size ∈
[30000]. Wrec has a connection probability of0.001 for size ∈ [2000, 4000, 8000], 0.0002 for size
∈ [10000], and 0.0001 for size ∈ [20000, 30000]. For the MNIST dataset, Win has a connection
probability of 0.1 for all reservoir sizes, and Wrec has a connection probability of 0.1 for size ∈
[2000, 4000, 8000, 10000], and 0.01 for size ∈ [20000, 30000, 40000, 50000].

I   R ECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS FOR PERFORMING THE DMS TASK

Network structure. The architecture of recurrent networks used here (both the rate- and spiking-
based models) is shown in Figure S9, where the recurrent layer consists of recurrent units that receive
and process the time-varying inputs from the input layer, and generate the desired time-varying
outputs. The input layer encodes the sensory information relevant to the task, while the readout layer
produces a decision in terms of an abstract decision variable.


Figure S9: The schematic diagram of the recurrent neural network model for implementing a working
memory task.


The input layer. The input layer consists of N motion direction-tuned input neurons (for the
spiking network, N = 100; for the rate model, N = 24). The tuning of the motion direction-selective
neurons followed a von Mises distribution, such that the firing rate activity of the input neuron i
during the stimulus period was
                                uit = A exp κ cos θ − θpref
                                                         i

                                                                 ,                             (10)
                                           i
where θ is the direction of the stimulus, θpref is the preferred direction of input neuron i, κ was set
to 2.0, and A is the maximum firing rate and was set to 40 Hz. Furthermore, for all periods, input
neurons keep a constant background firing rate rbg . Here, rbg was set to 1 Hz.
In the main text, Figure 3B depicts the spiking activities of the input layer in the spiking-based model.
Unlike the spiking encoded input, which produces discrete spikes, the rate-based input layer generates
continuous firing rate values as data. Figure S10 demonstrates the cases of match (when the stimuli
during the sample and test periods are identical) and non-match (when they are different).

The recurrent layer in the rate model. In the rate-based model, the recurrent layer consists of 80
excitatory neurons and 20 inhibitory neurons. The firing activity r of the rate-based recurrent neurons
was modeled with the following dynamical equation (Song et al., 2016):
                       dr                                           √
                     τ     = −r + f W rec r + W in u + brec + 2τ σrec ζ ,                          (11)
                       dt


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Match sample                              Non-match sample


Figure S10: The rate version of two examples that show the match case and the non-match case. For
the spiking version of the input, please refer to Figure 3 in the main text.


where τ is the neuron time constant, f (∗) represents the activation function, W rec and W in are
the recurrent synaptic weights and input synaptic weights, respectively, brec is a bias term, ζ is
independent Gaussian white noise with zero mean and unit variance applied to all recurrent neurons
and σrec is the noise intensity. The activation function used in this study is f (x) = max(0, x).
In practice, the simulation of the Eq. 11 was performed with the Euler integration method:
                                                                     r                  !
                                                                         2
           rt = (1 − α)rt−dt + αf W rec rt−dt + W in ut + brec +           σrec N (0, 1) ,         (12)
                                                                         α

where α = dt/τ , dt the numerical integration step, N (0, 1) denotes the standard normal distribution.
To maintain the separation of excitatory and inhibitory neurons, we decomposed the recurrent weight
matrix W rec as the product between a trainable non-negative matrix W rec,+ and a fixed diagonal
matrix D (Song et al., 2016):
                                       W rec = W rec,+ D                                           (13)
                                                          
                                               1
                                       D=
                                                 ..       
                                                                                                   (14)
                                                     .     
                                                        −1

The recurrent layer in the spiking model. For the spiking model, the recurrent cell was im-
plemented with the spiking neuron model. In this study, the spiking neuron is modified from the
generalized integrate-and-fire neuron model (Mihalas & Niebur, 2009). In particular, this model has
two internal currents, one fast and one slow. Its dynamic behavior is given by
               dI1
           τI1     = −I1 ,                                             fast internal current       (15)
                dt
               dI2
           τI2     = −I2 ,                                            slow internal current        (16)
                dt
               dV
           τV      = −V + Vrest + R(I1 + I2 + Iext ),                  membrane potential          (17)
                dt
When V i of i-th neuron meets Vth , the modified GIF model fires:
                                            I1i ← A1 ,                                             (18)
                                            I2i ← I2i + A2 ,                                       (19)
                                            V i ← Vrest ,                                          (20)
where τI1 denotes the time constant of the fast internal current, τI2 the time constant of the slow
internal current, τV the time constant of membrane potential, R the resistance, Iext the external input,
Vrest the resting potential, and A1 and A2 the spike-triggered currents.
For matching the statistical data of electrophysiological experiments in Hass et al. (2016), we assigned
80 excitatory neurons and 20 inhibitory neurons. Inhibitory neurons exhibit a bursting firing pattern,


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


while excitatory neurons show adaptive spikings. We set A1 = 8.0 for inhibitory neurons, A1 = 0
for excitatory neurons, A2 = −0.6, τI1 = 10 ms, τI2 was sampled from a uniform distribution
U [100, 3000] ms.
The external current Iext in the network was modeled through the exponential synapse model, whose
dynamics is given by:
                        i
                      dIext     Ii    X                         X
                            = − ext +   Wijrec z j [t − dij ] +   Wijin uj [t],                                   (21)
                       dt      τdecay j                         j

where τdecay is the time constant of the synaptic state, tk the time of the presynaptic spike, W rec the
recurrent weight, W in the input to recurrent weight, and dij the synaptic delay. Here, dij = 0 ms.
τdecay = 100 ms was chosen according to the previous literature (Compte et al., 2000).
To inspect the computational graph of the modified GIF network, we also give the discrete description
of the model:
            I1 [t + ∆t] = where(z[t] == 1, A1 , αI1 I1 [t])                                                       (22)
            I2 [t + ∆t] = αI2 I2 [t] + A2 z[t]                                                                    (23)
            Iext [t + ∆t] = αIext Iext [t] + Wrec z[t] + Win u[t]                                                 (24)
            V[t + ∆t] = αV V[t] + (Vrest + R(I1 [t + ∆t] + I2 [t + ∆t] + Iext [t]))∆t                             (25)
            z[t + ∆t] = where(V[t + ∆t] > Vth , 1, 0)                                                             (26)
                                        − τ 1 ∆t               − τ 1 ∆t                −τ 1    ∆t              − τ1 ∆t
where z is the spiking state, αI1 = e        I1
                                                   , αI2 = e     I2
                                                                          , αVth = e     Vth
                                                                                                    , αV = e     V       ,
                  1
                −τ     ∆t
and αIext = e    decay      .
Similar to the rate-based model, we decomposed the recurrent weight matrix W rec as the product
between a trainable non-negative matrix W rec,+ and a fixed diagonal matrix D (Song et al., 2016):
                                             W rec = W rec,+ D                                                    (27)

For the forward spike function, we use the Heaviside function to generate the spike:
                                spike(x) = H(V [t] − Vth ) = H(x),                                                (28)
where x is used to represent V [t] − Vth .
To make the non-differentiable spiking activation compatible with the back-propagation algorithm,
we considered a surrogate gradient:
                                spike′ (x) = ReLU(α ∗ (width − |x|))                                              (29)
where width = 1.0, and α = 0.3. α is the parameter that controls the altitude of the gradient, and
width is the parameter that controls the width of the gradient. The shape of this function is shown in
Figure S11.


         Figure S11: The shape of the ReLU gradient function depends on its parameters.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The readout layer. The recurrent neurons project linearly to the output neurons. For the rate-based
model, the readout layer is given by:
                                               y[t] = W out r[t] + bout ,                            (30)
          out                                                                            out
where W         are the synaptic weights between the recurrent and output neurons, and b       the bias.
For the spiking network, the output neuron is the leaky neuron, whose dynamics is given by:
                                               dy
                                        τout      = −y + W out z + bout ,                            (31)
                                               dt
where τout is the time constant of the output neuron, W out the synaptic weights between the recurrent
and output neurons, and bout the bias. In the discrete description, the output dynamics is written as:
                                 y[t + ∆t] = αout y[t] + (W out z[t] + bout )∆t,                     (32)
                  − τ 1 ∆t
where αout = e       out     .

Weight initialization.
                    q Initial input, recurrent, and readout weights were drawn from a Gaussian
                       nin N (0, 1), where nin is the number of afferent neurons, N (0, 1) is the
                        s
distribution Wji ∼
zero-mean unit-variance Gaussian distribution, and s is the weight scale. For inhibitory neurons,
s = 0.2; for excitatory neurons, s = 0.05.

                 A


                  B


                 C


Figure S12: The rate-based recurrent model for implementing a DMS working memory task. (A) The
training accuracy of the rate-based recurrent neural network for performing a DSM working memory
task. (B) The recurrent activity during the network receiving a non-match case stimulus. (C) The
output activity of the network when receiving a non-match case stimulus.

Training methods. The training was performed using the BPTT algorithm. The integration time
step ∆t is 1 ms for the spiking neural network, while ∆t is 100 ms for the rate-based model. The
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) was used for computing the gradient-based optimization. The
goal of the training was to minimize the cross-entropy between the output activity and the target output
during the test period. For the spiking network, we add an additional voltage regularization loss that


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


penalizes voltages that fall significantly outside the support of the surrogate gradient function (Plank
et al., 2021):
                               XX
             Lvoltage [t] = λv         (ReLU(V i [t] − 0.4))2 + (ReLU(−V i [t] − 2.0))2 ,           (33)
                                  i      t

where λv is the strength of the voltage regularization.

The performance of the rate-based model. In contrast to the spiking-based model, the rate model
employed here exhibits a slow convergence of training (see Figure S12A). It requires dozens of
epochs of training to achieve a high accuracy. Figure S12 B and C also show the recurrent and output
activities after the rate-based network receives a non-match case stimulus. Same as in the spiking
network, the neural activity of the rate model during the delay period (1000 - 2000 ms) maintains a
high firing rate.


J      E VALUATION OF B RAIN P Y ON TRAINING MACHINE - LEARNING ORIENTED
       SPIKING NEURAL NETWORKS

To evaluate the performance of BrainPy on BIC models, we conduct a comparative analysis with
several popular SNN training frameworks, including snnTorch (Eshraghian et al., 2021), Norse (Pehle
& Pedersen, 2021), and SpikingJelly (Fang et al., 2020). Note here our comparisons are only carried
out using densely connected spiking neural networks, which are predominantly utilized in existing
BIC models.
We first use a simple three-layer SNN model (Neftci et al., 2019), where the input layer delivers
synaptic currents to the hidden LIF layer with exponential dynamics, then the output layer readouts
the hidden dynamics with an exponential synapse. The connections between each layer are dense
layers. The training was performed using the BPTT algorithm on the Fashion-MNIST dataset (Xiao
et al., 2017). The comparison result of the training speed per epoch is presented in Table S2. We find
that BrainPy exhibits superior performances on both CPU and GPU devices. Furthermore, to test the
performance of BrainPy on large-scale SNN networks, we re-implement a VGG SNN network (Xiao
et al., 2022) which was originally coded in a PyTorch+SpikingJelly environment. The evaluation
result is shown in Table S2. Under the same training setting, BrainPy achieves much better running
performance. It reduces almost half of the time for training on GPUs.


Table S2: Comparison of average training speed per epoch for two SNN models using
snnTorch (Eshraghian et al., 2021), SpikingJelly (Fang et al., 2020), Norse (Pehle & Pedersen,
2021), and BrainPy.
    Model                             Device          snnTorch     SpikingJelly   Norse       BrainPy
                                     CPU (Intel)     44.1 ± 0.3 s 49.9 ± 1.0 s    52.2 ± 0.2 s 28.6 ± 1.0 s
    Simple SNN (Neftci et al., 2019)
                                     GPU (RTX A6000) 46.6 ± 1.0 s 53.1 ± 0.9 s    49.6 ± 0.3 s 17.1 ± 0.6 s
    VGG SNN (Xiao et al., 2022)       GPU (RTX A6000) -            104.0 ± 1.0 s -            50.0 ± 1.0 s



K       E VALUATION OF COMPILATION TIME BETWEEN B RAIN P Y AND B RIAN 2

Simulating biological spiking neural networks often involves a time-consuming compilation pro-
cess. To evaluate the compilation cost of BrainPy, we conducted a systematic comparison with
Brian2 (Stimberg et al., 2019).
To assess the compilation time, we utilized two different network models: a simple EI balance
network (Vogels & Abbott, 2005) and a more complex multi-area network model consisting of 30
interconnected brain areas (Joglekar et al., 2017).
During the initial run, both BrainPy and Brian2 compile the model. Consequently, we measured
the compilation time by simulating the respective network for a single time step (T = ∆t, where T
represents the simulation duration, and ∆t is the simulation time step).


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For Brian2 on CPU, we measured the compilation time using the cython backend. To measure GPU
compilation time, we utilized Brain2CUDA (Alevi et al., 2022).
In the case of the EI balance network, we varied the network size by increasing the number of neurons.
We measured the compilation time across different network sizes and computing platforms. The
comparison results are presented in Figure S13A. BrainPy demonstrates compilation speeds more
than ten times faster than Brian2, regardless of the CPU or GPU device used. Brian2CUDA shows a
gradual increase in compilation cost on GPU devices, which is consistent with the findings in their
original paper. In BrainPy, CPU and GPU exhibit comparable compilation speeds.


A                                                                  &RPSLODWLRQ 7LPH RI (, %DODQFH 1HWZRUN                B                                                               &RPSLODWLRQ 7LPH RI 0XOWL$UHD (, 1HWZRUN


 &RPSLODWLRQ 7LPH >V@


                                                                                                                                                                   &RPSLODWLRQ 7LPH >V@

                                                                                                                                   %UDLQ3\ &38
                                                                                                                                     %UDLQ3\ *38
                                                                                                                                     %UDLQ  &38
                                                                                                                                     %UDLQ &8'$


                                                                                            1HWZRUN 6L]H                                                                                                   %UDLQ3\ &38             %UDLQ3\ *38               %ULDQ  &38

Figure S13: The compilation time comparison between BrainPy and Brian2. (A) The compilation
time measured on an EI balance network model (Vogels & Abbott, 2005). (B) The compilation time
measured on multi-area large-scale network model (Joglekar et al., 2017).


With the multi-area network model, BrainPy exhibits a significant speedup compared to Brain2
(Figure S13B). In this network, we employ jax.vmap to merge multiple projections from one brain
area, resulting in a much simpler computational graph. In contrast, although the simulation of the
network took only around one minute, the compilation process in Brain2 took over an hour. Note
that in this model, the Brain2CUDA failed so we ignore the comparison with Brain2’s GPU backend.
This result unequivocally demonstrates the superior advantage of BrainPy, which leverages modern
just-in-time compilation technology, over traditional brain simulators.
The compilation time comparisons between BrainPy and Brian2 on both the EI balance network and
the more complex multi-area network demonstrate clear advantages of BrainPy’s JIT compilation
approach. BrainPy exhibited over 10x faster compilation times than Brian2 on both CPU and GPU
devices, with the advantage being more pronounced on larger networks.
The gradual increase in Brian2’s compilation time on GPU devices has been reported before (Alevi
et al., 2022) and is likely due to inefficiencies in translating imperative Python code to GPU kernels.
In contrast, BrainPy’s compilation speed was consistent across CPU and GPU. This shows the power
of just-in-time compilation and using computational graph optimizations like jax.vmap to simplify
projections between areas.
The extremely long (>1 hour) compilation time for Brian2 on the multi-area network compared to the
short simulation runtime (∼1 minute) highlights a key bottleneck. As researchers continue building
larger and more complex brain network models, short compilation times are essential to enable rapid
testing and iteration. The over three orders of magnitude speedup shown by BrainPy is thus hugely
impactful.
Overall, BrainPy’s modern compilation approach enables faster development cycles and more complex
networks than previously feasible. As brain models continue increasing in scale and detail, optimized
just-in-time compilation will become more and more critical. These benchmark results validate
BrainPy’s advantages in compilation efficiency today and its ability to scale up to the brain models of
tomorrow.


                                                                                                                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L    S UPPORT FOR THE DISTRIBUTED COMPUTATION IN B RAIN P Y
BrainPy leverages JAX’s parallel computation capabilities to enable distributed simulation and
training of biological spiking neural network models. Specifically, it utilizes JAX’s pjit interface
which parallelizes execution across devices using XLA’s Global Synchronous Parallelism for Multi-
Device (GSPMD) protocol. This allows seamless model parallelism in BrainPy, wherein a single
biological neural network can be partitioned across multiple devices with synchronized updates.
To showcase BrainPy’s distributed computing capabilities, we provide an example using a decision-
making neural network model from Wang (2002). This model has multiple interconnected brain
areas that can be parallelized across devices. By using pjit, we are able to accelerate the simulation
of this complex model by distributing it over multiple GPUs or TPUs. The difference under such
parallelization context is that users should specify one sharding parameter when defining the model
(for details please see the code in Data availability). Each device simulates a part of the network in
sync with the other devices. This enables faster experimentation with larger models, as shown in
Figure S14.

                                                               'LVWULEXWHG &RPSXWDWLRQ RI WKH 'HFLVLRQ 0DNLQJ 1HWZRUN

         &RPSLODWLRQ 7LPH >V@


                                                                                                                                                   738   FRUHV
                                                                                                                                                     738   FRUHV
                                                                                                                                                     738   FRUHV
                                                                                                                                                     738   FRUH

                                                                                                         1HWZRUN 6L]H                                       H

Figure S14: Distributed computation of a decision-making network (Wang, 2002) using BrainPy on
TPUv3 devices. For TPU experiments with 1 and 2 cores, data are truncated due to the out-of-memory
error.
It’s worth noting that this distribution strategy has been successfully used in training large-scale DNN
models, but it can incur significant communication overhead for spiking neural networks. This is
because spike-based models tend to have sparse activations - with only a small subset of neurons
spiking at each timestep. However, GSPMD synchronization requires gathering and broadcasting the
full activation state across devices at every step, even though most values are zero.
This overhead is negligible for dense DNN activations but grows substantially with increasing sparsity
levels. For example, in extreme cases where less than 1% of neurons in a spiking model spike per
timestep, over 99% of the synchronization communication would transfer redundant zero values.
This redundant communication consumes network bandwidth and limits scalability.
To address this inefficiency, we are exploring more optimized synchronization schemes tailored to
spiking neural networks. These could leverage compression or gather only non-zero spikes to reduce
communication costs. Alternately, asynchronous update approaches could be employed that relax
strict lockstep synchronization between devices. Such spike-specific optimizations can unlock greater
scalability for large-scale spiking models in BrainPy while retaining its flexible device distribution
capabilities.


                                                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M     PACKAGE STRUCTURE

BrainPy is a comprehensive Python library for modeling and simulating brain dynamics. It provides
a flexible and extensible framework for building, simulating, training, and analyzing biological
neural networks and brain-inspired algorithms. BrainPy is built on top of efficient Just-In-Time (JIT)
compilers, enabling high-performance computations for various brain dynamics models.
The BrainPy package is organized into several core modules that encapsulate different aspects of
brain dynamics programming:

       • brainpy.math: This module provides a collection of mathematical functions and utilities
         for use in brain dynamics modeling. It includes functions for numerical operations, vector
         and matrix operations, random number generation, and dedicated event-driven, sparse, and
         JIT connectivity operators.
       • brainpy.integrators: This module provides a variety of numerical integration meth-
         ods for solving diverse differential equations (including ordinary differential equations,
         stochastic differential equations, fractional differential equations, and delay differential
         equations) that arise in brain dynamics models. These solvers are based on well-established
         numerical techniques, such as Euler’s method, Runge-Kutta methods, and adaptive solvers.
         The brainpy.integrators module is an essential component of the BrainPy library,
         providing a powerful and versatile set of tools for integrating differential equations used in
         brain dynamics models.
       • brainpy.dyn: This module provides fundamental building blocks for biological neural net-
         works, including ion channels, neurons, synapses, projections, plasticity models, populations,
         and networks.
       • brainpy.dnn: This module provides a high-level API for constructing deep neural net-
         works. It is designed to be simple and easy to use, while still providing the flexibility and
         power needed to build complex models. The module includes a variety of pre-built layers,
         including convolutional layers, pooling layers, and fully connected layers. The DNN models
         can also be used as a component in brainpy.dyn models.
       • brainpy.analysis: The module provides a collection of tools for analyzing the dy-
         namics of neural networks, including phase plane analysis and bifurcation analysis for
         low-dimensional dynamical systems, and linearization analysis for high-dimensional ones.
       • brainpy.train: This module provides algorithms for training biological neural networks,
         including supervised learning, online learning, and offline learning.
       • brainpylib: This module provides customized operators and utilities for optimizing brain
         dynamics computations.

In addition to these core modules, BrainPy also includes a toolbox that extends its core functionality:

       • brainpy.measure: The module provides a collection of functions for measuring and
         evaluating the properties of neural network models, such as firing rates, synchronization,
         and functional connectivity.
       • brainpy.inputs: The module provides a collection of functions for defining and handling
         input data for models in BrainPy.
       • brainpy.connect: The module provides a mechanism for connecting neurons and
         synapses in BrainPy. It allows users to specify the connectivity pattern between differ-
         ent populations of neurons and to define the properties of synaptic connections, such as
         weights.
       • brainpy.initialize: The module provides a collection of functions for initializing the
         parameters of models in BrainPy. It includes various initialization schemes, such as random
         initialization, Xavier initialization, and He initialization. It also provides functions for
         initializing other network components, such as biases and noise sources.

For more details about BrainPy’s package structure, please see Figure S15.


                                                  28
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Figure S15: The structure and components of BrainPy


    N    I MPLEMENTATION OF EI BALANCE NETWORK USING THE JIT
         CONNECTIVITY OPERATORS

    For the details of the EI balance network, please refer to (Vogels & Abbott, 2005). To implement
    this balanced network in BrainPy, we leverage the just-in-time (JIT) connectivity operators (see
    Section 4.2) to dynamically create connections between excitatory and inhibitory neuron populations
    during the simulation. We first initialize the neuron population specifying the neuron models and
    population sizes (see Line 12 in Listing S6). Then we use JIT connectivity to randomly connect the two
    layers with a given sparsity and specified weight for excitatory-to-excitatory, inhibitory-to-inhibitory,
    and inhibitory-to-excitatory projections (see Lines 17, 18, 24, and 25 in Listing S6). Note that
    brainpy.dnn.EventJitFPHomoLinear has implemented an event-driven matrix multiplication
    JIT operator with homogeneous synaptic weight. Specifically, this layer is based on the operator
    brainpy.math.jitconn.event_mv_prob_homo.
    Key parameters to tune include the maximum connection synapse per neuron and connection weight
    strengths. Monitoring the relative excitatory and inhibitory firing rates over time allows assessment
    of EI balance and guides further parameter adjustments towards stabilizing the network dynamics.
    The JIT connectivity functionality has the same workflow for simulation in BrainPy.
1   import brainpy as bp
2   import brainpy.math as bm
3
4   class EINet(bp.DynSysGroup):
5     def __init__(self, scale=1.):


                                                       29
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 6          super().__init__()
 7          self.num = int(4000 * scale)
 8          self.num_exc = int(3200 * scale)
 9          self.num_inh = int(800 * scale)
10          p = 80 / self.num
11
12          self.N = bp.dyn.LifRef(self.num, V_rest=-60., V_th=-50.,
13                                 V_reset=-60., tau=20., tau_ref=5.,
14                                 V_initializer=bp.init.Normal(-55., 2.))
15          self.delay = bp.VarDelay(self.N.spike, entries={’I’: None})
16          self.E = bp.dyn.ProjAlignPostMg1(
17            comm=bp.dnn.EventJitFPHomoLinear(self.num_exc, self.num,
18                                             prob=p, weight=0.6),
19            syn=bp.dyn.Expon.desc(size=self.num, tau=5.),
20            out=bp.dyn.COBA.desc(E=0.),
21            post=self.N
22          )
23          self.I = bp.dyn.ProjAlignPostMg1(
24            comm=bp.dnn.EventJitFPHomoLinear(self.num_inh, self.num,
25                                             prob=p, weight=6.7),
26            syn=bp.dyn.Expon.desc(size=self.num, tau=10.),
27            out=bp.dyn.COBA.desc(E=-80.),
28            post=self.N
29          )
30
31       def update(self, inp):
32         spk = self.delay.at(’I’)
33         self.E(spk[:self.num_exc])
34         self.I(spk[self.num_exc:])
35         self.delay(self.N(inp))
36         return self.N.spike.value
37
38
39 model = EINet(scale=10.)
40 indices = bm.arange(1000) # 100 ms
41 spks = bm.for_loop(lambda i: model.step_run(i, 20.), indices)
42 bp.visualize.raster_plot(indices, spks, show=True)

         Listing S6: Implementation the EI balance network model using the JIT connectivity operators.


     O      DATA AVAILABILITY
     BrainPy is a pip installable Python package and available at the following GitHub repos-
     itory: https://github.com/brainpy/BrainPy, with documentation at https://
     brainpy.readthedocs.io/. All the code to reproduce the result presented in the pa-
     per can be found in the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/brainpy/
     brainpy-iclr24-reproducibility.
     The MNIST dataset can be found in http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/ and it is also
     conveniently accessible in Python via the brainpy-datasets package. The processed KTH data
     can be available in (Antonik et al., 2019). The multi-area connectivity data can be found in (Markov
     et al., 2014) and https://core-nets.org/.

     P     S UPPLEMENTARY FIGURES


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A                                B                                 C


Figure S16: Additional experiments of E/I balanced network. (A) Depicting the data from Figure 5C
on a log-scale x-axis. (B) E/I balanced network simulation with a thousand synapses per neuron.
Under this condition, the network still shows the linear scaling property. (C) E/I balanced network
simulation where a fixed connection probability (p=0.001) is used and the weight is rescaled.


                                                31
