Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OMPANY KG: A L ARGE -S CALE H ETEROGENEOUS
G RAPH FOR C OMPANY S IMILARITY Q UANTIFICATION
                                                 A BSTRACT
          In the investment industry, it is often essential to carry out fine-grained company
          similarity quantification for a range of purposes, including market mapping, com-
          petitor analysis, and mergers and acquisitions. We propose and publish a knowledge
          graph, named CompanyKG, to represent and learn diverse company features and
          relations. Specifically, 1.17 million companies are represented as nodes enriched
          with company description embeddings; and 15 different inter-company relations
          result in 51.06 million weighted edges. To enable a comprehensive assessment of
          methods for company similarity quantification, we have devised and compiled three
          evaluation tasks with annotated test sets: similarity prediction, competitor retrieval
          and similarity ranking. We present extensive benchmarking results for 11 repro-
          ducible predictive methods categorized into three groups: node-only, edge-only,
          and node+edge. To the best of our knowledge, CompanyKG is the first large-scale
          heterogeneous graph dataset originating from a real-world investment platform,
          tailored for quantifying inter-company similarity.

1       I NTRODUCTION
In the investment industry, it is often essential to identify similar companies for purposes such as
market mapping, competitor analysis and mergers and acquisitions (M&A)1 . The significance
of similar and comparable companies in these endeavors is paramount, as they contribute to in-
forming investment decisions, identifying potential synergies, and revealing areas for growth and
improvement. Therefore, the accurate quantification of inter-company similarity (a.k.a., company
similarity quantification) is the cornerstone to successfully executing such tasks. Formally, company
similarity quantification refers to the systematic process of measuring and expressing the degree
of likeness or resemblance between two companies with a focus on various “traits”, typically
represented through numerical values. While a universally accepted set of “traits” does not exist,
investment researchers and practitioners commonly rely on attributes, characteristics or relation-
ships that reflect (but not limited to) competitive landscape, industry sector, M&A transactions,
people’s affiliation, news/event engagement, and product positioning.
In real investment applications, company similarity quantification often forms a central component in a
similar company expansion system, which aims to extend a given set of companies by incorporating
the similarity traits mentioned above2 . Such a system aids in competitor analysis, where investment
professionals begin with a seed company x0 of interest (a.k.a. query company, represented by a
company ID), aiming to identify a concise list of direct competitors to x0 . The identified competitor
companies serve as benchmarks for evaluating the investment potential of x0 , influencing the final
investment decisions. Until now, implementing such a company expansion system remains a challenge,
because (1) the crucial business impact necessitates an exceptionally high production-ready standard
of recommendation recall and precision; and (2) the underlying data has expanded to an unprecedented
scale and complexity, particularly regarding the intricate and diversified inter-company relationships.
In recent years, transformer-based Language Models (LMs), such as Cer et al. (2018); Devlin et al.
(2019); Reimers & Gurevych (2019), have become the preferred method for encoding textual company
descriptions into vector-space embeddings. Companies that are similar to the seed companies can be
    1
      Market mapping analyzes the market landscape of a product or service, while competitor analysis focuses
on the competitive landscape of a concrete company (Zeisberger et al., 2017). They both start with identifying a
set of similar companies, yet the former often expects a more coarse and inclusive result than the latter. M&A
refers to the process of combining two or more companies to achieve strategic and financial objectives, such as
enhanced market share and profitability (Sherman, 2018). Investment professionals typically work with a list of
M&A candidate companies and examine them based on the sequence of their projected business compatibility.
    2
      In domains beyond investment, related research such as (Lissandrini et al., 2020; Akase et al., 2021) focuses
on expanding query entities to a more extensive and relevant set, akin to our work. We emphasize the difference
to a company suggestion system which concentrates on proactively recommending entities based on user
behavior and preferences. However, company expansion and suggestion are both concepts in the context of KG
and recommender systems with slightly different processes and implication.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


searched in the embedding space using distance metrics like cosine similarity. Rapid advancements
in Large LMs (LLMs), such as GPT-3/4 (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023) and LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023), have significantly enhanced the performance of general-purpose conversational models.
Models such as ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) can, for example, be employed to answer questions
related to similar company discovery and quantification in an N -shot prompting paradigm, where
N 0 examples are included in the input prompt to guide the output of a language model.
A graph is a natural choice for representing and learning diverse company relations due to its ability
to model complex relationships between a large number of entities. By representing companies as
nodes and their relationships as edges, we can form a knowledge graph (KG)3 . A KG allows us to
efficiently capture and analyze the network structure of the business landscape. Moreover, KG-based
approaches allow us to leverage powerful tools from network science, graph theory, and graph-based
machine learning, such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (e.g., Hamilton et al., 2017a; Veličković
et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Hou et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2023), to
extract insights and patterns to facilitate similar company analysis that goes beyond the relations
encoded in the graph. While there exist various company datasets (mostly commercial/proprietary
and non-relational) and graph datasets for other domains (mostly for single link/node/graph-level
predictions), there are to our knowledge no datasets and benchmarks that target learning over a
large-scale KG expressing rich pairwise company relations.
We gain access to a general-purpose investment platform4 that integrates over 50 data sources about
companies, providing investment professionals (i.e., users) with a comprehensive and up-to-date
view of the companies and the entire market. Meanwhile, valuable insights are collected from the
interaction between the users and the platform, which often implies inter-company relations of various
kinds. Based on this unique edge, we construct and publish a large-scale heterogeneous graph dataset
to benchmark methods for similar company quantification. Our main contributions include:
• We introduce a real-world KG dataset for similar company quantification – CompanyKG5 . Specif-
  ically, 1.17 million companies are represented as nodes enriched with company description embed-
  dings; and 15 distinct inter-company relations result in 51.06 million weighted edges.
• To facilitate a comprehensive assessment of methods learned on CompanyKG, we design and
  collate three evaluation tasks with annotated datasets: Similarity Prediction (SP), Competitor
  Retrieval (CR) and Similarity Ranking (SR).
• We provide comprehensive benchmarking results (with source code for reproduction) of node-only
  (embedding proximity and N -shot prompting), edge-only (shortest path and direct neighbors) and
  node+edge (self-supervised graph learning) methods.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Typical efforts to define company similarity employ a multidimensional approach, encompassing
various facets such as industry classifications (Hoberg & Phillips, 2010), financial flexibility (Hoberg
et al., 2014) and shared directorship (Lee et al., 2021). Among the widely embraced data sources
tailored for the investment domain – most of which are not in the format of a KG – are Diffbot,
Pitchbook, Crunchbase, CB Insights, Tracxn, and S&P Capital IQ6 . They primarily offer predicted
similar companies without revealing the methodology or foundational data underpinning the pre-
dictions. In recent years, investment practitioners seeking a scalable method for recommending
companies similar to seed entities have predominantly relied on LMs or KGs. Our benchmark
tasks and methods focuses primarily on graph-based company similarity measurement for a task
like competitor analysis. However, a company KG of this sort could be used for other tasks, where
other modeling and querying approaches would be appropriate (e.g., Jayaram et al., 2014; Lissandrini
et al., 2020). Alternatively, non-KG-based approaches for entity similarity quantification can build
on similar sources of company data, just as textual descriptions or keywords. We include two here
(embedding proximity and LLM prompting) for comparison to KG-based approaches, although other
options exist, such as those grounded in document co-occurrence (Foley et al., 2016) or the fusion of
a KG with domain-specific signals (Akase et al., 2021).
   3
     A knowledge graph is a specific type of graph where nodes represent real-world entities/concepts and edges
denote relations between the entities.
   4
     The details of the investment platform (also referred to as “the platform”) are hidden for review.
   5
     The dataset and source code (utility and benchmarking) will be public on Zenodo and GitHub respectively.
   6
     Diffbot: www.diffbot.com; Pitchbook: www.pitchbook.com; Crunchbase: www.crunch
base.com; CB Insights: www.cbinsights.com; Tracxn: www.tracxn.com; S&P Capital IQ:
www.capitaliq.com;. These data sources can be used beyond similar company quantification.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1     L ANGUAGE M ODEL (LM) BASED A PPROACHES
Text embedding proximity has become a popular approach for company similarity quantification.
The key idea is to represent textual descriptions of companies as dense vectors (a.k.a., embeddings)
in a high-dimensional space, such that the similarity between two companies can be measured by
the proximity between their corresponding vectors. The text embeddings are usually obtained using
pretrained LMs, such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023) and GPT-3/4 (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023). The pretrained LMs can be used
directly, or finetuned on company descriptions in a supervised (Cer et al., 2018; Reimers & Gurevych,
2019), semi-supervised (Cao et al., 2021), or Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) paradigm (Gao et al.,
2021) to further improve the performance of proximity search. Supervised and semi-supervised
methods typically yield superior performance (than SSL) on domain-specific tasks, when high-quality
annotations are available (Cao et al., 2021). This limits its applicability in scenarios where the
annotation is scarce, noisy, or costly to obtain.
N -shot prompting. The recent rapid development of LLMs such as GPT-3/4 (Brown et al., 2020;
OpenAI, 2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022) has led to
significant improvements in general-purpose conversational AI like ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022).
By prompting them with N 0 examples, the instruction tuned models can answer questions about
identifying similar companies, for example “Can you name 10 companies that are similar to OpenAI?”
As a result, N -shot prompting has emerged as a potential tool for investment professionals (e.g., Wu
et al., 2023; Yue & Au, 2023) looking to conduct similar company search and analysis. However, this
approach is currently limited by several factors: (1) to ensure the model’s responses are up-to-date,
relevant, and precise, a large amount of domain-specific information must be incorporated, an active
area of research with various methods such as contextual priming and fine-tuning being explored; (2)
the decision-making process may not be explainable, making it difficult to understand and trust the
answer; (3) the performance is closely tied to meticulous design of prompts.

2.2     K NOWLEDGE G RAPH (KG) BASED A PPROACHES
Companies can be represented as nodes in a graph, where each node is enriched with attributes.
There can be various types of similarities between any two companies, which can be naturally
represented as heterogeneous edges in the graph. Moreover, the strength of each relation can be
captured by assigning appropriate edge weights. Such a graph-based representation enables the
use of heuristic algorithms or GNN models for searching and identifying similar companies, based
on their structural and attribute-level similarities. According to our survey7 , most public graph
datasets are designed for predicting node (Zeng et al., 2019), edge (Bollacker et al., 2008) or graph
(Rozemberczki et al., 2020) level properties, while our graph is tailored for company similarity
quantification8 . The most common entities in KGs are web pages (Mernyei & Cangea, 2020), papers
(Bojchevski & Günnemann, 2018), particles (Brown et al., 2019), persons (Leskovec & Mcauley,
2012) and so on. Relato Business Graph9 , which also represents companies as node entities, is
the dataset most similar to ours. However, its limited scale and absence of edges with explicit
implications of company similarity could constrain its suitability for quantifying company similarity.
To address this, we build CompanyKG, a large-scale company KG that incorporates diverse and
weighted similarity relationships in its edges. We present extensive benchmarking results for 11
reproducible baselines categorized into three groups: node-only, edge-only, and node+edge. To the
best of our knowledge, CompanyKG is the first large-scale heterogeneous graph dataset originating
from a real-world investment platform, tailored for quantifying inter-company similarity.

3       C OMPANY KG
3.1     E DGES (R ELATIONS ): T YPES AND W EIGHTS
We model 15 different inter-company relations as undirected edges, each of which corresponds
to a unique edge type (ET) numbered from 1 to 15 as shown in Table 1. These ETs capture six
widely adopted categories (C1⇠C6) of similarity between connected company pairs: C1 - competitor
    7
      We have reviewed graph datasets in SNAP (Leskovec & Krevl, 2014), OGB (Hu et al., 2020), Network
Repository (Rossi & Ahmed, 2015), Hugging Face (https://huggingface.co), Kaggle (https:
//www.kaggle.com) and Data World (https://data.world)
    8
      Formally, it is equivalent to edge prediction, yet edge prediction methods like GraphSAGE usually assume
an exhaustive edge representation in the graph, which is not the case in CompanyKG as discussed in Section 3.1.
    9
      https://data.world/datasyndrome/relato-business-graph-database


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: An illustrative subgraph (center) of the heterogeneous and undirected CompanyKG graph
(left), where the numbered nodes represent distinct companies and the edges signify multi-dimensional
inter-company relations. Example node features and edge weights are displayed on the right.

landscape (ET2, 5 and 6), C2 - industry sector (ET3, 4, 9 and 10), C3 - M&A transaction (ET1, 7 and
11), C4 - people’s affiliation (ET8 and 15), C5 - news/events engagement (ET12 and 14), and C6 -
product positioning (ET13). The constructed edges do not represent an exhaustive list of all possible
edges due to incomplete information (more details in Appendix F.2. 3 ). Consequently, this leads to a
sparse and occasionally skewed distribution of edges for individual ETs. Such characteristics pose
additional challenges for downstream learning tasks. Associated with each edge of a certain type, we
calculate a real-numbered weight as an approximation of the similarity level of that type. The edge
definition, distribution, and weights calculation are elaborated in Table 1. As depicted in Figure 1,
we merge edges between identical company pairs into one, assigning a 15-dim weight vector. Here,
the i-th dimension signifies the weight of the i-th ET. Importantly, a “0” in the edge weights vector
indicates an “unknown relation” rather than “no relation”, which also applies to the cases when there
is no edge at all between two nodes. See Appendix C for distribution of edge weights. Although
there are a few ETs that can naturally be treated as directed (e.g. ET7, M&As), most are inherently
undirected. We therefore treat the whole graph as undirected.
3.2 N ODES (C OMPANIES ): F EATURES AND P ROFILE A NALYSIS
The CompanyKG graph includes all companies connected by edges defined in the previous section,
resulting in a total of 1,169,931 nodes. Each node represents a company and is associated with a
descriptive text, such as “Klarna is a fintech company that provides support for direct and post-
purchase payments ...”. As mentioned in Appendix F.2, about 5% texts are in languages other than
English. To comply with privacy and confidentiality requirements, the true company identities or
any raw interpretable features of them can not be disclosed. Consequently, as demonstrated in
the top-right part of Figure 1, we encode the text into numerical embeddings using four different
pretrained text embedding models: mSBERT (multilingual Sentence BERT) (Reimers & Gurevych,
2019), ADA210 , SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) (fine-tuned on textual company descriptions) and PAUSE
(Cao et al., 2021). The choice of embedding models encompasses both pre-trained, off-the-shelf
(mSBERT and ADA2) and proprietary fine-tuned (SimCSE and PAUSE) models. Justifications and
details of node features/embeddings can be found in Appendix F.2. To showcase the sophistication
and inclusiveness of the company profiles, Appendix B presents the distribution of companies across
five attributes, revealing a wide dispersion of companies.
3.3 E VALUATION TASKS
The main objective of CompanyKG is to facilitate developing algorithms/models for recommending
companies similar to given seed/query companies. The effectiveness of such recommendations relies
on the capability of quantifying the degree of similarity between any pair of companies. Two-stage
paradigms are prevalent in large-scale recommender systems (Wang & Joachims, 2023): the first
stage swiftly generates candidates that fall into the similarity ballpark, while the second stage ranks
them to produce the final recommendations. We assemble a Competitor Retrieval (CR) task from
real investment deals to assess the end-to-end performance over the entire task of company expansion.
To understand the performance for each stage, we carefully curate two additional evaluation tasks:
Similarity Prediction (SP) and Similarity Ranking (SR). We explain below how SP and SR address
different real-world investment use cases.
   10
      ADA2 is short for “text-embedding-ada-002”, which is OpenAI’s most recent embedding engine employing
a 1536-dimensional semantic space, with default settings used throughout the experiments.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Type                              The specification of each edge type (ET) and the associated weight                                         #edge
      In the platform, investment professionals (i.e., users) can create a so-called “space” by specifying a theme such as “online
      music streaming service”. In each space, users are exposed to some companies that are recommended (by a linear model) as
ET1
      theme-compliant. Users can approve or reject each recommended company, which will be used to continuously train the 117,924
(C3)
      model in an active learning fashion. We create an edge between any two confirmed companies in the same space. For any
      two companies with an edge with this type, the associated edge weight counts their approval occurrences in all spaces.
      The users of the investment platform can add N 1 direct competitors for any target company, resulting in a competitor set
ET2 containing N +1 companies (N direct competitors and the target company itself). For each target company with such a
                                                                                                                                              16,734
(C1) competitor set, we create one fully connected sub-graph. When merging these sub-graphs, the duplicated edges are merged
      into one with a weight indicating the degree of duplication.
      Investment professionals can create “collections” of companies for various purposes such as market mapping and portfolio
ET3 tracking. We manually selected 787 (out of 1458 up till February 2023) collections that contain companies with a certain level
                                                                                                                                             374,519
(C2) of similarity. We create a fully connected sub-graph for each collection. These sub-graphs are then merged and deduplicated
      like ET2, so the edge weights represent the duplication degree.
ET4 Based on a third-party data source⇤ containing about 4 million company profiles, we create graph edges from company
                                                                                                                                           1,473,745
(C2) market connections. The edge weights represent the count of the corresponding market connection in that data source.
                                     ⇤
ET5 From a third-party data source about companies, investors and funding rounds, we extract pairwise competitor relations and
                                                                                                                                              74,142
(C1) build edges out of them. Again, the edge weights are the number of occurrences of such extracted relation.
ET6 Same as ET5 except that competitor information is extracted from a different data source⇤ that specializes in financials of
                                                                                                                                             346,162
(C1) private and public companies.
      The platform also works with deal teams on various M&A and add-on acquisition† projects. Such projects aim to produce
ET7 a list of candidate companies for a certain company to potentially acquire. For each selected project⇤ up till December
                                                                                                                                              55,366
(C3) 2022, we create a fully connected sub-graph from a company set containing the acquirer and all acquiree candidates. These
      sub-graphs are then merged and deduplicated like ET2 and ET3, so the edge weights represent the duplication degree.
      Based on the naı̈ve assumption that employees tend to move among companies that have some common traits, we build graph
      edges representing how many employees have flowed (since 1990) between any two companies. For any two companies
ET8 A and B who currently have NA and NB employees respectively, let NA:B and NB:A respectively denote the number of
                                                                                                                                              71,934
(C4) employees flowed from A to B and from B to A. We create an edge between A and B either when (1) NA:B +NB:A 20,
                                       N     +NB:A                                        NA:B +NB:A
      or (2) NA:B +NB:A 3 and A:B        NA +NB          0.15. We  assign  the value  of     NA +NB       as the edge weight.
      In the platform’s data warehouse, each company has some keywords (e.g., company OpenAI may have three keywords:
      artificial intelligence, machine learning and ChatGPT) that are integrated from multiple data sources⇤ . We filter out the
ET9
      overly short/long keywords and obtain 763,503 unique keywords. Then we calculate IDF (inverse document frequency) score 45,717,108
(C2)
      for every keyword and apply min-max normalization. Finally, we create an edge between any two companies that have shared
      keyword(s), and assign the average (over all shared keywords) IDF score as the corresponding edge weight.
      The platform adopts a hierarchical sector framework to support thematic investment activities. The users of the platform can
      tag a company as belonging to one or more sectors (e.g., cyber security, fintech, etc.). For each low-level sector (i.e., sub-sector
ET10
      and sub-sub-sector), we create a fully connected sub-graph from all the tagged companies. The sub-graphs are further merged 813,585
 (C2)
      into one big graph with edge weights indicating duplication degree of edges. It also worth mentioning that an edge created
      from a sub-sub-sector is weighted twice as important as the one created from a sub-sector.
      Mergers and/or acquisitions could imply a certain level of similarity between the acquirer and acquiree. As a result, we create
ET11
      an edge between the involved companies of historical (since 1980) merger/acquisition (specifically M&A, buyout/LBO, 260,644
 (C3)
      merger-of-equals, acquihire)‡ events. The edge weight is the number of occurrences of the company pair in those events.
      Based on a third-party data source⇤ that keeps track of what events (e.g., conferences) companies have attended, we create
ET12 a preliminary edge between two companies who have had at least five co-attendance events in the past (up till June 2022).
                                                                                                                                           1,079,304
 (C5) Then, we further filter the edges by computing the Levenshtein distance between the company specialties that come with the
      data source in the form of a textual strings. The edge weights are the count of co-attendance in log scale.
      From a product comparison service⇤ , we obtain data about what products are chosen (by potential customers) to be compared.
ET13 By mapping the compared products to the owning companies, we can infer which companies have been compared in the past
                                                                                                                                             216,291
 (C6) up till February 2023. We build a graph edge between any two companies whose products has been compared. The edge
      weights are simply the number of times (in log scale) they are compared.
      The platform has a news feed⇤ about global capital market. Intuitively, companies mentioned in the same piece of news
ET14 might be very likely connected, thus we create an edge between any pair of the co-mentioned companies (till February 2023).
                                                                                                                                             151,302
 (C5) When one of the co-mentioned companies is an investor, the relation is often funding rather than similarity, therefore we
      eliminate those edges from the final graph. The edge weights are log-scale co-mention count.
      One individual may hold executive roles in multiple companies, and it is possible for them to transition from one company to
      another. When any two companies, each having fewer than 1,000 employees, share/have shared the same person in their
ET15
      executive role, we establish a graph edge between them. To address the weak and noisy nature of this similarity signal, we 273,851
 (C4)
      refine the edges by only retaining company pairs that share at least one keyword (cf. ET9). The edge weights are log-scale
      count of shared executives between the associated companies.
 * The detailed information is hidden due to legal and compliance requirements. Our intent is not to re-license any third-party data; instead, we focus on sharing
aggregated and anonymized data for pure research purposes only. Please refer to Appendix F.5 for more information about dataset usage.
 † An add-on acquisition is a type of acquisition strategy where a company acquires another company to complement and enhance its existing operations or products.
 ‡ Leveraged buyout (LBO) is a transaction where a company is acquired with a significant loan. Acquihire is the process of acquiring a company primarily to recruit its
employees, rather than to gain control of its products/services. A merger-of-equals is when two companies of about the same size come together to form a new company.

Table 1: Specification of 15 edge types (ET1⇠ET15), edge weights (stronger relations has higher
weights), and the number of edges per type (“#edge” column). ETs fall into six extensively recognized
categories of company similarity: C1 (competitor landscape), C2 (industry sector), C3 (M&A
transaction), C4 (people’s affiliation), C5 (news/events engagement), and C6 (product positioning).

Competitor Retrieval (CR) describes how a team of experienced investment professionals would
carry out competitor analysis, which will be a key application of a company expansion system. Con-
cretely, investment professionals perform deep-dive investigation and analysis of a target company
once they have identified it as a potential investment opportunity. A critical aspect of this process
is competitor analysis, which involves identifying several direct competitors that share significant
similarities (from perspectives of main business, marketing strategy, company size, etc.) with the
target company. The investment platform maintains a proprietary archive of deep-dive documents that
contain competitor analysis for many target companies. We select 76 such documents from the past 4


                                                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


years pertaining to distinct target companies and ask human annotators to extract direct competitors
from each document, resulting in ⇠5.3 competitors per target on average. Ideally, for any target
company, we expect a competent algorithm/model to retrieve all its annotated direct competitors and
prioritize them at the top of the returned list.
Similarity Prediction (SP) defines the coarse binary similar-versus-dissimilar relation between
companies. Excelling in this task often translates to enhanced recall in the first stage of a recommender
system. It also tends to be valuable for use cases like market mapping, where an inclusive and
complete result is sought after. For SP task, we construct an evaluation set comprising 3,219 pairs
of companies that are labeled either as positive (similar, denoted by “1”) or negative (dissimilar,
denoted by “0”). Of these pairs, 1,522 are positive and 1,697 are negative. Positive company pairs
are inferred from user interactions with the investment platform – closely related to ET2&3, although
the pairs used in this test set are selected from interactions after the snapshot date, so we ensure
there is no leakage. Every negative pair is formed by randomly sampling one company from a
company collection (cf. ET3 in Table 1) and another company from a different collection. All
samples, including the negative pairs, have been manually examined by domain experts.
Similarity Ranking (SR) is designed to assess the ability of any method to rank candidate companies
(numbered 0 and 1) based on their similarity to a query company. Excelling in this task is of utmost
significance for the second stage of a high-quality recommender system. When applied to real-world
investment scenarios like M&A, a fine-grained ranking capability can significantly enhance the
efficacy of prioritizing M&A candidates. During the creation of this evaluation dataset, we need
to ensure a balanced distribution of industry sectors and increase the difficulty level of the task.
Therefore, we select the query and candidate companies using a set of heuristics based on their sector
information. As a result, both candidates will generally be quite closely related to the target, making
this a challenging task. As described in Appendix F.3. 4 and F.4. 3 , paid human annotators, with
backgrounds in engineering, science, and investment, were tasked with determining which candidate
company is more similar to the query company. Each question was assessed by at least three different
annotators, with an additional annotator involved in cases of disagreement. The final ground-truth
label for each question was determined by majority voting. This process resulted in an evaluation set
with 1,856 rigorously labeled ranking questions. See Appendix F.3. 2 for more details. We retained
20% (368 samples) as a validation SR set for model selection. The choice to use the SR task for
model selection, instead of the SP or CR tasks, is primarily because it covers a more representative
sample of the entire graph. See Appendix F.2. 8 for further explanation.

4    E XPERIMENTS
In addition to the CompanyKG dataset, we provide comprehensive benchmarks from 11 popular
and/or state-of-the-art baselines categorized into three groups: node-only, edge-only, and node+edge.
Node-only baselines use only the features of individual companies provided in the graph and ignore
the graph structure. We measure the cosine similarity between the embeddings of a given type (see
Section 3.2) that are associated with any two companies in the graph. This gives us an embedding
proximity score, which can be evaluated in the SP task, and a method of ranking candidates, evaluated
by SR and CR. In order to assess the cutting-edge N -shot prompting methodology, we transform
each raw SP/SR/CR evaluation sample into a text prompt and let ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022)
generate the label. The templates of task-specific prompts are provided in Appendix D.5.
Edge-only baselines merely utilize the graph structure. We define four simple heuristics to rank
companies Ci by proximity to a target company T : (1) Unweighted Shortest Path (USP) length
from T to Ci ; (2) total weight of the Weighted Shortest Path (WSP) from T to Ci (weights inverted
so lower is more similar); (3) close proximity only if T and Ci are immediate Neighbors; and (4)
rank weighted neighbors (abbreviated as W. Neighbors) – immediate neighbors to T ranked by edge
weight. All four heuristics will choose randomly when the heuristic is not discriminative. To allow
comparison of edge and path weights from different ETs, we scale edge weights to [0, 1] for ET and
shift them so they have a mean weight of 1. In order to avoid edge weights playing too strong a role
in WSP compared to presence/absence of edges and paths, we add a constant11 to all weights.
Node+edge baselines leverage both the node feature and graph structure. CompanyKG does not
provide an explicit signal that can guide supervised learning to combine these into a single company
   11
      We set this constant to 5 after a few empirical explorations. Results could potentially be improved by tuning
this constant, but the method is intended here only as a simple baseline.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Pairwise redundancy        Figure 3: Ranking performance (SR test set) of different ETs
analysis of ETs.                     using USP and WSP heuristics. Coverage for ”all” is 100%.

representation for similarity measurement. As a result, we test five popular self-supervised GNN
methods: GRACE (Zhu et al., 2020), MVGRL (Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020),GraphSAGE
(Hamilton et al., 2017b), GraphMAE (Hou et al., 2022) and eGraphMAE (Hou et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2021). GRACE and MVGRL are graph contrastive learning (GCL) approaches that construct
multiple graph views via stochastic augmentations before learning representations by contrasting
positive samples with negative ones (Zhu et al., 2021). GraphSAGE, which is especially suited
for edge prediction, is trained to ensure that adjacent nodes have similar representations, while
enforcing disparate nodes to be distinct. In light of the recent success of generative SSL in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) domains, Hou et al. proposed GraphMAE, a
generative SSL method for graphs that emphasizes feature reconstruction. To incorporate the edge
weights in GraphMAE, we replaced the graph attention network (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2018)
with an edge-featured GAT (eGAT) (Wang et al., 2021), resulting in eGraphMAE (edge-featured
GraphMAE) detailed in Appendix D.4. Unless otherwise specified, we report the best results from
a hyper-parameter grid search detailed in Appendix D, using the validation split of the SR task set
described in Section 3.3. We treat embedding type as a hyperparameter, optimized for each GNN
method on the SR validation set, reporting only a single embedding type per method. However,
results for all embedding types are given in Table 7 in the Appendix.

4.1   C OMPARISON OF ET S (E DGE T YPES )
Before presenting the results of the evaluations on the full graph, we intend to gain some insights
into the differences between the 15 different ETs. To understand the extent of redundancy among
different ETs, we measure the overlap between any two ETs, such as ETi and ETj. Letting {ETi}
and {ETj} be the set of unweighted edges belonging to ETs i and j respectively, we measure the
Jaccard coefficient J = |{ETi} \ {ETj}|/|{ETi} [ {ETj}|, where |·| denotes the size of the embodied
set. The heatmap in Figure 2 shows that for most pairs of ETs, there is effectively no overlap, whilst
for a few (e.g., 3–10, 11–14, 6–8) there is a slightly stronger overlap. However, the coefficient for the
most overlapped pair, 3–10, is still very small (J = 0.022), suggesting that the information provided
by the different ETs, derived from different sources, is in general complementary.
To investigate further, we create a sub-graph for each individual ET by preserving only edges of that
type, and apply the four edge-only heuristics to evaluate on the SR task (test set) using only that
sub-graph. SR is chosen because of its superior representativeness of companies (cf. question “ 8 ”
in Appendix F.2) and alignment with our model selection approach (Section 4 and Appendix D).
From Figure 3, we see some variation between the performance of different heuristics using different
ETs. On many ETs, performance of all heuristics is close to random, since coverage is low (1%-47%,
Figure 3), and few are able to yield performance much above chance. For ET9 (highest coverage),
the full-path methods, USP and WSP, perform considerably better than immediate neighbors, but the
same pattern is not seen, for example, on ET10 (also relatively high coverage). Nevertheless, the best
performance is seen when all ETs are used together, giving full coverage of the companies in the
samples, suggesting again the complementary nature of ETs. Here we see that full-path heuristics
perform much better than immediate neighbors, reflecting useful structural information in the graph
beyond the company-company relations that constitute the edges of the graph. Making use of the
weights in WSP helps further, suggesting that they also carry useful information.

4.2   P ERFORMANCE OF SP (S IMILARITY P REDICTION )
To evaluate the performance of the SP task, we compute the cosine similarity score between the
embeddings of each pair of companies from all methods that produce vector embeddings of companies


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                               SP     SR        CR        CR
        Approach / Model
                                              AUC Acc%        Recall@50 Recall@100
                      USP (Unweighted SP)    N/A* 59.61        18.27     29.48

 heuristics
  Graph               WSP (Weighted SP)      N/A* 61.16        43.69     56.03
                      Neighbors             0.6229† 56.52      22.25     31.84
                      W. Neighbors          0.6020 56.65       43.50     54.65
                      mSBERT (512-dim)      0.8060 67.14       12.96     18.24
  Embedding
   proximity



                      ADA2 (1536-dim)       0.7450 67.20       14.09     21.69
                      SimCSE (768-dim)      0.7188 61.69        7.66      8.90
                      PAUSE (32-dim)        0.7542 65.19        6.84      9.62
  N-shot              ChatGPT-3.5           0.7501† 66.73†     30.06     31.10
                      GraphSAGE             0.7422 62.90       10.12     11.93
                      (ADA2)                ±0.0202   ±2.25    ±3.91      ±0.96
 GNN-based Methods
  Knowledge Graph


                      GRACE                 0.7243    59.36     2.68       4.64
                      (mSBERT)              ±0.0233   ±0.64    ±1.82      ±1.51
                      MVGRL (PAUSE) 0.6843            55.60      0.47      1.25
                                            ±0.0280   ±1.18    ±0.35      ±0.56
                      GraphMAE              0.7981    67.61    20.88     27.83
                      (mSBERT)              ±0.0063   ±0.11    ±0.46      ±0.39
                      eGraphMAE             0.7963    67.52    18.44     23.79
            (mSBERT)               ±0.0030         ±0.03     ±0.21      ±0.22
 * We omit SP evaluation for the path-based graph heuristics, since, whilst they
are able to rank companies by similarity, there is no obvious way to obtain a 0-1
similarity score for a pair of companies from them.
 † To account for the binary nature of the SP prompts answered by ChatGPT
and the Neighbors heuristic, we report accuracy instead of AUC.

Table 2: The performance of baselines on three evalua-
tion tasks (SP, CR and SR) of CompanyKG. Best results                                Figure 4: Performance comparison on
are in bold. Standard deviations are reported over 3                                 CR task measured in Recall@K over
random initializations of the trained models.                                        the full range of K values tested.

(all except graph heuristics and ChatGPT). As the optimal threshold to distinguish between similar
and dissimilar examples is unknown, we calculate the metric of Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)
for benchmarking, except for cases where the model can only produce a binary similar/dissimilar
judgement (ChatGPT and Neighbors), where we report accuracy. We apply the immediate neighbor
graph heuristics by classifying all pairs of companies that are directly connected by an edge in the
graph as similar and others as dissimilar. We extend this to the weighted case by scaling weights to a
0-1 range and using them as similarity scores where edges exist.
Results are reported in Table 2. Edge-only baselines perform poorly: although the test data is similar
in nature certain ETs in the graph, there is no overlap between the test pairs and the graph edges, so
such a simple heuristic is not sufficient. Node-only baselines span a broad range, the best achieving
⇠0.8, outperforming most other models. ChatGPT and GNN-based methods perform at a comparable
level to the node-only baselines. Since we only display the results from the top-performing GNN
models and across embedding types, chosen using the SR validation split, the de facto highest SP
performance (0.8253), achieved by eGraphMAE+SimCSE, is slightly higher still than those shown
here and is among the few methods that outperform mSBERT embedding proximity. (See Table 7 in
Appendix.) As on other tasks, GraphMAE appears to be the most promising among the GNN-based
methods, with a slight improvement brought by incorporating edge weights (eGraphMAE).

4.3                  P ERFORMANCE OF SR (S IMILARITY R ANKING )
To evaluate SR task for KG and embedding proximity methods, we obtain embeddings for the query
company and two candidate companies using each method. Next, we calculate cosine similarity
scores between the query company and the two candidate companies resulting in two scores. The
final prediction of the more similar company is made by choosing the candidate with the higher score.
Evaluation using edge-only graph heuristics is described in Section 4.1.
We report the SR accuracy in Table 2. Edge-only methods establish a baseline of ⇠60%, while some
node-only methods (e.g., mSBERT and ADA2) are able to improve on this (⇠65%), perhaps due to
pretraining on extensive multilingual corpora. These baseline results suggest that a combination of
node and edge information into a single representation might be able to take advantage of both sources
of similarity prediction. However, the GNN-based methods struggle to improve on the baselines. The
best node+edge method, GraphMAE, manages to slightly outperform the best node-only baseline,


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


achieving the overall best result. Incorporating edge weights into the model (eGraphMAE) does
not succeed in improving on this result, even though we found using graph heuristics that the edge
weights carry useful information.

4.4   P ERFORMANCE OF CR (C OMPETITOR R ETRIEVAL )
For the CR task, we aim to determine how likely the direct competitors of a target company are to
appear in the top-K most similar companies, where K represents the number of companies returned
in the search results. To accomplish this, we perform an exhaustive search in the embedding space
and return the top-K companies with the highest cosine similarity scores to the target company. We
then count the number of annotated direct competitors (denoted as M ) that appear within the returned
set and compute the metric of Recall@K, which is given by M       N , where N is the total number of
direct competitors in the CR test set. Although we test eight K values over a wide range – 50, 100,
200, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 5,000 and 10,000 (cf. Table 7 in Appendix and the plot in Figure 4) – it is the
lower end of this range that is of most interest for downstream applications: in any search/retrieval
system, the user will only in practice be able to examine a small number of the top-ranked results. We
therefore only report Recall@50 and @100 in Table 2. Nevertheless, the comparison of performance
at higher K in Figure 4 also provides further insight into the comparison, since the different types of
models show different behaviours as K increases.
Edge-only heuristic methods that incorporate edge weights, specifically WSP and W. Neighbors,
clearly stand out as superior. This underscores the significance of both the graph structure and edge
weights, as we saw with graph heuristics in Section 4.1. The generative graph learning methods,
GraphMAE and eGraphMAE, yield robust results, comparable to USP and Neighbors, suggesting
that they succeed in capturing some salient aspects of the graph structure, but not in exploiting the
edge weights. However, other GNN-based methods like GRACE perform poorly across all Ks in
comparison to edge-only and most node-only baselines. Whilst the comparative performance of
the methods is similar to the other tasks, the differences are greater in CR. This suggests CR is a
challenging task and may benefit greatly from KG-based learning, making it suited for benchmarking
a model’s ability to harness node and edge simultaneously.

4.5   E MBEDDING S PACE V ISUALIZATION
Intuitively, it is desirable for similar companies to cluster closely together in the embedding space,
while dissimilar ones are preferably pulled apart. To gain qualitative insights from this perspective, we
reduce the embeddings (from various baseline methods) to two dimensions using UMAP (McInnes
et al., 2018), and color-code them by manually annotated sectors (cf. Figure 5e in Appendix B). We
visualize the embeddings before and after GNN training in Appendix E.2 (Figure 7). It is noticeable
that GNN-based methods tend to nudge companies within the same sector closer together, which
could help with tasks like industry sector prediction. However, this improved embedding clustering
has no clear positive correlation to the performance of the three evaluation tasks designed for similar
company quantification.

5     C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
To represent and learn diverse company features and relations, we propose a large-scale heterogeneous
graph dataset – CompanyKG, originating from a real-world investment platform. Specifically, 1.17
million companies are represented as nodes enriched with company description embeddings; and 15
different inter-company relations result in 51.06 million weighted edges. Additionally, we carefully
compiled three evaluation tasks (SP, CR and SR), on which we present extensive benchmarking results
for 11 reproducible baselines categorized into three groups: node-only, edge-only, and node+edge.
While node-only methods show good performance in the SR task, edge-only methods clearly stand out
as superior in addressing the CR task. On SP task, node-only and GNN-based approaches outperform
edge-only ones by a large margin, with the best result obtained by eGraphMAE that attempts to
incorporate node embeddings, edges and their weights. Although generative graph learning exhibits
robust performance in general, no single method takes a clear lead across all CompanyKG tasks,
calling for future work to develop more robust learning methods that can incorporate node and edge
information effectively. Overall, CompanyKG can accelerate research around a major real-world
problem in the investment domain – company similarity quantification – while also serving as a
benchmark for assessing self-supervised graph learning methods. Given the continuous evolution of
nodes and edges, a logical extension involves capturing KG snapshots over time, thereby transforming
it into a spatio-temporal KG.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are especially grateful to [HIDDEN FOR REVIEW] ...

L IMITATIONS AND S OCIETAL I MPACTS

The known limitations include:

       • Due to compliance and legal reasons, the true identity of individual companies is considered
         sensitive information. As detailed in Appendix F.2. 4 , we only provide the company
         description embeddings (as node features) instead of raw textual descriptions from four
         different pretrained LMs. A comprehensive overview of the actions taken to prevent the
         recovery of true company identities is presented in Appendix F.2. 11 .
       • As discussed in Appendix F.2. 3 , CompanyKG does not represent an exhaustive list of all
         possible edges due to incomplete information from various data sources. This leads to a
         sparse and occasionally skewed distribution of edges for individual ETs. Such characteristics
         pose additional challenges for downstream learning tasks.

The identified potential societal impacts are as follows:

       • Privacy Concerns: The raw data sources we use to build CompanyKG contain proprietary
         information. As a result, we anonymize, aggregate and transform the raw data to prevent
         re-identification. See Appendix F.2. 4 and 11 for more details.
       • Bias: The dataset might reflect or perpetuate existing biases in the business world. For
         example, companies from certain industries or regions might be under-represented. Ap-
         pendix 3.2 presents a company profile analysis. Appendix F.2. 3 has a detailed overview
         about representativeness of included companies and relations.
       • Legal and Regulatory Issues: The compliance experts from [ANONYMIZED] evaluated
         the dataset, data collection methods, and potential risks associated with the research. Their
         conclusion is that all published artifacts adhere to relevant laws, regulations, policies, and
         ethical guidelines. See Appendix F.3. 6 .

R EFERENCES
Ryuya Akase, Hiroto Kawabata, Akiomi Nishida, Yuki Tanaka, and Tamaki Kaminaga. Related entity
  expansion and ranking using knowledge graph. In Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive
  Systems: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software
  Intensive Systems (CISIS-2021), pp. 172–184. Springer, 2021.
Aleksandar Bojchevski and Stephan Günnemann. Deep gaussian embedding of graphs: Unsupervised
  inductive learning via ranking. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. Freebase: a collabora-
  tively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
  SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, pp. 1247–1250, 2008.
Nathan Brown, Marco Fiscato, Marwin HS Segler, and Alain C Vaucher. GuacaMol: benchmarking
  models for de novo molecular design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 59(3):
 1096–1108, 2019.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Lele Cao, Emil Larsson, Vilhelm von Ehrenheim, Dhiana Deva Cavalcanti Rocha, Anna Martin, and
  Sonja Horn. PAUSE: Positive and annealed unlabeled sentence embedding. In Proceedings of
  the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 10096–10107,
  Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant,
  Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, et al. Universal sentence encoder for english.
  In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP): System Demonstrations, pp. 169–174, 2018.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Cluster-GCN: An
 efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 257–266,
 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
John Foley, Brendan O’Connor, and James Allan. Improving entity ranking for keyword queries.
  In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge
  Management, CIKM ’16, pp. 2061–2064, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450340731. doi: 10.1145/2983323.2983909.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), 2021.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):
  86–92, 2021.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2017a.
William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Representation learning on graphs: Methods and
 applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05584, 2017b.
Kaveh Hassani and Amir Hosein Khasahmadi. Contrastive multi-view representation learning on
  graphs. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4116–4126. PMLR, 2020.
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon Phillips. Product market synergies and competition in mergers and
  acquisitions: A text-based analysis. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(10):3773–3811, 2010.
Gerard Hoberg, Gordon Phillips, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala. Product market threats, payouts, and
  financial flexibility. The Journal of Finance, 69(1):293–324, 2014.
Zhenyu Hou, Xiao Liu, Yukuo Cen, Yuxiao Dong, Hongxia Yang, Chunjie Wang, and Jie Tang.
  GraphMAE: Self-supervised masked graph autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
  SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 594–604, 2022.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2005.00687, 2020.
Nandish Jayaram, Mahesh Gupta, Arijit Khan, Chengkai Li, Xifeng Yan, and Ramez Elmasri. GQBE:
  Querying knowledge graphs by example entity tuples. In 2014 IEEE 30th International Conference
  on Data Engineering, pp. 1250–1253, 2014. doi: 10.1109/ICDE.2014.6816753.
Charles MC Lee, Eric C So, and Charles CY Wang. Evaluating firm-level expected-return proxies:
  implications for estimating treatment effects. The Review of Financial Studies, 34(4):1907–1951,
  2021.
Jure Leskovec and Andrej Krevl. SNAP Datasets: Stanford large network dataset collection. http:
  //snap.stanford.edu/data, June 2014.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jure Leskovec and Julian Mcauley. Learning to discover social circles in ego networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Matteo Lissandrini, Davide Mottin, Themis Palpanas, and Yannis Velegrakis. Graph-query sug-
 gestions for knowledge graph exploration. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp.
 2549–2555, 2020.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, Nathaniel Saul, and Lukas Großberger. UMAP: Uniform manifold
  approximation and projection. Journal of Open Source Software, 3(29), 2018.
Péter Mernyei and Cătălina Cangea. Wiki-cs: A wikipedia-based benchmark for graph neural
   networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02901, 2020.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina Beygelzimer,
  Florence d’Alché Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. Improving reproducibility in machine
  learning research (a report from the neurips 2019 reproducibility program). The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(1):7459–7478, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 3973–3983, 2019.
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive graph analytics
  and visualization. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2015.
Benedek Rozemberczki, Oliver Kiss, and Rik Sarkar. Karate Club: An API Oriented Open-source
  Python Framework for Unsupervised Learning on Graphs. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
  International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’20), pp. 3125–3132.
  ACM, 2020.
Andrew Sherman. Mergers and Acquisitions from A to Z. HarperCollins Leadership, 2018.
Qiaoyu Tan, Ninghao Liu, Xiao Huang, Soo-Hyun Choi, Li Li, Rui Chen, and Xia Hu. S2GAE:
  Self-supervised graph autoencoders are generalizable learners with graph masking. In Proceedings
  of the Sixteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 787–795,
  2023.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Petar Veličković, William Fedus, William L. Hamilton, Pietro Liò, Yoshua Bengio, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Deep graph infomax. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lequn Wang and Thorsten Joachims. Uncertainty quantification for fairness in two-stage recom-
  mender systems. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search
  and Data Mining, pp. 940–948, 2023.

Ziming Wang, Jun Chen, and Haopeng Chen. EGAT: Edge-featured graph attention network. In
  Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2021: 30th International Conference
  on Artificial Neural Networks, Bratislava, Slovakia, September 14–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part I
  30, pp. 253–264. Springer, 2021.

Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prabhan-
  jan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. BloombergGPT: A large language model for
  finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564, 2023.

Thomas Yue and Chi Chung Au. GPTQuant’s conversational ai: Simplifying investment research for
  all. Available at SSRN 4380516, 2023.

Claudia Zeisberger, Michael Prahl, and Bowen White. Private Equity in Action: Case Studies from
  Developed and Emerging Markets. Wiley, 2017.

Hanqing Zeng, Hongkuan Zhou, Ajitesh Srivastava, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor Prasanna. Graph-
  SAINT: Graph sampling based inductive learning method. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.

Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Deep graph contrastive
  representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04131, 2020.

Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Qiang Liu, and Shu Wu. An empirical study of graph contrastive learning.
  In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems
  Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1. Curran, 2021.


A    DATASET, S OURCE C ODE AND L ICENSE

The dataset, along with its machine-readable metadata, is hosted on CERN-backed Zenodo data
repository: https://zenodo.org/record/[ANONYMIZED]. Its long-term maintenance is
discussed in our datasheet detailed in Appendix F.
The source code is available on GitHub at https://github.com/[ANONYMIZED]. This includes
reproducible code for the Analysis and Experiments in Sections 3 and 4 of the main paper, following
the ML Reproducibility Checklist (Pineau et al., 2021). The GitHub repository also contains links to
the dataset and information on how to cite.
The authors hereby state that they bear all responsibility in case of violation of rights, etc., and
confirm that the data license is as follows:

      • The large-scale heterogeneous graph, CompanyKG, is distributed under the license of
        Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC 4.0): https:
        //creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0.
      • The source code is distributed under MIT license: https://opensource.org/license
        /mit.


B    C OMPANY (N ODE ) P ROFILE

To aid in understanding node/company profiles, we collect five attributes (a snapshot as of February
2023) for each company. The attributes have different rate of missing values and are bucketed. The
attributes include (1) employee size (Figure 5a): the total number of employees; (2) total funding
(Figure 5b): the accumulative funding (in USD) received by the company; (3) geo region (Figure 5c):
the geographic region where the company is registered; (4) duration years (Figure 5d): the number
of years since the company was founded; (5) sector (Figure 1e): the top level of industry sectors of
the company. As illustrated in Figure 5, the companies are distributed widely when inspected using
each attribute, demonstrating the graph’s sophistication and inclusiveness.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                        80k                                                                                                                4k


                                                        10M-100M


                                                                                                                                                                industrial-technology
                                                                                     United States
400k


                                                                                                                                                                         technology
           1-10


                                                                              East Europe Baltics
                                                                                                                         300k


          11-50


                                                       100K-1M


                                                                                                                                                  5-15
                                                         0-10K


                                                                              Southern Europe
                                        60k                                                                                                                3k


                                                                               France Benelux
                                                                      400k


                                                     1M-10M


                                                                                                                                               20-50
                                                                              South East Asia


                                                                                                                                                                     healthcare
                                                                                Great Britain


                                                                                                                                                                     services
                                                                                                                         200k


                                                 10K-100K
                        51-200


                                                                                                                                            15-20
                                        40k                                                                                                                2k


                                                                              South Asia
                                                 100M+
200k


                     201-1K


                                                                                                                                          50+
                                                                      200k


                                                                                                                                    2-5
                                                                              Nordics


                                                                              Canada
                  10K-50K


                                                                               DACH
                                                                                                                         100k


                                                                              Paciﬁc
                  5K-10K
                   1K-5K


                                                                              China
                                        20k                                                                                                                1k


                                                                               RoW
                  50K+


                                                                                                                                1-2
    0k                                      0k                          0k                                                 0k                              0k

    (a) employee size.                  (b) total funding.                          (c) geo region.                      (d) duration years. (e) sector.

Figure 5: The distribution (y-axis) of bucketed company/node attributes (x-axis). In (c), “France
Benelux” refers to France, Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg; “DACH” includes Germany,
Austria and Switzerland; “RoW” stands for Rest of the World.


C         R ELATION (E DGE ) W EIGHTS
To provide insight into the distribution of edge weights, we present histograms of the weights for all
15 ETs (ET1-15) in Figure 6. As shown in Table 1 in the main paper, edge weights are calculated
differently depending on the nature of the edge/relation. Consequently, while some edge types (ET1-6
and ET11) have discrete weights, others follow a continuous distribution.

10k                         10k                       10k                    10k                   10k                   10k                         10k
 3k                                                                           4k                    3k
                             1k                        1k                                                                 1k                          1k
 1k                                                                           2k                    1k
300                         100                       100                     1k                   300                   100                         100
100                                                                          400                   100
                             10                        10                                                                 10                          10
 30                                                                          200                    30
 10                           1                         1                    100                    10                     1                           1
        1.0 1.4     1.8           1.0 2.0   3.0 4.0         1.0 1.8   2.6          1.0 1.4   1.8         1.0 1.4   1.8          0   4     8   1216         0.1       0.5       0.9


        (a) ET1                   (b) ET2                   (c) ET3            (d) ET4&5                 (e) ET6                (f) ET7                    (g) ET8
10k                         10k                       10k                    10k                    1k                   10k                         10k
                                                                                                   700
 1k                          1k                        1k                     1k                   500                    1k                          1k

100                         100                       100                    100                   300                   100                         100
 10                          10                        10                     10                   200                    10                          10
    1                         1                         1                      1                   100                     1                           1
        0.0 1.0   2.0 3.0         0.5 1.5   2.5 3.5         1.0 1.4   1.8          01 2 3 4 56           0.0 2.0   4.0          0.01.0 2.0 3.0             0.0 2.0           4.0


        (h) ET9                   (i) ET10                  (j) ET11               (k) ET12              (l) ET13              (m) ET14                    (n) ET15

Figure 6: The weight distributions of different ETs: we randomly sample 5,000 edges for each type.
The histograms of ET4 and ET5 are almost identical, hence they are merged.


D         E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS AND H YPER -PARAMETERS
In order to ensure the reproducibility and transparency of our experimental results, we provide a
comprehensive overview of the experimental settings and hyper-parameter search strategy employed
in our study. For each baseline method included in our benchmark, we present the specific hardware
and software configuration used during the experiments. Additionally, we detail the range of hyper-
parameters that were explored and the optimal hyper-parameters identified through the search process.
By sharing this information, we aim to facilitate the replication of our experiments and promote a
deeper understanding of the performance of the baseline methods in our evaluation.

D.1         G RAPH SAGE

We carry out the GraphSAGE training and evaluation on a Linux Machine with 8 vCPUs, 52GB
RAM, 1024GB SSD Disk, and one Nvidia Tesla P100 GPU. GraphSAGE is trained to generate
beneficial embeddings for nodes, taking into account their local neighborhoods. It utilizes a mini-batch
methodology in its training process, achieved by sampling a restricted number of neighboring nodes.
Although this approach allows it to scale to large graphs, it also extends the time needed to complete
a single epoch of training. As a result, we are limited to training GraphSAGE on CompanyKG dataset
for a maximum of two epochs. We adopt the “SAGEConv” (Hamilton et al., 2017a) implementation
in Deep Graph Library (DGL: https://www.dgl.ai) as the GNN layers, and we choose Graph


                                                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Convolutional Network (GCN) as the aggregator. The searched hyper-parameters for GraphSAGE
are shown in Table 3.
                                                          The selected value for different node features
 Hyper-parameter                    Searched values
                                                          mSBERT ADA2             SimCSE       PAUSE
 The number of sampled neighbors    6, 12                 12          12          12           12
 The number of GNN layers           2, 3                  2           2           2            2
 Training batch size                210 , 212             212         212         212          212
 Training epochs                    1, 2                  1           1           1            2
 Dropout rate                       0.1, 0.3              0.3         0.3         0.3          0.1
 Learning rate                      1 ⇥ 10 3 , 1 ⇥ 10 4   1 ⇥ 10 4 1 ⇥ 10-4 1 ⇥ 10 3 1 ⇥ 10 3
 Embedding dimension                25 , 26 , 27          26          27          27           25

Table 3: The researched and optimal hyper-parameters for GraphSAGE over different node features.
The bold column corresponds to the optimal feature type and the main model reported in the results
table of the main paper.


D.2     GRACE AND MVGRL

GCL training with GRACE and MVGRL is run on a Linux machine with 8 vCPUs, 52GB RAM,
300GB SSD Disk, and one Nvidia V100 GPU. We train with a minibatch scheme that loads the
neighbours of nodes sampled in each minibatch to a depth sufficient to compute the full loss function
for the sampled nodes. Where nodes have many neighbors, we randomly subsample a fixed number
to limit the memory required for a batch.
We use Adam optimization with a learning rate of 0.1, betas of 0.9 and 0.999 and no weight decay.
In this case, we do not apply early stopping, but train every model for 100 epochs.
We run grid search over the remaining hyper-parameters: the number of subsampled neighbors, the
number of layers of the GNN and the dimensionality of the learned hidden representations. The
tested hyperparameter values are shown in Table 4 (GRACE) and 5 (MVGRL).

                                                          Selected value for each node feature type
      Hyper-parameter                   Searched values
                                                          mSBERT ADA2 SimCSE PAUSE
      The number of sampled neighbors   5, 10             5            10         10          10
      The number of GNN layers          2, 3              3            2          3           3
      Hidden layer dimensionality       8, 16, 32         16           32         8           16

Table 4: The searched and optimal hyper-parameters for GRACE over different node feature types,
selected based on performance on the SR validation set. The bold column corresponds to the optimal
feature type and the main model reported in the results table of the main paper.

                                                          Selected value for each node feature type
      Hyper-parameter                   Searched values
                                                          mSBERT ADA2 SimCSE PAUSE
      The number of sampled neighbors   5, 10             10           5         10          5
      The number of GNN layers          2, 3              2            3         2           3
      Hidden layer dimensionality       8, 16, 32         16           16        8           16

Table 5: The searched and optimal hyper-parameters for MVGRL over different node feature types,
selected based on performance on the SR validation set. The bold column corresponds to the optimal
feature type and the main model reported in the results table of the main paper.


D.3     G RAPH MAE

GraphMAE is trained and evaluated on a Linux machine with 12 vCPUs, 85GB RAM, 1024GB
SSD Disk, and one Nvidia Tesla A100 GPU. As GraphMAE is a full-batch algorithm and the
entire graph cannot be accommodated in the GPU memory, we construct a randomized multi-
scale mini-batch for each training step. Concretely, we randomly select an integer p from


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


{5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 300, 400, 600, 800, 1000} and partition the graph into p sub-graphs,
                                                        p
following Chiang et al. (2019); then, we sample d⇤e 10    sub-graphs to compose the current training
mini-batch.
We train the model for a maximum of 1⇥103 epochs, implementing an early stop condition if the
accuracy on the SR validation dataset does not improve for 100 epochs. We perform a grid search for
the most important hyper-parameters, as shown in Table 6, while keeping the other hyper-parameters
fixed to the default values selected by Hou et al. (2022): alpha_l=3, replace_rate=0.15,
loss_fn=“SCE”, encoder=decoder=“GAT”, norm=“LayerNorm”, num_out_heads=1,
optimizer=“Adam”, pooling=“Mean”, residual=True. During training, the learning rate `
is decayed at the end of each epoch using the following formula:
                                                     ✓         ◆
                                        `m                m⇡
                                `m+1 =        1 + cos              ,                            (1)
                                         2              1 ⇥ 103
where `m and `m+1 denote the learning rate used in the current and next epoch, respectively.

                                                                                 Selected value for each node feature type
  Hyper-parameter                               Searched values
                                                                                 mSBERT ADA2               SimCSE        PAUSE
  The number of GNN layers                      2, 3                             2            2            2             2
  The number of attention heads                 4, 8                             8            4            4             4
  Node mask rate                                0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7               0.3          0.3          0.7           0.5
  Dropout rate*                                 0.1, 0.3                         0.3          0.1          0.1           0.1
  Learning rate                                 1 ⇥ 10 3 , 5 ⇥ 10 4              1 ⇥ 10-3     5 ⇥ 10 4 1 ⇥ 10 3 1 ⇥ 10 3
  Edge drop rate                                0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7               0.1          0.5          0.5           0.3
  Embedding dimension                           26 , 27 , 28 , 29                28           29           27            27
 * It refers to the dropout rate of the attention dropout layer; and the dropout rate of the feature dropout layers is always set to 0.1 higher than the
attention dropout rate up to a maximum of 1.0.

Table 6: The searched and optimal hyper-parameters for GraphMAE over different node feature
types, selected based on performance on the SR validation set. The bold column corresponds to the
optimal feature type and the main model reported in the results table of the main paper.


D.4       E DGE -F EATURED G RAPH MAE ( E G RAPH MAE)

We choose GAT (graph attention network) (Veličković et al., 2018) as encoder and decoder for
GraphMAE, given its outstanding performance as reported by Hou et al. (2022). Within a GAT layer,
the attention score ↵ij between node i and j is calculated with
                                       ↵ij = Softmax(LeakyReLU(a> [Whi ||Whj ]))                                                                   (2)
where hi and hj are feature vectors of node i and j, respectively; W is a learnable weight matrix; a>
is the transpose of a learnable parameter vector; and notation “||” represents the vector concatenation
operation. However, such an implementation, does not be utilize the edge weights available in graphs
like CompanyKG. To that end, we replace GAT with EGAT (edge-featured GAT) (Wang et al., 2021),
resulting in a new approach – eGraphMAE (edge-featured GraphMAE). Specifically, the attention
score (between node i and j) in a EGAT layer is calculated by
                    ↵ij = Softmax(v> ✏0ij )                and       ✏0ij = LeakyReLU(A[Whi ||✏ij ||Whj ])                                         (3)
where v> is the transpose of a trainable parameter vector; A is a trainable parameter matrix; ✏ij is
the input embedding of the edge between node i and j; and ✏0ij is the output embedding to be used
as the input for the next EGAT layer. It is important to note that the input edge embedding of the
first EGAT layer is identical to the edge weight vectors provided in the graph, while the output edge
embedding of the last EGAT layer is disregarded.
Since eGraphMAE requires significantly more memory than GraphMAE, we conduct the experiments
for eGraphMAE on a Linux machine with 24 vCPUs, 170GB RAM, a 1024GB SSD Disk, and one
Nvidia Tesla A100 GPU. Given the significant similarity between GraphMAE (Hou et al., 2022)
and eGraphMAE (Appendix D.4), we adopt the same optimal set of hyper-parameter values as in
GraphMAE (refer to Appendix D.3). However, in eGraphMAE, we introduce a new hyper-parameter
for the number of dimensions in the output edge embeddings ✏0ij . We set this value to 32, which is
the highest feasible value for our hardware configuration.


                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.5    C HAT GPT: P ROMPTING T EMPLATES FOR SP, SR AND CR TASKS

As one of our baselines, ChatGPT relies on the raw texts associated with the companies, which we are
unable to include in the publicly released dataset due to legal and compliance constraints. Therefore,
this baseline is incorporated solely for the sake of comparison.
Prompting template for SP task:

         Below are the descriptions for two companies, company A and company B. Based on these
         descriptions, please indicate whether the companies are similar or not. The response should
         simply be ”1” if they are similar and ”0” otherwise, with no extra details.
         Company A description: [...]
         Company B description: [...]
         Response: [TO_BE_FILLED_BY_LLM]

Prompting template for SR task: we also provide two prompts with ground truth labels as demon-
strations.

         You are a helpful and responsible assistant that help me to make a choice. Please answer as
         concisely as possible.
         Example:
         Given information of a query company and two candidate companies C0 and C1 . Which
         candidate company (C0 or C1 ) is more similar to the target company?
         Query company description: [...]
         Company C0 description: [...]
         Company C1 description: [...]
         Your choice (Company C0 or Company C1 ) is: C0
         Another example:
         Given information of a query company and two candidate companies C0 and C1 . Which
         candidate company (C0 or C1 ) is more similar to the target company?
         Query company description: [...]
         Company C0 description: [...]
         Company C1 description: [...]
         Your choice (Company C0 or Company C1 ) is: C1
         Now, get ready to answer the following questions:
         Given information of a query company and two candidate companies C0 and C1 . Which
         candidate company (C0 or C1 ) is more similar to the target company?
         Query company description: [...]
         Company C0 description: [...]
         Company C1 description: [...]
         Your choice (Company C0 or Company C1 ) is: [TO_BE_FILLED_BY_LLM]

Prompting template for CR task. ChatGPT performance on CR task varied significantly depending
on the prompt formulation; and we used the prompt below to best mimic the evaluation of the other
CR methods.

         Below is the description of a company. Your task is to provide a unique list of [K] of its
         competitors, formatted as a python list and sorted from most similar to least similar. Make
         sure they are real companies.
         Target company description: [...]
         Competitor List: [TO_BE_FILLED_BY_LLM]

The notation “[...]” denotes the textual information of involved companies, and “[K]” is a variable to
be specified in Section 4.4 of the main paper.

E     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Due to page limit, we can only present a selected subset of the experimental results in the main paper.
We present the complete experimental results here.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            SP    SR    CR      CR          CR        CR       CR        CR        CR        CR
                                      Approach / Model
                                                                                           AUC Acc% Recall@50 Recall@100 Recall@200Recall@500Recall@1k Recall@2k Recall@5k Recall@10k
                                                                       USP                N/A* 59.61 18.27 29.48 40.38 57.62 72.46 75.56 78.74 83.08
 proximity heuristics                                                  WSP (Weighted SP)  N/A* 61.16 43.69 56.03 62.72 68.67 73.10 75.58 77.62 79.37
Embedding Graph

                                                                       Neighbors         0.6229† 56.52 22.25 31.84 46.50 60.16 66.81 67.19 67.19 67.19
                                                                       W. Neighbors      0.6020 56.65 43.50 54.65 60.86 65.86 67.19 67.19 67.19 67.19
                                                                       mSBERT (512-dim) 0.8060 67.14 12.96 18.24 23.03 31.10 41.43 47.71 55.84 63.49
                                                                       ADA2 (1536-dim) 0.7450 67.20 14.09 21.69 28.41 37.61 48.05 56.13 66.00 71.18
                                                                       SimCSE (768-dim) 0.7188 61.69    7.66     8.90 11.94 14.93 18.55 23.48 33.21 41.79
                                                                       PAUSE (32-dim)    0.7542 65.19   6.84     9.62 13.11 20.84 31.96 39.60 51.45 65.92
    N -shot
                                                                       ChatGPT-3.5          0.7501† 66.73      30.06    31.10    31.91    N/A‡     N/A‡    N/A‡     N/A‡     N/A‡
  Prompt.
                                                                               GraphSAGE    0.7415    62.03    10.80    13.04    17.63    25.29    33.68   43.29    53.82    64.30
                                                                                            ±0.0102    ±3.11   ±3.61    ±2.15    ±1.60    ±1.82    ±0.82    ±2.40    ±1.11    ±1.69
                                                                               GRACE        0.7243    59.36     2.68     4.64     8.03    13.10    20.03    30.61   43.98    53.46
                                                                                            ±0.0233    ±0.64   ±1.82    ±1.51    ±1.34    ±0.29    ±0.28    ±1.32    ±2.21    ±4.58
                                                                      mSBERT


                                                                               MVGRL        0.7208    58.29     2.17     3.56     5.83    10.65    15.52    23.37   35.96    44.37
                                                                                            ±0.0336    ±0.74   ±1.03    ±0.33    ±0.86    ±1.25    ±3.61    ±2.79    ±2.18    ±0.47
                                                                               GraphMAE     0.7981    67.61 20.88       27.83    36.48    50.27    56.21   64.43    76.06    84.69
Knowledge Graph (initiated with different types of node embeddings)


                                                                                            ±0.0063    ±0.11   ±0.46    ±0.39    ±0.53    ±0.26    ±0.37    ±0.76    ±0.40    ±0.40
                                                                               eGraphMAE    0.7963    67.52    18.44    23.79    32.47    42.68    50.82   61.39    70.73    79.69
                                                                                            ±0.0030    ±0.03   ±0.21    ±0.22    ±0.20    ±0.55    ±0.41    ±0.18    ±0.88    ±1.10
                                                                               GraphSAGE    0.7422    62.90    10.12    11.93    17.51    24.85    32.87   43.26    54.98    63.13
                                                                                            ±0.0202    ±2.25   ±3.91    ±0.96    ±2.44    ±0.92    ±1.90    ±1.74    ±1.92    ±1.42
                                                                               GRACE        0.7548    58.20     3.09     4.83     7.60    12.88    21.40   31.63    44.33    54.71
                                                                                            ±0.0264    ±0.47   ±0.59    ±0.78    ±1.20    ±2.79    ±2.45    ±5.07    ±5.58    ±4.24
                                                                      ADA2


                                                                               MVGRL        0.6638    55.85     1.00     1.77     3.27     7.11    10.85   15.42    24.04    33.38
                      GNN-based Methods


                                                                                            ±0.0557    ±0.88   ±0.35    ±0.24    ±0.90    ±1.56    ±3.33    ±3.11    ±6.59    ±7.50
                                                                               GraphMAE     0.8132    65.10    24.14    29.15    35.06    46.24    58.21   67.53     75.61   88.32
                                                                                            ±0.0053    ±0.06   ±0.30    ±0.26    ±0.36    ±0.52    ±0.67    ±0.36    ±0.21    ±1.20
                                                                               eGraphMAE     OOM!     OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM! OOM!
                                                                               GraphSAGE    0.7390    59.90 10.26 14.07 17.47 25.71 38.13 45.84 54.80 64.77
                                                                                            ±0.0095    ±2.26   ±0.92    ±3.06    ±1.24    ±0.86    ±2.25    ±1.87    ±0.70    ±0.94
                                                                               GRACE        0.7149    57.26     0.39     1.07     2.25     4.34     6.93    11.77   19.25    29.53
                                                                                            ±0.0524    ±1.38   ±0.57    ±0.86    ±1.65    ±3.31    ±4.87    ±6.69    ±9.51   ±11.09
                                                                      SimCSE


                                                                               MVGRL        0.7180    55.82     0.79     1.20     2.14     4.95     8.36    14.11   21.22    29.33
                                                                                            ±0.0600    ±0.69   ±0.10    ±0.45    ±1.03    ±1.57    ±2.31    ±3.77    ±4.06    ±4.68
                                                                               GraphMAE     0.8108    65.46    19.67    26.61    33.24    44.32    53.06   63.45    76.45    84.39
                                                                                            ±0.0066    ±0.05   ±1.14    ±0.63    ±2.20    ±1.16    ±2.32    ±2.67    ±1.77    ±0.95
                                                                               eGraphMAE    0.8253    66.09    18.53    26.33    33.42    44.39    51.50    63.71   74.69    83.81
                                                                                            ±0.0089    ±0.38   ±0.19    ±0.17    ±0.91    ±0.58    ±1.02    ±0.76    ±0.52    ±0.24
                                                                               GraphSAGE    0.7421    60.09     5.79     8.02    12.20    17.22    24.82   31.98    42.84    55.22
                                                                                            ±0.0121    ±1.83   ±1.24    ±2.03    ±1.77    ±1.81    ±1.70    ±0.89    ±7.07    ±2.47
                                                                               GRACE        0.6698    58.15     0.66     1.31     2.07     5.44     9.58   15.40    26.27    36.47
                                                                                            ±0.0135    ±0.78   ±0.36    ±0.36    ±0.48    ±0.71    ±0.80    ±1.51    ±4.46    ±3.97
                                                                      PAUSE


                                                                               MVGRL        0.6843    55.60     0.47     1.25     2.94     6.39    11.19   17.29    26.68    35.52
                                                                                            ±0.0280    ±1.18   ±0.35    ±0.56    ±0.77    ±1.76    ±2.67    ±2.72    ±0.79    ±1.83
                                                                               GraphMAE     0.7727    64.81 10.16       12.51    14.87    19.59    25.41   31.90    42.85    54.33
                                                                                            ±0.0113    ±0.40   ±1.13    ±0.62    ±0.43    ±0.46    ±1.32    ±0.12    ±1.13    ±2.75
                                                                               eGraphMAE    0.7742    65.17    11.62    13.95    15.42    19.28    26.88   37.49    49.92    62.53
                                       ±0.0068     ±0.95     ±0.33      ±1.50       ±0.97       ±0.44    ±0.53      ±1.28        ±0.75      ±1.47
 * We omit SP evaluation for the path-based graph heuristics, since, whilst they are able to rank companies by similarity, there is no obvious way
to obtain a 0-1 similarity score for a pair of companies from them.
 † To account for the binary nature of the SP prompts answered by ChatGPT, we report accuracy (Acc.) instead of AUC.
 ‡ As ChatGPT’s answer on the CR task is not limited to the companies in CompanyKG and is not mapped to any specific company/node IDs,
we conducted a manual examination of the top-K responses and counted the number of entries that match the ground truth competitors. As a
result, when the value of K exceeds 200, it becomes overly tedious to calculate hit rate for ChatGPT.


Table 7: The performance of the popular and state-of-the-art baselines on three evaluation tasks of
CompanyKG: SP, SR and CR which are compared with Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC), Accuracy
(Acc.) and Recall@K respectively. Best results are in bold. “OOM!” means out-of-memory.



                                                                                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Dimension reduction and visualization of embeddings obtained from different LMs (the
first row) and GNN-based models (the rest of the rows).


E.1   P ERFORMANCE OF SP, CR AND SR

In Section 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 of the main paper, we treat the type of node features as a hyper-parameter
and only report the model that performs the best on SR validation split. In Table 7, we report the SP,
SR and CR performance of each individual model trained using different node feature (mSBERT,
ADA2, SimCSE and PAUSE). It is worth noting that the best performing models on SP and CR
(Recall@10k) are different than the results (Table 2) in the main paper.


E.2   E MBEDDING S PACE V ISUALIZATION

Figure 7 is the visualization for Section 4.5 in the main paper. We reduce the embeddings (from
either node feature or various GNN-based baselines) to two dimensions using UMAP (McInnes et al.,
2018), and color-code them by manually annotated sectors (cf. Figure 5e in Appendix B).


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     DATASHEET OF C OMPANY KG
This Datasheet follows the template defined by Gebru et al. (2021).

F.1   M OTIVATION

 1 For what purpose was the dataset created? Was there a specific task in mind? Was there a
specific gap that needed to be filled? Please provide a description.
Please refer to Section 1 in the main paper for the answer to this question.
 2 Who created the dataset (e.g., which team, research group) and on behalf of which entity
(e.g., company, institution, organization)?
This dataset was created by [HIDDEN FOR REVIEW] ...
 3 Who funded the creation of the dataset? If there is an associated grant, please provide the name
of the grantor and the grant name and number.
The development of this dataset was financially supported by [HIDDEN FOR REVIEW], covering
expenses related to human resources and access to proprietary and third-party data sources as
mentioned in Table 1 of the main paper.

F.2   C OMPOSITION

 1 What do the instances that comprise the dataset represent (e.g., documents, photos, people,
countries)? Are there multiple types of instances (e.g., movies, users, and ratings; people and
interactions between them; nodes and edges)? Please provide a description.
CompanyKG is a heterogeneous graph consisting of nodes and undirected edges, with each node
representing a real-world company and each edge signifying a relationship between the connected
pair of companies. As illustrated in Figure 5, the nodes/companies span a diverse range across five
distinct attributes: (1) the total number of employees; (2) the cumulative funding received by the
company; (3) the geographic region where the company is registered; (4) the number of years since
the company was founded; and (5) the industry sectors of the company. The graph edges capture 15
different inter-company relationships, as outlined in Table 1 in the main paper, resulting in 15 unique
edge types (abbreviated as ET), i.e., ET1⇠ET15.
CompanyKG also includes three evaluation datasets (summarized below) representing three different
tasks related to similar company quantification. Section 3.3 provides more details.

       • Similarity Prediction (SP): contains pairs of companies that are either annotated as similar
         (denoted by ”1”) or dissimilar (denoted by ”0”);
       • Similarity Ranking (SR): each sample consists of one query company and two candidate
         companies (identified by 0 and 1, respectively), and its label (valued 0 or 1) indicates which
         candidate is more similar to the query company.
       • Competitor Retrieval (CR): contains several target companies, each of which is annotated
         with N (N 1) direct competitors by investment professionals.

2 How many instances are there in total (of each type, if appropriate)?
CompanyKG comprises a total of 1,169,931 nodes and 50,815,503 edges; the distribution of edges
across each edge type is summarized in Table 1 of the main paper. Regarding evaluation tasks, the
SP dataset contains 3,219 annotated company pairs; the SR dataset includes 1,856 company ranking
questions with ground-truth answers; and the CR dataset comprises 76 target companies, each with
⇠5.3 manually identified direct competitors in average.
 3 Does the dataset contain all possible instances or is it a sample (not necessarily random)
of instances from a larger set? If the dataset is a sample, then what is the larger set? Is the
sample representative of the larger set (e.g., geographic coverage)? If so, please describe how
this representativeness was validated/verified. If it is not representative of the larger set, please
describe why not (e.g., to cover a more diverse range of instances, because instances were withheld
or unavailable).


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The inclusion criteria is aligned with [ANONYMIZED]’s investment focus concerning aspects such
as geographic location, industry sector, total funding, time of establishment and number of employees.
An insight into the coverage of companies from those aspects can be found in Appendix B. That said,
CompanyKG includes only a subset of companies still operating as of the publication date of this
dataset.
Certain edge types, such as ET8 (employee flow), ET9 (shared keywords), ET11 (mergers and/or
acquisitions), ET12 (event co-attendance), ET13 (common potential customers), ET14 (co-appearance
in news), and ET15 (common executives) in Table 1 of the main paper, reflect more universal relations
and are likely to lead to a more representative subset of companies. In contrast, other relations
(e.g., ET1 to ET3) tend to result in a skewed subset of companies, as they often represent specific
interests and focuses of the investment professionals.
Acknowledging the incompleteness and skewness of edges from individual relation types, we merge
all relations into a single heterogeneous (in terms of edge types) large graph, expecting the resulting
company set to better represent the entire population of companies. Appendix B displays the
distribution of the included companies from five perspectives, demonstrating their wide distribution
across each attribute, which highlights the graph’s complexity and inclusiveness.
 4 What data does each instance consist of? “Raw” data (e.g., unprocessed text or images) or
features? In either case, please provide a description.
We compile a textual description for each company (corresponding to a node in CompanyKG) by
extracting relevant information (i.e., company name, keywords and descriptions) from multiple data
sources. Due to legal and compliance concerns, we cannot disclose the complete list of these sources.
For example, the assembled textual description for company “Klarna” should look like

         Klarna is a fintech company that provides support for direct and post-purchase payments.
         Keywords: “buy-now-pay-later”, “shopping”, “saving account” and “financial service”.

It is worth noting that about 5% company descriptions are in languages other than English. Since
the true identity of individual companies is considered sensitive information, we can only publish
the company description embeddings (a.k.a. node features) from four different pretrained LMs.
The choice of LMs encompasses both pretrained off-the-shelf models (mSBERT and ADA2) and
proprietary fine-tuned models (SimCSE and PAUSE). We hereby justify our selection of LMs and
offer additional details about the chosen ones below.

       • mSBERT (multilingual Sentence BERT) (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) is selected due to
         its early and wide adoption in generating contextually rich and language-aware sentence
         embeddings, catering to the multilingual nature of our dataset. The model is downloaded
         from https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/distiluse-base-m
         ultilingual-cased-v2.
       • ADA2 (i.e., “text-embedding-ada-002” model introduced in https://platform.openai.
         com/docs/guides/embeddings) is GPT-3’s most recent embedding engine employing a
         1536-dimensional semantic space, with default settings used throughout the experiments. At
         the time of writing this paper, ADA2 represents the most comprehensive and state-of-the-art
         language embedding model publicly accessible, serving as a versatile and general-purpose
         solution to encode the description of companies.
       • SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) address the reality of label scarcity (i.e., company pairs that are
         annotated as similar or dissimilar) well, as it obviates the need for annotations during the
         fine-tuning process of this embedding model. Specifically, we finetune a “bert-base-ucased”
         model (Devlin et al., 2019) in a self-supervised manner using all company descriptions for
         two epochs.
       • PAUSE, a semi-supervised language embedding model, displays the ability to minimize
         approximately 90% of the normal labeling effort while maintaining superior embedding
         performance. Its practical application spans over two years in various investment scenarios,
         including market mapping and M&A. For this work, we adopt the “PAUSE-SC-10%” model
         introduced in Section 4.4 of (Cao et al., 2021).

Readers can refer to Figure 1 (top-right part) of the main paper for a specific example of node features
or embeddings.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 5 Is there a label or target associated with each instance? If so, please provide a description.
No. But we have three evaluation datasets (cf. Section 3.3 in main paper) with ground-truth labels,
which represent different subsets of all instances.
 6 Is any information missing from individual instances? If so, please provide a description,
explaining why this information is missing (e.g., because it was unavailable). This does not include
intentionally removed information, but might include, e.g., redacted text.
While we have gathered company descriptions from multiple data sources, there are still instances
(¡0.2%) where the description is either too brief or too generic to contain sufficient relevant information
useful for measuring inter-company similarity. In these cases, the discriminative ability of the node
embeddings may be somewhat diminished.
Regarding the edges incorporated into CompanyKG, they do not constitute a comprehensive repre-
sentation of all conceivable edges, primarily due to incomplete information from various data sources.
Such incompleteness may be attributed to the data source selection process, which mostly aligns with
[ANONYMIZED]’s investment preferences, or to the quality of the chosen data sources.
 7 Are relationships between individual instances made explicit (e.g., users’ movie ratings,
social network links)? If so, please describe how these relationships are made explicit.
The undirected and weighted edges in CompanyKG represent 15 distinct inter-company relations, as
detailed in Section 3.1 and Table 1 of the main paper, leading to 15 unique edge types (abbreviated
as ET), specifically ET1⇠ET15. Specifically, for any two companies that share at least one type of
relationship, we create a single undirected edge between them with a 15-dimensional weight vector
(refer to the bottom-right portion of Figure 1 in the main paper). The i-th value of the weight vector
is the weight of the i-th edge type (i.e., ETi).
 8 Are there recommended data splits (e.g., training, development/validation, testing)? If so,
please provide a description of these splits, explaining the rationale behind them.
In reflecting real use cases within the PE industry, the primary goal of constructing CompanyKG
is to develop similar company search algorithms using the entire graph. The performance of these
algorithms should be measured based on three evaluation tasks – SP, SR, and CR, as described in
Section 3.3 of the main paper. Consequently, there is no recommended graph split.
However, the graph can be naturally divided into 15 sub-graphs by retaining only one edge type at a
time, as demonstrated in the empirical analyses conducted in Sections 4.1 of the main paper.
We further randomly split the SR evaluation dataset into validation and test sets at a 1:5 ratio. It
is recommended to use the SR validation set (comprising 368 samples/questions) for selecting the
optimal combination of hyper-parameters and to report the selected model on the SR test set and the
entire SP and CR evaluation datasets. The rationale for not splitting the SP or CR datasets further is
two-fold:

     (1) The SP and CR datasets used for validation are constructed using output from historical
         [ANONYMIZED]’s investment tasks, leading to a potential bias towards the areas of interest
         for [ANONYMIZED]’s investment professionals. As a result, the generalizability of the SP
         and CR tasks may be limited.
     (2) The binary similarity labels used in the SP task do not capture the fine-grained similarity
         discrimination required by many real-world use cases. Excelling at the SP task does not
         necessarily indicate the ability to differentiate between companies with subtle differences in
         similarity. Additionally, the SP task requires the use of a uniform threshold to distinguish
         between similar and dissimilar cases, which may not align with the varying similarity
         thresholds in different scenarios.

 9 Are there any errors, sources of noise, or redundancies in the dataset? If so, please provide a
description.
Each relation that we model as an edge type in the graph has a varying degree of incompleteness. In
most cases, quantifying the degree of completeness is challenging, especially for edge types that rely
on third-party information, as explained in Table 1 of the main paper. Consequently, we recommend
using all edge types together when training graph learning algorithms on CompanyKG to mitigate
this issue.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, both node features and edge weights can be prone to noise:

       • The node features are based on company description embeddings, and the quality of these
         embeddings is influenced by the completeness and relevance of the raw textual descriptions.
       • The statistics used to calculate edge weights may be somewhat inaccurate. For instance,
         inaccuracies may arise in determining people’s affiliations and durations when deriving edge
         weights for ET8.

Lastly, considering that CompanyKG integrates multiple data sources, we established an entity
resolution system to merge information from different data sources. During that merging process,
two types of errors may emerge: (1) incorrectly merging two different companies into a single graph
node and (2) representing the same company as different nodes.
 10 Is the dataset self-contained, or does it link to or otherwise rely on external resources (e.g.,
websites, tweets, other datasets)? If it links to or relies on external resources, a) are there guarantees
that they will exist, and remain constant, over time; b) are there official archival versions of the
complete dataset (i.e., including the external resources as they existed at the time the dataset was
created); c) are there any restrictions (e.g., licenses, fees) associated with any of the external resources
that might apply to a dataset user? Please provide descriptions of all external resources and any
restrictions associated with them, as well as links or other access points, as appropriate.
The dataset is self-contained and does not rely on or link to external resources. During the construction
of CompanyKG, some third-party data sources were used to build a portion of the edges and
nodes. However, all information has been incorporated by performing encoding, transformation, and
anonymization to meet [ANONYMIZED]’s compliance requirements. For more details, please refer
to Appendix F.3.
 11 Does the dataset contain data that might be considered confidential (e.g., data that is
protected by legal privilege or by doctor–patient confidentiality, data that includes the content
of individuals’ non-public communications)? If so, please provide a description.
There are primarily three categories of information considered confidential and/or proprietary:

       • The disclosure of individual companies’ true identities may risk leaking deal information
         due to certain inter-company relations derived from ET1, 2, 3, 7, and 10. As a result, we
         conceal the names of the companies and use incremental numerical IDs to identify them.
       • The company descriptions are assembled using several third-party data sources, so we cannot
         directly publish them. Additionally, publishing the company descriptions (even with the
         company names hidden) could potentially enable speculation about the true identities of
         some companies. For instance, it would be relatively easy to guess the company ”King” from
         the description ”COMPANY_NAME is a mobile game developer and publisher that gained prominence
         after releasing Candy Crush Saga in 2012”. To address this issue, we convert the company
         descriptions into NLP embeddings (a.k.a. node features) using four different pretrained
         LMs, as already introduced in F.2. To prevent reverse engineering of the embeddings (to
         recover company identities), we also apply linear transformations to the NLP embeddings,
         selecting different transformation parameters for each embedding type. The details of this
         transformation are not shared.
       • The details of the data sources, whether from [ANONYMIZED] or third-party, used to
         construct the 15 different edge types are considered as sensitive proprietary information.
         Nevertheless, we have made our best effort to explain each edge type in Table 1 of the main
         paper. The rationale behind this is that disclosing the exact third-party data sources could
         potentially enable the identification of the true identities of some companies by comparing
         their connection patterns using criteria such as in/out-degree, centrality, and other relevant
         graph connectivity measures.

 12 Does the dataset contain data that, if viewed directly, might be offensive, insulting, threat-
ening, or might otherwise cause anxiety? If so, please describe why.
No, the dataset focuses on companies and their relationships, with all sensitive information being
concealed or anonymized as previously discussed. Consequently, it does not contain data that, if
viewed directly, might be offensive, insulting, threatening, or cause anxiety.


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


13 Does the dataset relate to people? If not, you may skip the remaining questions in this section.
No, this dataset focuses on companies and their relationships with one another. Although some
relationships, such as ET8 and ET15, are built upon people’s affiliations, they are heavily aggregated,
making it impossible to identify any individual person.

F.3    C OLLECTION P ROCESS

 1 How was the data associated with each instance acquired? Was the data directly observ-
able (e.g., raw text, movie ratings), reported by subjects (e.g., survey responses), or indirectly
inferred/derived from other data (e.g., part-of-speech tags, model-based guesses for age or language)?
If the data was reported by subjects or indirectly inferred/derived from other data, was the data
validated/verified? If so, please describe how.
The data used to construct CompanyKG primarily originates from two categories of sources:

        • First-hand, high-quality information from the [ANONYMIZED] investment platform, which
          includes historical user interaction records. This data assists in constructing edge types ET1,
          2, 3, 7, and 10, as presented in Table 1 of the main paper. The information is considered
          reliable because it is directly provided by [ANONYMIZED]’s investment professionals to
          facilitate various investment activities.
        • Third-party data sources offer information for constructing the remaining edge types and raw
          textual company descriptions. All data providers in this category have signed commercial
          contracts with us, which include quality assurance measures as a crucial aspect.

As previously introduced in Appendix F.2, the published node features (refer to Section 3.2 of the
main paper) and edge definitions and weights (refer to Section 3.1 of the main paper) are not directly
observable due to required anonymization, embedding, and transformation processes. This ensures
the data is in compliance with privacy and confidentiality requirements while maintaining its utility
for research purposes.
 2 What mechanisms or procedures were used to collect the data (e.g., hardware apparatus or
sensor, manual human curation, software program, software API)? How were these mechanisms
or procedures validated?
As previously emphasized, CompanyKG is built upon the integration of company information from
various internal and external data sources. The information about companies continually arrives
(from the [ANONYMIZED] platform or external data providers) into our streaming data pipeline,
which primarily performs two consecutive tasks:

      (1) Associating the incoming company information with a company ID using an entity resolution
          system as mentioned in the response to question “ 9 ” in Appendix F.2.
      (2) Materializing the updated company entity with the newly associated information in our data
          warehouse, as explained in a blog post titled [HIDDEN FOR REVIEW].

CompanyKG is constructed using the materialized company entities as of April 5th, 2023.
Collection of annotated test sets for the three evaluation tasks is described in Section 3.3 the main
paper. The annotation procedure for the SR task is slightly more involved, so warrants some more
detail here.
Ten [ANONYMIZED] employees initially labeled 119 samples. Subsequently, around 15 experienced
annotators labeled 2,400 carefully curated samples (including the initial set) through the annotation
service Appen (https://appen.com). The task is a choice between two candidate companies, the
order of which is randomized prior to annotation. Multiple rounds of annotation were carried out in
order to ensure that the professional annotators’ understanding of the task was consistent with those
of the [ANONYMIZED] employees, and in the process some annotators were excluded. The final set
annotated by Appen annotators was combined with the initial set from [ANONYMIZED] employees.
During Appen annotation, three annotations from different annotators were collected per sample first.
In cases without full agreement (1,280/2,281), an annotation was collected from a fourth annotator.
544 samples that still did not reach a majority agreement (i.e. had 2/4 votes for each candidate) were
excluded from the final set, leaving 1,856. The final label set exhibits a slight bias towards label 0


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(56% vs 44%), which we attribute to a tendency by some annotators to select the first candidate when
uncertain. In a supervised setting, where a model is trained on a portion of the annotated set, we
would therefore consider 56% accuracy to be baseline performance. However, in the experiments
reported in the main paper, none of the models has access to this dataset at training time and almost
all models outperform this hypothetical baseline.
 3 If the dataset is a sample from a larger set, what was the sampling strategy (e.g., deterministic,
probabilistic with specific sampling probabilities)?
We direct readers to our response to question “ 3 ” in Appendix F.2 for a detailed explanation on this
matter.
 4 Who was involved in the data collection process (e.g., students, crowdworkers, contractors)
and how were they compensated (e.g., how much were crowdworkers paid)?
The integration of multi-source information into unified [ANONYMIZED] company entities is
performed by the Data Engineers of [ANONYMIZED]. The construction of the CompanyKG dataset
from the materialized company entities is carried out by the authors of this paper, listed in the response
to question “ 2 ” in Appendix F.1. The persons involved in creating the three evaluation datasets (SP,
SR, and CR) are described below.
       • SP: Two [ANONYMIZED] employees were involved in manually verifying the labels.
       • SR: Ten [ANONYMIZED] employees (mainly data scientists and machine learning engi-
         neers) were involved in labeling the first 119 questions. Subsequently, around 15 experienced
         labelers hired by Appen (https://appen.com) labeled 2,400 carefully curated questions
         at a total cost of approximately 18,000 EUR. More details of this process are given under
         question “ 2 ” above.
       • CR: Four experienced [ANONYMIZED] employees manually extracted the data from PE
         deal materials.
 5 Over what timeframe was the data collected? Does this timeframe match the creation timeframe
of the data associated with the instances (e.g., recent crawl of old news articles)? If not, please
describe the timeframe in which the data associated with the instances was created.
The CompanyKG dataset (including the graph and evaluation tasks) represents a snapshot of the
[ANONYMIZED] platform’s data warehouse as of April 5th, 2023. The authors began working
on incrementally building and iterating the dataset in September 2022. However, the materialized
company entities have been integrating information from various data sources since 2016.
 6 Were any ethical review processes conducted (e.g., by an institutional review board)? If so,
please provide a description of these review processes, including the outcomes, as well as a link or
other access point to any supporting documentation.
Yes, the compliance experts from [ANONYMIZED] evaluated the dataset, data collection methods,
and potential risks associated with the research. Their conclusion is that all published artifacts adhere
to relevant laws, regulations, policies, and ethical guidelines.

F.4   P REPROCESSING / CLEANING / LABELING

 1 Was any preprocessing/cleaning/labeling of the data done (e.g., discretization or bucketing,
tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, SIFT feature extraction, removal of instances, processing
of missing values)? If so, please provide a description. If not, you may skip the remaining questions
in this section.
Firstly, we encode the textual company description into four different NLP embeddings, as detailed
in the response to question “ 1 ” in F.2. The published node embeddings are also linearly transformed
to prevent recovering the true company identities, as described in the answer to question “ 11 ” in F.3.
Secondly, we aggregate the relation (i.e., edge) strength into a single scalar, which is truncated,
normalized, or log-transformed as specified in Table 1 of the main paper. As introduced in Section 3.1
of the main paper, we merge multiple edges/connections (if any) between the same pair of companies
into one by assigning a 15-dimensional edge weight vector. It is crucial to note that a value of “0”
in any edge weights vector represents “unknown relation” rather than “no relation”, which can be
regarded as a form of edge imputation.


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: A screenshot of the web application developed for labeling SR (Similarity Ranking) task.



 2 Was the “raw” data saved in addition to the preprocessed/cleaned/labeled data (e.g., to
support unanticipated future uses)? If so, please provide a link or other access point to the “raw”
data.
No, due to compliance requirements discussed earlier, the “raw” data cannot be publicly shared.
 3 Is the software that was used to preprocess/clean/label the data available? If so, please
provide a link or other access point.
Given that the “raw” data isn’t publicly available, we do not release the software for preprocessing
or cleaning it. For the SP task, [ANONYMIZED]’s proprietary platform, [ANONYMIZED], is
utilized to acquire labels. The CR task, which involves manually extracting direct competitor
information from meticulously chosen investment deep-dive documents, does not necessitate custom
software. Conversely, for the SR task, we developed a labeling web application using Retool
(https://retool.com), as depicted in Figure 8. This tool was initially designed to validate the
labeling experience and quality. Subsequently, Appen (https://appen.com) incorporated it into
their platform for labeling the complete SR dataset.


F.5   U SES

1 Has the dataset been used for any tasks already? If so, please provide a description.
No, although the non-anonymized dataset is planned to be used internally for applications like
market/competitor mapping and M&A.


                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 2 Is there a repository that links to any or all papers or systems that use the dataset? If so,
please provide a link or other access point.
The CompanyKG dataset has been archived on Zenodo (https://zenodo.org), complete with its
own DOI for easy referencing. This allows for tracking of all papers that cite this dataset. At present,
we do not have plans to maintain a separate manual repository for tracking dataset usage. However,
we remain open to reconsidering this stance if we receive substantial requests.
 3 What (other) tasks could the dataset be used for?
CompanyKG serves as a robust benchmark for any unsupervised graph learning algorithms aimed at
generating node embeddings. The meticulously designed evaluation tasks within our dataset represent
high-quality, manually curated benchmarks that provide multi-faceted assessments of the learned
company embeddings. These tasks can significantly aid in comparing and evaluating the performance
of various embedding techniques.
 4 Is there anything about the composition of the dataset or the way it was collected and
preprocessed/cleaned/labeled that might impact future uses? For example, is there anything
that a dataset consumer might need to know to avoid uses that could result in unfair treatment of
individuals or groups (e.g., stereotyping, quality of service issues) or other risks or harms (e.g., legal
risks, financial harms)? If so, please provide a description. Is there anything a dataset consumer could
do to mitigate these risks or harms?
As outlined in Appendix F.4, the “raw” data undergoes a series of processes including encoding,
aggregation, transformation, and anonymization to ensure proprietary information remains secure.
Consequently, the dataset is not suitable for analyzing any real-world investment scenarios.
 5 Are there tasks for which the dataset should not be used? If so, please provide a description.
It is imperative that users of this dataset refrain from attempting to decipher the true identities of the
companies contained within.

F.6   D ISTRIBUTION

 1 Will the dataset be distributed to third parties outside of the entity (e.g., company, institution,
organization) on behalf of which the dataset was created? If so, please provide a description.
Yes, we have designated this dataset as open access to ensure its widest possible utilization. In an
effort to promote reuse and potential contributions, we have deliberately opted for the most permissive
licenses available for this dataset.
 2 How will the dataset be distributed (e.g., tarball on website, API, GitHub)? Does the dataset
have a digital object identifier (DOI)?
Yes, the dataset DOI is [ANONYMIZED]. Please see Appendix A.
 3 When will the dataset be distributed?
After the review process of the conference.
 4 Will the dataset be distributed under a copyright or other intellectual property (IP) license,
and/or under applicable terms of use (ToU)? If so, please describe this license and/or ToU, and
provide a link or other access point to, or otherwise reproduce, any relevant licensing terms or ToU,
as well as any fees associated with these restrictions.
See Appendix A.
 5 Have any third parties imposed IP-based or other restrictions on the data associated with
the instances? If so, please describe these restrictions, and provide a link or other access point
to, or otherwise reproduce, any relevant licensing terms, as well as any fees associated with these
restrictions.
None.
 6 Do any export controls or other regulatory restrictions apply to the dataset or to individual
instances? If so, please describe these restrictions, and provide a link or other access point to, or
otherwise reproduce, any supporting documentation.


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


None.

F.7   M AINTENANCE

1 Who will be supporting/hosting/maintaining the dataset?
The authors from [ANONYMIZED], akin to typical academic practice, will ensure the long-term
upkeep of the dataset’s content. In relation to hosting, we have entrusted Zenodo with this respon-
sibility to ensure maximal availability and longevity of the dataset. Backed by CERN, Zenodo has
become the gold standard for dataset distribution, offering excellent availability and redundancy.
More information about the underlying infrastructure and redundancy measures of Zenodo can be
found at https://about.zenodo.org/infrastructure.
2 How can the owner/curator/manager of the dataset be contacted (e.g., email address)?
The primary contacts are [HIDDEN FOR REVIEW] ...
3 Is there an erratum? If so, please provide a link or other access point.
No.
 4 Will the dataset be updated (e.g., to correct labeling errors, add new instances, delete
instances)? If so, please describe how often, by whom, and how updates will be communicated to
dataset consumers (e.g., mailing list, GitHub)?
All amendments to the dataset, including error corrections and expansions concerning the number of
nodes, edges, and evaluation samples, will be handled through Zenodo. Each updated version will be
assigned a unique DOI by Zenodo, while all versions collectively will be identifiable under a fixed
root DOI. Our commitment is to maintain the dataset’s quality and growth, responding to any errors
that are identified and planning for future enhancements.
 5 If the dataset relates to people, are there applicable limits on the retention of the data
associated with the instances (e.g., were the individuals in question told that their data would
be retained for a fixed period of time and then deleted)? If so, please describe these limits and
explain how they will be enforced.
No retention limits.
 6 Will older versions of the dataset continue to be supported/hosted/maintained? If so, please
describe how. If not, please describe how its obsolescence will be communicated to dataset consumers.
As the dataset is hosted on Zenodo, which supports DOI versioning, all different versions of the
dataset are appropriately tracked and stored. This versioning functions much like incremental updates,
duplicating only those files that have undergone modification. For more detailed information on this
process, please refer to Zenodo’s versioning guidelines at https://help.zenodo.org/#versi
oning.
 7 If others want to extend/augment/build on/contribute to the dataset, is there a mechanism
for them to do so? If so, please provide a description. Will these contributions be validated/verified?
If so, please describe how. If not, why not? Is there a process for communicating/distributing these
contributions to dataset consumers? If so, please provide a description.
We encourage users to share additional benchmarking results using various graph learning algorithms.
Furthermore, we welcome discussions regarding potential relationships that could expand the graph.
Please refer to question “ 2 ” above for contact details. Any suggestions will be thoroughly evaluated
and validated internally on a case-by-case basis.


                                                  28
