Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DAPTIVE R EGRET FOR BANDITS M ADE P OSSIBLE :
T WO Q UERIES S UFFICE
 Zhou Lu∗                                      Qiuyi Zhang∗                            Xinyi Chen
 Princeton University                          Google Deepmind                         Google Deepmind
                                                                                       Princeton University

 Fred Zhang                      David P. Woodruff                           Elad Hazan
 UC Berkeley                     Google Research                             Google Deepmind
                                 Carnegie Mellon University†                 Princeton University



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Fast changing states or volatile environments pose a significant challenge to online
             optimization, which needs to perform rapid adaptation under limited observation.
             In this paper, we give query and regret optimal bandit algorithms under the strict
             notion of strongly adaptive regret, which measures the maximum regret over any
             contiguous interval I. Due to its worst-case nature, there is an almost-linear
             Ω(|I|1−ε ) regret lower bound, when only one query per round is allowed [Daniely
             el al, ICML 2015]. Surprisingly, with just two queries p
                                                                    per round, we give Strongly
             Adaptive Bandit Learner (StABL) that achieves O( n|I|) adaptive regret for
                                                                 e
             multi-armed bandits with n arms. The bound is tight and cannot be improved
             in general. Our algorithm leverages a multiplicative update scheme of varying
             stepsizes and a carefully chosen observation distribution to control the variance.
             Furthermore, we extend our results and provide optimal algorithms in the bandit
             convex optimization setting. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the superior
             performance of our algorithms under volatile environments and for downstream
             tasks, such as algorithm selection for hyperparameter optimization.


1       I NTRODUCTION

In online optimization, a player iteratively chooses a point from a decision set, and receives loss from
an adversarially chosen loss function. The classic metric for measuring the performance of the player
is regret: the difference between her total loss and that of the best fixed comparator in hindsight.
However, as pointed out by Hazan and Seshadhri Hazan & Seshadhri (2009), regret incentivizes static
behavior and is not the correct metric in changing environments. They instead proposed the notion of
adaptive regret, defined as the maximum regret over any continuous interval in time. This notion
intuitively captures adaptivity to the environment,
                                          p         and is studied later by Daniely et al. (2015) which
gives an algorithm with near-optimal O( |I| log T ) adaptive regret for any interval I simultaneously.
Most algorithms for minimizing adaptive regret, such as Hazan & Seshadhri (2009); Daniely et al.
(2015), work by running O(log T ) independent copies of online learning schemes and using a meta-
learner to aggregate them. Therefore, they make O(log T ) queries per round. In practice, oftentimes it
is expensive to evaluate the arms. For example, an arm corresponds to a set of hyperparameter values
of a large machine learning model, and playing an arm amounts to evaluating the model performance
and fully training the model. This motivates the study of query-efficient adaptive regret algorithms.
Recently, Lu and Hazan Lu & Hazan (2023) give an improved algorithm with only O(log log T )
queries per round. However, the known lower bound in Daniely et al. (2015) only shows that in the
bandit setting, near-optimal adaptive regret is impossible with one query. This leaves the following
question:
    ∗
        Equal contribution
    †
        Part of this work was done while visiting the Simons Insitute for the Theory of Computing


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Can we design algorithms with near-optimal adaptive regret using fewer queries?

In thisp
       paper we give an affirmative answer, showing that two queries per round is enough to guarantee
    e |I|) adaptive regret bound. The key ingredient of our algorithm is using the additional query
an O(
for exploration under a special distribution on arms, which serves to construct unbiased loss estimators
with small variance for both experts and the meta-learner.

1.1   O UR R ESULTS

We design adaptive regret minimization schemes with the power to query additional arms. In the
adversarial multi-arm bandit (MAB) problem, the algorithm selects and plays one arm per round.
In our setting the algorithm can pick additional arms to query in parallel to selecting which arm to
play, then the loss values of both the queried and played arms will be revealed, but the algorithm only
suffers the loss of the arm played. This is similar to, but still different from the multi-point feedback
model Agarwal et al. (2010), which suffers the average loss of the arms. The query complexity counts
the total arm observations received, including the one played.
                                                 √
First, we prove that two queries suffice for O(e nI) adaptive regret in the MAB setting (we slightly
abuse the notation I to denote its length |I|). Our algorithm runs an EXP3-type meta-algorithm on top
of black-box bandit learners A which are EXP3. It uses the additional query to perform exploration
every round for constructing a bounded unbiased loss estimator. Then each bandit algorithm together
with the meta-algorithm gets updated according to the loss estimator. Together with the lower bound
in Daniely et al. (2015), our algorithm gives a tight characterization of the query efficiency of adaptive
regret minimization. Such O(log T ) to 2 improvement in the number of queries needed is significant
for computational efficiency, for applications such as hyperparameter optimization in expensive
settings.

Table 1: Adaptive regret bounds and query efficiency in the adversarial multi-armed bandits setting.

                  Algorithm                     Adaptive√regret bound     Number of queries
          FLH Hazan & Seshadhri (2009)                √ nT                   O(log T )
            SAOL Daniely et al. (2015)                  nI log T             O(log  T)
                                                    1
                                                      +ε
                                                          √
                                                                                  log log T
             EFLH Lu & Hazan (2023)               I 2    · n log T           O        ε
                                                 √
              This paper (Theorem 1)               nI log n · log1.5 T              2

Next, we extend our MAB√     method to the bandit convex optimization (BCO) setting, proving that
three queries suffice for O(
                          e I) adaptive regret. We use one of the additional queries to do uniform
exploration, which gets us the loss value of some expert i’s prediction ℓt (Ai (t)). This value is used
to construct both a bounded unbiased loss estimator to the meta EXP3 algorithm, and an unbiased
sparse gradient estimator with bounded variance by leveraging another query to get ℓt (Ai (t) + µ),
where µ is a small random perturbation term.
Finally, we show empirically the advantage of using our adaptive algorithms in changing environments
on synthetic and downstream tasks, such as algorithm selection during hyperparameter optimization.

1.2   R ELATED W ORK

Adaptive Regret Minimization Motivated by early work on shifting experts Herbster & Warmuth
(1998); Bousquet & Warmuth (2002), the notion of adaptive regret was first proposed by Hazan &
Seshadhri (2009). They gave an algorithm called Follow-the-Leading-History (FLH) with O(log2 T )
adaptive regret for online optimization on strongly convex√ functions. The bound on the adaptive
regret for general convex cost functions, however, is O( T log T ). This question has been further
studied by a sequence of work Daniely et al. (2015); Jun et al. (2017); Lu et al. (2022) which aims
to improve the regret bound. In particular, Daniely et al. (2015)√proposed the algorithm Strongly-
Adaptive-Online-Learner (SAOL)√achieving a near-optimal O( I log T ) bound. Later, Jun et al.
(2017) improved this bound by a log T factor and Lu et al. (2022) attained a second-order bound.
Crucially, note that all the algorithms use O(log T ) queries per round.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Recently, Lu & Hazan (2023) initiated a study on improving the efficiency of adaptive regret
minimization. They showed a trade-off between adaptive regret and computational complexity, that
    e 12 +ε ) regret bound is achievable with O log log T base algorithms,each with one query per
an O(I                                                 ε
round. This result differs from ours in two aspects: (i) Lu & Hazan (2023) studied the computational
complexity (number of base algorithms), while we consider the query complexity and achieve a better
bound; and (ii) Lu & Hazan (2023) focused on improving the classic exponential-history-lookback
technique of Hazan & Seshadhri (2009); Daniely et al. (2015) itself, by showing an regret upper
bound with doubly exponential lookback. However, they also showed a matching lower bound that
the history-lookback technique must use Ω(log log T ) experts to achieve non-vacuous regret. Instead,
our work bypasses such limitations by incorporating the EXP3 method into the classic framework,
using only a constant number of queries.
                                                                                √
For adaptive regret in the BCO setting, Zhao et al. (2021) showed that an O(  e T ) adaptive regret
bound is achievable under the two-point feedback model. However, the result√     is weaker than ours
in two aspects. First, our result provides a strongly adaptive regret bound O(e I) which depends
on the interval-length, and is a stronger notion than adaptive regret. Second, √ our regret bound is
independent of the condition number κ, while their regret bound is O(dGDκ
                                                                     e           T ). We will discuss
the comparison in more details later.

Dynamic Regret Dynamic regret is another related notation to handle changing environments
in OCO, which aims to capture comparators√with bounded total movement instead. Starting from
Zinkevich (2003) which provided an O(P   e      T ) dynamic regret bound of vanilla OGD where P
denotes the path length, there have been many works on improving and applying dynamic regret
bounds. Zhao et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2017) achieved improved dependence on P under further
assumptions. Baby & Wang (2021; 2022) focused on the setting of exp-concave and strongyly-convex
loss, showing that the classic adaptive regret algorithm FLH Hazan & Seshadhri (2009) guarantees
 e 13 P 23 ) dynamic regret. Some works study the relationship between adaptive regret and dynamic
O(T
regret, for example Zhang et al. (2018; 2020).

Bandit Convex Optimization The study on BCO was initiated by Flaxman et al. (2005), which
showed how to construct an approximate gradient estimator with bandit feedback, providing an
     3/4
O(T√ ) regret bound. If multi-point feedback is allowed, the regret bound can be improved to
O( T ) as shown in Agarwal√ et al. (2010). Later, Bubeck et al. (2017) used a kernel-based algorithm
to achieve the optimal O( T ) regret bound. Nevertheless, none of the prior works considered
adaptive regret in the BCO setting.

2   S ETTINGS AND P RELIMINARIES

We study adaptive regret in a limited information model, for both the multi-armed bandit (MAB) and
the continuous bandit convex optimization (BCO) problems. In the MAB problem, a decision maker
A plays a game of T rounds, she pulls an arm xt at round t and chooses an additional set of arms
Xt to query. Then an adversary reveals the values of the loss vector ℓt on {xt } ∪ Xt . The goal is to
minimize the (strongly) adaptive regret, which examines all contiguous intervals I = [j, s] ∈ [T ]:
(we will omit I when it’s clear from the context)
                                                                            
                                                  Xs                Xs
                     SA-regret(A, I) = max          ℓ⊤
                                                      t ext − min       ℓ⊤
                                                                         t ei .
                                                                             
                                         s−j=I                   i
                                                  t=j                t=j

For the BCO setting, similarly the decision maker chooses xt ∈ K ⊂ Rd at each time t along with
a set of points Xt , where K is some convex domain, then the adversary reveals the loss values on
{xt } ∪ Xt . The player aims to minimize the (strongly) adaptive regret as well: (notice for expected
regret, it contains the above definiton for MAB as a special case when K is a simplex)
                                                                            
                                                 Xs                 s
                                                                    X
                       SA-regret(A, I) = max        ℓt (xt ) − min    ℓt (x) .
                                         s−j=I                 x∈K
                                                 t=j                 t=j



                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The decision maker has limited power to query ℓt . For every round t she has a query budget |Xt | ≤ N
for some small constant N ∈ N+ . In particular, we will only consider the case N = 1 for the MAB
problem and N = 2 for the BCO problem. We emphasize the choice of which arms to query is made
before any information of the loss is revealed, thus differentiates our setting from the stronger "Bandit
with Hints" setting Bhaskara et al. (2023). Our setting is stronger than the vanilla MAB setting, but
weaker than the full-information setting or the hint setting.
We make the following assumption on the loss ℓt and domain K, which is standard in literature.
Assumption 1. For the MAB problem, the loss vector ℓt is assumed to have each of its coordinate
bounded in [0, 1]. For the BCO problem, we assume the loss ℓt is convex, G-Lipschitz and non-
negative. The convex domain K is sandwiched by two balls centered at origin: rB ⊂ K ⊂ DB, we
denote the condition number κ = D/r.

2.1   T HE Q UERY M ODEL

Our query model is similar to the multi-point feedback model Agarwal et al. (2010), with a slight
difference. Both models specify a set of arms to query beforehand, then after the adversary reveals the
loss, both models receive loss information on the set of chosen arms. Here, the definition (evaluation
of the loss function at a given point) and complexity (number of evaluations) of query are the same
for both models, and the only difference is that our model only incurs loss of the actually played arm,
while the multi-point feedback model incurs the average loss of the set of chosen arms. Notice that
neither model strictly implies the other model. As a result, it’s fair to compare the query efficiency of
our result with previous works under the multi-point feedback model.

2.2   T HE EXP3 A LGORITHM

The EXP3 algorithm for adversarial MAB Auer et al. (2002) is based on the multiplicative update
method, and performs a weight update according to an unbiased loss estimator using bandit feedback.
Denote wt (k) as the weight of arm k at time t, the EXP3 algorithm samples the arm xt according to
the weights wt (k). Ideally, we would like to update each weight based on full information of the loss:
                                  wt+1 (k) = wt (k) 1 − ηℓ⊤

                                                             t ek .

In the bandit setting, we have only the value of ℓ⊤
                                                  t ext . Let 1 denote the all-ones vector. The EXP3
algorithm instead constructs an unbiased estimator ℓbt to replace ℓt :
                                                         ⊤
                                                        ℓ ex
                                         ℓbt (i) = 1i=xt t t .
                                                        wt (k)
This pseudo loss√has a bounded variance. In particular, E[wt⊤ ℓb2t ] ≤ n, which gives the EXP3
algorithm an O(
             e nT ) regret bound.

2.3   S TANDARD F RAMEWORK FOR M INIMIZING A DAPTIVE R EGRET

We briefly review the standard framework of adaptive regret minimization. Since adaptive regret
                                      √ a simple idea is to construct, for any interval I, a base learner
asks for small regret over all intervals,
AI that achieves optimal regret O( I) on I. There are O(T 2 ) contiguous intervals between [1, T ].
Thus, a naive procedure is to run a meta-learner,
                                              √ such as multiplicative weights (MW) update, on
these O(T 2 ) experts, and this leads to an O( I log T ) adaptive regret.
Unfortunately, although the regret bound is near optimal, the naive algorithm is inefficient. In
particular, for any t there are Ω(T ) number of intervals containing t, and the naive algorithm needs to
maintain and update Ω(T ) number of base learners per round. To resolve this issue, the key technique
is to consider only a subset S of all intervals Hazan & Seshadhri (2009); Daniely et al. (2015):
             S = [s2k , (s + 1)2k − 1] | 0 ≤ k ≤ log T, s ∈ N+ , (s + 1)2k − 1 ≤ T .


The set S, known as the geometric interval set, contains all successive intervals with length equal to
some power of two. In particular, the kth expert will only need to optimize the series of intervals
[2k , 2 × 2k − 1], [2 × 2k , 3 × 2k − 1], · · · one by one. With this technique, the algorithm only needs
                                                                                                     √
to hold a running set of base algorithms with size O(log T ), while maintaining a near-optimal O(  e I)
adaptive regret bound.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     A DAPTIVE R EGRET IN M ULTI -A RMED BANDITS
In this section, we study efficient adaptive regret minimization in the adversarial
                                                                          √         multi-armed bandit
(MAB) setting. We propose a procedure (Algorithm 1) that achieves O( nI) adaptive regret, using
                                                                        e
only two queries. At a high level, the algorithm maintains a set of instances of the EXP3 algorithm
(i.e., base learners) and aggregates them via a MWU meta-algorithm.

Algorithm 1 Strongly Adaptive Bandit Learner (StABL)
 1: Input: general EXP3 algorithm A and horizon T .
 2: Construct interval set S = {[s2k , (s + 1)2k − 1] | 2 + log log T ≤ k ≤ log T, s ∈ N+ }.
 3: Construct B = log T − (1 + log log T ) independent instances of EXP3 algorithm Ak , where
    Ak optimizes each {I ∈ S|2k = |I|} one after another since they don’t overlap.
 4: Denote wt (k) to be the weight assigned to Ak at time t by the meta-algorithm.
 5: Denote v(t, k) ∈ Rn to be the distribution over arms by Ak at time t, and v(t, k)i to be the
    probability of sampling arm i by Ak atotime t.
                         n  √     p
 6: Define ηk = min 1/2 n, 1/ n|2k | , and initialize w1 (k) = ηk for all k ∈ [B].
 7: for τ = 1, . . P
                   . , T do
 8:   Let Wt = k wt (k) and p(t) = W1t (..., wt (k), ...) be the distribution over the base learners.
 9:   For all i ∈ [n], let
                                          maxk v(t, k)2i
                                                               P
                                                                    v(t, k)i
                              P (t)i = P                  2 + k
                                        2 i maxk v(t, k)i           2B
      // This defines         a  probability       distribution         over n arms.
      Sample xt ∼ k p(t)k v(t, k), and in parallel sample x′t ∼ P (t).
                        P
10:
      // Only the second sample x′t will be used for weight updating.

11:    Play xt , suffer loss ℓ⊤                       ⊤
                              t ext and observe loss ℓt ex′t . Compute loss estimator

                                                            1
                                          ℓbt = 1i=x′t           ℓ⊤ ex′ .
                                                         P (t)x′t t t

12:   Update the weight v(t + 1, k) of each EXP3 instance with loss estimator ℓbt , via Algorithm 2.
13:   Update the meta-algorithm’s weights over base learners via the loss estimator ℓbt . For each k,
      update wt+1 (k) as follows,

                                           ηk                      2k |t + 1
                            wt+1 (k) =
                                           wt (k) (1 + ηk ret (k)) else

      where ret (k) = ℓb⊤                    b⊤
                          P
                        t  k p(t)k v(t, k) − ℓt v(t, k).
14: end for


Algorithm 2 Sub-routine: EXP3 with a General Loss Estimator
                                                1
 1: Input: horizon T , learning rate η and w1 = n .
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:   Play it ∼ wt .
 4:   Get unbiased estimator of loss ℓet .
 5:   Update yt+1 (i) = wt (i)e−ηℓt (i) , wt+1 = ∥yyt+1
                                                     t+1
                                                        ∥1 .
                                    e

 6: end for

Theorem 1 (Adaptive regret minimization for multi-armed bandits). For the multi-armed bandits
   √ with n arms and
problem              T rounds, Algorithm 1 achieves an expected adaptive regret bound of
O nI log n log1.5 T , using two queries per round.

The main idea is to use EXP3-type algorithms for both the black-box base learners and the meta-
algorithm in the typical adaptive regret framework. Directly using EXP3 in the MAB setting will fail,
because the weight distribution might become unbalanced over time and the unbiased estimator of


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the loss will have huge variance. When the unbiased estimator is propagated to the meta algorithm, it
serves now as the value of “arm” which leads to a sub-optimal regret.
The remedy is to use an additional evaluation to create unbiased estimators of the loss vector with
controllable variance, for updating both experts and the meta-algorithm. A naïve (but sub-optimal)
choice is to sample uniformly over the arms to observe x′t , and update both experts and the meta-
algorithm (line 10 in Algorithm 1). By doing this, the loss estimator ℓbt is not only unbiased, but also
                                                                                                       2
norm bounded by n. As a result, the variance term in the classical EXP3  √ analysis is bounded by n .
Thus, the regret of the base learners, as well as the meta-algorithm, are n factor worse than optimal.
Instead of the naïve uniform exploration, we choose the distribution of the additional query to be the
average of a uniform exploration among all base learners’ choices and a near-optimal distribution
for the meta-algorithm. Below we briefly explain the design of this importance sampling P (t)i (line
9 in Algorithm 1). Pt is the average of two distributions, the first one controlling the regret of the
meta learner while the second one controlling the regret of base learners. If Pt is merely
                                                                                         √ the second
distribution,
√             it achieves near-optimal regret for base learners, with the excessive term  n improved to
  log T . However, the second distribution alone will make the regret of the meta learner unbounded,
thus we mix it with the first distribution which is designed to control the regret of the meta learner.
Such mixing is known to only affect the regret by a constant for EXP-3 type algorithms.

3.1   P ROOF S KETCH

In the following, we slightly abuse notation and let ℓ⊤      ⊤
                                                      t x = ℓt ex for x ∈ [n]. The proof consists
of three steps: decomposing the randomness of playing xt , bounding the base learners’ regret, and
analyzing the regret of the meta-algorithm.
Step 1: There are two sources of randomness in the algorithm, namely, randomness pl in sampling
which arm xt to play, and ob in sampling which arm x′t to observe and update weights. The key
observation is that pl is independent of ob. Thus, we have the following equivalence via linearity and
the tower property of expectations, for any fixed interval I and arm x∗ ,
                  "                       #        "                                    #
                    X            X                  X X                        X
           Epl,ob        ℓ⊤ xt −
                          t         ℓ⊤ x∗ = Eob
                                       t                ℓb⊤    p(t)k v(t, k) −
                                                               t                  ℓb⊤ x∗ ,
                                                                                        t
                    t∈I          t∈I                     t∈I       k              t∈I

which decouples the randomness of playing xt from observing x′t .
Step 2: We prove the following lemma on EXP3 algorithms with general unbiased loss estimators,
which gives a regret guarantee for Algorithm 2.
Lemma 2 (Regret for EXP3). Given ℓet , an unbiased estimator of ℓt , such that for some distribution zt ,
ℓet (i) = 1 ℓt (i) and ℓet (j) = 0 for j ̸= i with probability zt (i). Suppose zt satisfies wt (i) ≤ Czt (i)
         zt (i)

     qi, where wt (i) represents
for all
                              √
                                 the weight of the ith expert at time t. Algorithm 2 using ℓet with
η = TlognCn has regret bound 2 CnT log n.

As a result, noticing C = 2 log √  T in our algorithm, we have that for any expert Ak , its regret on
interval I can be bounded by O( nI log n log T ).
                                                                                ⊤             ⊤
                                                                       P               P
Step 3: We analyze the regret of the meta-learner, which is Epl, ob      t∈I ℓt xt −     t∈I ℓt v(t, k) =
                                                               et (k) = wηt (k)
      P
                                                                                      ft = P w
Eob      t∈I r
             et (k) . Define the pseudo-weight wet (k) to be w              k
                                                                                , and W       k et (k), we
first prove Wt ≤ t(log t + 1) using induction, which leads to the following estimate
            f
                               "           #         "             #
                                 X                     X
                                                             2         2 log T
                           Eob      ret (k) ≤ ηk Eob       ret (k) +              .
                                                                          ηk
                                t∈I                        t∈I

Then we show the term Eob ret2 (k) can be bounded by:
                                    " n                            2 #
                                     X (ℓ⊤ ei )2
                                           t            ⊤
                   2
             Eob ret (k) ≤ Eob,<t                  max ei v(t, k)      ≤ 2n log T,
                                     i=1
                                          P (t)i    k



                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which implies
        √       the regret of our algorithm on any interval I ∈ S, can be bounded by
O(log √
      T nI log n). Finally, such regret can be extended to any interval at the cost of an addi-
tional log T term, by Cauchy-Schwarz (each arbitrary interval can be decomposed into a disjoint
union of O(log T ) geometric intervals as in Daniely et al. (2015)).

4     A DAPTIVE R EGRET IN THE BCO S ETTING
The result from the previous section inspires us to consider the following question: can we use a
similar approach to achieve near-optimal adaptive regret in the bandit convex optimization (BCO)
setting with constant number of queries? The answer is yes, that near-optimal adaptive regret is
achievable with three queries, at the cost of extra logarithmic terms in the regret.
The algorithm for adaptive regret in the BCO setting (see appendix) has a similar spirit as Algorithm
1. At time t, each expert k asks for gradient estimation at a point Ak (t), and we only randomly
sample one expert to get the gradient estimation. If we sample expert kt , the estimation for Akt is
                               dmu(ℓt (Akt (t) + δt u) − ℓt (Akt (t)))
                                                                       ,
                                                  δt
and the gradient estimation for the rest of experts is 0, where m is the number of experts, δ is a
small constant and u is a random unit vector. Such estimation is classic in the two-point feedback
BCO setting Agarwal et al. (2010), in fact all we need is a (nearly) unbiased estimation of loss with
bounded absolute value. Then we can use the same approach as the MAB case to make an unbiased
estimation of the experts’ losses, by setting
                                  ℓet (Ak (t)) = mℓt (Ak (t))1[k=k ] .
                                                        t         t

We have the following regret guarantee for Algorithm 3. The proof is delayed to the appendix.
                                                      1
Theorem 3. In the BCO setting, Algorithm 3 with δt = κT  uses three queries per round and achieves
an expected adaptive regret bound of
                                               √
                                     O dGD I log2 T .

Theorem 3 also directly applies to the full-information setting, improving the query complexity of all
previous works in adaptive regret from Θ(log T ) to a constant, while preserving the optimal regret.
Compared to Zhao et al. (2021), note that though their algorithm uses one fewer query, they considered
only the weaker √ notion of adaptive regret, failing to achieve dependence on interval length which
leads to a worse T dependence on horizon. We discuss how to further reduce the required number
of queries by one for strongly-adaptive regret in the appendix, by using the linear surrogate loss idea
of Zhao et al. (2021) in our algorithm.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed algorithms on synthetic data and the downstream task of
hyperparameter optimization. We note that even though the algorithms are stated in terms of losses,
we find that in practice, using rewards instead of losses lead to better performance.

5.1   L EARNING FROM E XPERT A DVICE

Experimental Setup We first consider the learning with expert advice setting with linear rewards,
and demonstrate the advantage of using an adaptive algorithm in changing environments. For
simplicity, the arms and experts are equivalent in our construction. More specifically, there are N
arms, indexed from 0 to N − 1, and there are N experts, where the i-th expert (zero-indexed) always
suggests pulling the arm i. We take N = 30, time horizon T = 4096, and for each time step, we
randomly generate a baseline reward ret ∈ RN where ret,i is drawn from the uniform distribution
over [0, 0.5). To simulate the volatile nature of the environment, we divide the time horizon into 4
intervals, and add an additional reward to the baseline reward of a different expert in each interval.
In particular, for t ∈ [0, 1023], we set the reward rt,0 = ret,0 + 0.5 and rt,i = ret,i for i ̸= 0; for
t ∈ [1024, 2047], we do the same for expert 1, and so on. The reward at each time step is rt⊤ xt ,
where xt is the point played.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Comparison plots of the algorithm rewards in the learning with expert advice setting.
The right subfigure shows the performance of the algorithms when the best arm changes at random
intervals, and demonstrates the advantage of using base algorithms with varying history lengths


Analysis In the first experiment, we compare the performance of the non-adaptive EXP3 algorithm
with uniform exploration, StABL, and the StABL algorithm with naive exploration. In StABL
with naive exploration, the observation query is sampled with the uniform distribution (Line 10 in
Algorithm 1 is replaced with the uniform distribution). We run all algorithms 5 times and plot the
moving average of their reward with a window of size 50 in the left subfigure of Figure 1. Both
StABL and and StABL Naive can adapt to changing environments and recover after the best arm has
changed. In contrast, EXP3 is optimal in the first interval, but its performance quickly degrades in the
subsequent intervals. Compared to StABL, StABL Naive is worse in most intervals, reflecting the
suboptimal performance resulting from the naive observation sampler.
To understand the importance of having base algorithms with varying history lengths, we also compare
StABL with a variant, StABL Single Scale, where the base algorithm only has one history length
of 1024. Such a variant would perform well in the previous experiment, since the intervals have the
same length. In this experiment, we randomly generated time steps at which the best arm changes,
and they are 1355, 1437, 1798, 3249, for a time horizon of 4096. As before, we run each algorithm 5
times and compare the moving average reward in the right subfigure of Figure 1. In this experiment,
StABL Single Scale struggles in intervals that do not conform to a length of 1024. Thus, even though
StABL requires more memory and compute by running log T base algorithms, it is more robust to
volatile environments that can have irregular changes.

5.2   A LGORITHM S ELECTION FOR H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION

Algorithm as Arms We compare the effectiveness of bandit-feedback regret minimization algo-
rithms for the downstream task of choosing the best algorithms for minimizing a blackbox function.
Specifically, we view each round as a selection process between an ensemble of evolutionary strate-
gies, each with different algorithm parameters, such as perturbation, gravity, visibility and pool size
Yang & He (2013). Therefore each arm represents a specific evolutionary algorithm and the rewards
of each arm are observed per-round in a bandit fashion, indicating the performance of the algorithm
at that round, given all of the data observed so far.

Benchmark and Reward Signal The reward is determined by the underlying task of blackbox
optimization, which is done on Black-Box Optimization Benchmark (BBOB) functions (Tušar et al.,
2016). BBOB functions are usually non-negative and we are in the simple regret setting, in which we
want to find some x such that f (x) is minimized. Therefore we use the decrease of the objective, upon
evaluation of the algorithm’s suggestion, as the reward. Specifically, if Di = (xi , f (xi )) are all the
evaluations so far in round k, then each algorithm Aj suggests xj = Aj (Dj ) and the corresponding
reward is rj = max(mini (f (xi )) − f (xj ), 0). Note that this reward is always positive and we
normalize our BBOB functions so that it is within [0, 1]. Note that this reward signal is sparse, so we
also add a regularization term of −λf (xj ) with λ = 0.01 of the negative objective into the reward.
In addition to normalization, we also apply random vectorized shifts and rotations on these functions,
as well as adding observation noise to the evaluations.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Analysis We ran the four algorithms: the uniform random algorithm, classic EXP3 al-
gorithm, the EXP3 algorithm with uniform exploration, and StABL with history lengths
[20, 40, 80, 160, 320, 640, 1280, 2560]. We run each of our algorithms in dimensions d = 32, 64
and optimize for 1000, 2000 iterations with 5 repeats. For metrics, we use the log objective curve,
as well as the performance profile score, a gold standard in optimization benchmarking (higher is
better) Dolan & Moré (2002). Our full results are in the appendix and here, we focus on the SPHERE
function (Fig. 2), where we see that StABL generally performs better adaptation than the EXP3
algorithms leading to better optimization throughout. Specifically, for the first half of optimization,
both StABL and EXP3-Uniform enjoy a consistent performance advantage in performance, with
respect to the Uniform strategy. However, this advantage sharply drops after around 600 Trials,
after which the EXP3 strategy is no longer competitive against Uniform and ends up worse, as its
performance curve abruptly stops at Trial 700. StABL generally tracks with the EXP3 strategy
throughout this process but is noticeably better at adapting and maintaining its advantage after the
critical turning point.


Figure 2: Algorithm comparison plots of the log objective (lower is better) and the performance
profile score against the Uniform baseline (higher is better) for minimizing the 32-dimensional
SPHERE across 1000 trials.


6   C ONCLUSIONS
We study adaptive regret in the limited observation model. By making merely√one additional query
with a carefully chosen distribution, our algorithm achieves the optimal O(   e nI) adaptive regret
bound in the multi-arm bandit setting. This result not only improves the state-of-the-art query
efficiency of O(log log T ) in Lu & Hazan (2023), but matches the lower bound in the bandit setting
Daniely et al. (2015), thus providing a sharp characterization
                                                         √       of the query efficiency of adaptive
regret. As an extension, we prove that the optimal O( e I) adaptive regret can be achieved in the
bandit convex optimization setting, with only two additional queries. We also conduct experiments to
demonstrate the power of our algorithms under changing environments and for downstream tasks.
We list some limitations of this work and potential directions for future research, elaborated below.
Reduce the logarithmic dependence in T : Although our regret bound is tight in the leading
parameters n, I, it involves a worse dependence on log√T . For the full-information setting, the best
known result in Orabona & Pál (2016) only contains an log T dependence. The main open question
is thus: can the log1.5 T factor be improved in general?
Fewer queries for BCO: Our BCO Algorithm uses two additional queries to achieve the optimal
adaptive regret bound, however for the MAB setting Algorithm 1 requires only one query. Though
BCO is a harder problem than MAB, and the lower bound of Daniely et al. (2015) was designed for
MAB, we wonder whether an algorithm can use even fewer queries in the BCO setting.
Extension to dynamic regret: In the full-information setting, any advance in adaptive regret of
exp-concave loss implies improved dynamic regret bounds via a black-box reduction, as shown in Lu
& Hazan (2023). However, it seems harder in the bandit setting. The fundamental difficulty is, for the
meta-learner, how to exploit exp-concavity (or strong convexity) of the loss in the MAB setting.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Ofer Dekel, and Lin Xiao. Optimal algorithms for online convex optimization with
  multi-point bandit feedback. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2010.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The non-stochastic multi-
  armed bandit problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Dheeraj Baby and Yu-Xiang Wang. Optimal dynamic regret in exp-concave online learning. In
 Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2021.
Dheeraj Baby and Yu-Xiang Wang. Optimal dynamic regret in proper online learning with strongly
  convex losses and beyond. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
 (AISTATS), 2022.
Aditya Bhaskara, Sreenivas Gollapudi, Sungjin Im, Kostas Kollias, and Kamesh Munagala. Online
  learning and bandits with queried hints. In 14th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
 Conference (ITCS), 2023.
Olivier Bousquet and Manfred K Warmuth. Tracking a small set of experts by mixing past posteriors.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:363–396, 2002.
Sébastien Bubeck, Yin Tat Lee, and Ronen Eldan. Kernel-based methods for bandit convex opti-
  mization. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
  (STOC), 2017.
Amit Daniely, Alon Gonen, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Strongly adaptive online learning. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
Elizabeth D Dolan and Jorge J Moré. Benchmarking optimization software with performance profiles.
  Mathematical programming, 91:201–213, 2002.
Abraham D Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
  in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2005.
Elad Hazan and Comandur Seshadhri. Efficient learning algorithms for changing environments. In
  Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2009.
Mark Herbster and Manfred K Warmuth. Tracking the best expert. Machine learning, 32(2):151–178,
 1998.
Kwang-Sung Jun, Francesco Orabona, Stephen Wright, and Rebecca Willett. Improved strongly
 adaptive online learning using coin betting. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics (AISTATS), 2017.
Zhou Lu and Elad Hazan. On the computational efficiency of adaptive and dynamic regret minimiza-
  tion. arXiv preprint, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.00646.
Zhou Lu, Wenhan Xia, Sanjeev Arora, and Elad Hazan. Adaptive gradient methods with local
  guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01400, 2022.
Francesco Orabona and Dávid Pál. Coin betting and parameter-free online learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.
Tea Tušar, Dimo Brockhoff, Nikolaus Hansen, and Anne Auger. Coco: the bi-objective black box
  optimization benchmarking (bbob-biobj) test suite. ArXiv e-prints, 2016.
Xin-She Yang and Xingshi He. Firefly algorithm: recent advances and applications. International
  journal of swarm intelligence, 1(1):36–50, 2013.
Lijun Zhang, Tianbao Yang, Jinfeng Yi, Rong Jin, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Improved dynamic regret for
  non-degenerate functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lijun Zhang, Tianbao Yang, Rong Jin, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Dynamic regret of strongly adaptive
  methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Lijun Zhang, Shiyin Lu, and Tianbao Yang. Minimizing dynamic regret and adaptive regret simulta-
  neously. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 309–319. PMLR,
  2020.
Peng Zhao, Yu-Jie Zhang, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Dynamic regret of convex and smooth
  functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Peng Zhao, Guanghui Wang, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Bandit convex optimization in
  non-stationary environments. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):5562–5606, 2021.
Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In
 Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2003.


                                                11
