Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS C ROSS D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION OF
H AMILTONIAN R EPRESENTATION VIA M ETA L EARNING
 Yeongwoo Song1 Hawoong Jeong1 2∗
 1
  Department of Physics, KAIST 2 Center for Complex Systems, KAIST
 ywsong1025@kaist.ac.kr, hjeong@kaist.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             Recent advances in deep learning for physics have focused on discovering shared
             representations of target systems by incorporating physics priors or inductive biases
             into neural networks. While effective, these methods are limited to the system
             domain, where the type of system remains consistent and thus cannot ensure the
             adaptation to new, or unseen physical systems governed by different laws. For
             instance, a neural network trained on a mass-spring system cannot guarantee
             accurate predictions for the behavior of a two-body system or any other system
             with different physical laws. In this work, we take a significant leap forward by
             targeting cross domain generalization within the field of Hamiltonian dynamics.
             We model our system with a graph neural network (GNN) and employ a meta
             learning algorithm to enable the model to gain experience over a distribution of
             systems and make it adapt to new physics. Our approach aims to learn a unified
             Hamiltonian representation that is generalizable across multiple system domains,
             thereby overcoming the limitations of system-specific models. We demonstrate that
             the meta-trained model captures the generalized Hamiltonian representation that
             is consistent across different physical domains. Overall, through the use of meta
             learning, we offer a framework that achieves cross domain generalization, providing
             a step towards a unified model for understanding a wide array of dynamical systems
             via deep learning.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has succeeded in many application areas such as image classification, image generation,
natural language processing, and so on (Reed et al., 2016; Tan & Le, 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Gu
et al., 2022). One of the major roles of such accomplishment was capable of parameterizing useful
representations from data with neural networks (Chen et al., 2020; Van Den Oord et al., 2017;
Hamilton et al., 2017). However, grafting deep learning to physics is yet another problem. They
struggle to learn conservation laws or implicit physical geometries or symmetries. Although various
studies make the model learn the conservative quantities or symmetries inside the system (Greydanus
et al., 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Liu & Tegmark, 2021), these approaches are system-
specific, which means that if a model is trained for one system, it cannot easily adapt to another
system with different physical laws. Since systems whose physics is unknown have more sparse data,
these flaws make the standard supervised learning methods harder to learn the physics of the system.
One of the current extents of this limitation is crafting the generalization of a fixed type of system
across various parameter environments (Lee et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2021; Kirchmeyer et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2023). Here, one can think of an extension of building a unified model that is not limited
to adapting to various parameter environments within a single system type, but instead generalizes
across the vast landscape of different system types. In this paper, we focus our objectives on systems
that Hamiltonian mechanics can formulate. Systems governed by Hamiltonian mechanics inhere
symmetries, and their state trajectories are laid on the symplectic manifold (Libermann & Marle,
2012; Arnol’d, 2013). Moreover, almost all of the physics in our nature has its own conservation
laws, and Hamiltonian mechanics relates the state of the system to its corresponding conservative
quantities (usually energy).
     ∗
         Correspondence to Hawoong Jeong.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this work, we search for the generalized representation that shares the essence of Hamiltonian
mechanics that a neural network can learn. In doing so, we aim to make the model easily adaptable to
unseen physics.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.

       • Utilizing the meta learning algorithm, we extend its application to the data distribution
         across the Hamiltonian manifold, encompassing various types of physical systems. This
         enables our model to generalize effectively to system data with unknown physics, enhancing
         its versatility.
       • We begin by evaluating the model’s performance on simpler examples, such as the mass-
         spring and pendulum systems. Subsequently, we expand our evaluation to more complex
         scenarios characterized by chaotic behavior, such as the Hénon-Heiles and magnetic-mirror
         systems. This demonstrates the robustness and applicability of our approach across a wide
         range of dynamical systems.
       • To gain insights into the superior performance of the meta-trained model compared to other
         baselines, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the learned representations within the neural
         network. This investigation provides a deeper understanding of the underlying factors
         contributing to the model’s effectiveness due to meta learning.
       • We use the term domain to refer to different types of physical systems governed by distinct
         laws. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore cross-domain generalization
         across diverse dynamical system types enabling easy adaptation to new physics, surpassing
         prior studies limited to fixed system types.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   H AMILTONIAN MECHANICS

Hamiltonian mechanics is one of the concrete frameworks to describe the state of a dynamical
system. It begins by defining a vector composed of canonical coordinates x = (q, p). Here q and p
denotes the generalized coordinate and its canonical momentum respectively; q = (q1 , q2 , . . . , qN ),
p = (p1 , p2 , . . . , pN ), where N is the degree of freedom of the given system. Then, Hamiltonian (H)
is defined such that Hamilton’s equation (Equation 1) is held. Usually, the Hamiltonian of the system
corresponds to its energy where it is to be conserved.

                                       dq   ∂H dp    ∂H
                                          =   ,   =−                                                 (1)
                                       dt   ∂p dt    ∂q

                                                                                          0    In

                                                  ∂H     ∂H
Here, the Hamiltonian vector field XH =           ∂p , − ∂q         = J∇x Hθ , where J =
                                                                                        −In 0
                                                                                                    , is
known as symplectic, which allows the Hamiltonian to lie on a symplectic manifold. Symplectic
manifold is one of the essences of differential geometry, which naturally arises from the formulations
of Hamiltonian mechanics (Libermann & Marle, 2012; Arnol’d, 2013). It provides the generalization
of the phase space of a closed system, allowing one to probe the time evolution of the system.

2.2   L EARNING PHYSICAL DYNAMICS FROM NEURAL NETWORKS

Various works use neural networks to analyze the time evolution, or the conservation law of the
physical system (Greydanus et al., 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Cranmer et al., 2020; Kasim
& Lim, 2022; Greydanus et al., 2023). For example, Hamiltonian Neural Network (HNN) (Greydanus
et al., 2019) parameterizes the Hamiltonian of the system with a neural network. HNN learns the
dynamics of the given system by inducing a physical bias to the loss function. Making use of
Equation 1, HNN predicts the dynamics of the system incorporating the symplectic gradient inside
the loss function as in Equation 2.

                                        ∂Hθ   ∂q                ∂Hθ   ∂p
                            LHNN =          −               +       +                                (2)
                                         ∂p   ∂t        2        ∂q   ∂t      2


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As an alternative way to encode the physical bias into the objective function, the Variational Integrator
Network (VIN) (Saemundsson et al., 2020) has been introduced, which preserves the geometric
structure of physical systems. The architecture of VIN is designed to fit the discrete-time equations of
motion of the given dynamical system. Thus, it provides interpretability and more efficient learning
by preserving the manifold geometry inherent in physical systems directly in the model architecture.
While the theoretical understanding of inductive biases that underlie the advantages of neural networks
remains elusive, recent studies attempt to shed light on the influence of such specific biases. For
example, one demonstrates that contrary to conventional wisdom, the performance improvement in
HNNs arises from the second-order structure, rather than the symplectic bias (Gruver et al., 2022).
Nevertheless, a number of works focus on leveraging the inherent nature of physical systems, such as
their symplectic structure and the principle of least action, to enhance the predictive capabilities of
neural networks for system dynamics (Chen et al., 2021; Greydanus et al., 2023).
In opposition to implying relevant biases in neural networks, recent studies suggest a data-driven ap-
proach to learning the dynamics of one type of system generalized across different environments (Yin
et al., 2021; Kirchmeyer et al., 2022). These focus on dynamical systems that are governed by the form
of the following differential equation; dxdte (t)
                                                  = fe (xe (t)), where x(t) is a time-dependent state in
the phase space X , and fe : X → T X maps xe (t) to its time-derivative state dxdt  e (t)
                                                                                          which lies in the
tangent space T X . Here, the subscript e denotes an environment for a given dynamics (e.g. different
α, β, γ, δ parameter configuration of Lotka-Volterra system; du/dt = αu − βuv, dv/dt = δuv − γv).

2.3   M ETA LEARNING FOR GENERALIZING DYNAMICAL SYSTEM

Meta learning, also referred to as "learning to learn," focuses on training a model that exhibits
strong generalization across diverse data distributions, enabling it to effectively adapt to new tasks
even with a small amount of previously unseen samples. As a result, meta learning can serve as a
promising data-driven approach for generalizing the dynamics of physical systems. Among various
approaches of meta learning, optimization-based methods are particularly versatile and compatible
with differentiable models (Hospedales et al., 2020). For example, CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022)
is a representative optimization-based meta learning method for multi-environment formulation of
the generalization problem for dynamical systems. Particularly, previous studies (Lee et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2023) have demonstrated the ability of a broadly applicable optimization-based meta-learning
algorithm, Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), in uncovering the physical
laws of a given system across different environments. There also exists non-MAML based methods
for generalizing dynamics. Sequential Neural Processes (Singh et al., 2019) aims to build a meta-
transfer learning framework for stochastic processes, DyAd (Wang et al., 2022) is a model-based
meta learning method that learns the shared dynamics of a given domain, and meta-SLVM (Jiang
et al., 2022) utilizes Bayesian meta learning for learning to adapt latent dynamic functions.
The approaches mentioned above are all limited to scenarios where the systems share the same
functional form of Hamiltonians, such as a set of pendulum systems with varying physical parameters
(e.g. mass and length). Expanding upon these limitations, we aim to investigate whether a shared
neural representation can be discovered among diverse functional forms of Hamiltonians. In this
study, we explore the portrayal of a symplectic manifold governed by Hamilton’s equation within
neural networks by incorporating MAML with GNNs. Further details regarding the MAML algorithm
can be found in Section 3.2 and 3.3.

3     M ETHODS

3.1   P REPARING THE DATASET FOR META LEARNING

We constructed a task distribution comprising six distinct types of physical systems: mass-spring,
pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror, two-body, and three-body. Given that these systems
feature separable Hamiltonians, which inherently limit the diversity in the kinetic energy terms, we
intentionally selected systems with varying complexities in their potential energy terms. Starting
from the simplest mass-spring system, we extend the type of system to more difficult systems
such as Hénon-Heiles or magnetic-mirror system. The details for each system can be found in the
Supplementary Materials (SM) A.1.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This variety of systems encompasses a range of complexities, featuring simple physical systems like
the mass-spring and the pendulum, as well as more intricate systems exhibiting chaotic behavior such
as the Hénon-Heiles and the magnetic-mirror. Additionally, the task distribution extends to systems
involving more than two particles, specifically the two-body, and the three-body, thereby providing a
comprehensive set of challenges. For all of our systems, we generated a dataset with N = 10, 000
trajectories confined to the two-dimensional space, where the canonical coordinates x = (q, p) as
the input, and their corresponding time derivatives ẋ = (q̇, ṗ) as the output of a neural network. We
provide the detailed procedure for generating the dataset in the SM A.2.
In the language of meta learning, several different types of systems will be used for meta training,
while one of the remaining unselected systems will be used for meta testing (i.e. evaluation). We
will denote each trajectory as TS,i , which is sampled from the task distribution p(TS ) (where S ∈
{mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror, two-body, three-body}, and i ∈ J1..N K).
Then tasks from TS∁ will compose the task distribution for meta training, and tasks from TS will
form the data distribution for meta testing. For example, we will use the data distribution TS∁ ;
S∁ = {mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles} for meta training, TS ; S = {magnetic-mirror} for
evaluating the magnetic-mirror system. The exact dataset configuration for meta training scenario is
described in SM A.3.


3.2   M ETA TRAINING THE NEURAL NETWORK

We use a simple graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) to parametrize the
given physical system in which we implement it using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Using GNNs
to describe a system of several particles mediates the model to handle various degree-of-freedom
inputs such that the model can be fed with data from a diverse type of system, unlike from the
previous works listed in Section 2.2, and 2.3 that dealt with fixed system scenarios. In line with the
previous methods (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Bishnoi et al., 2023) that represented the physical
systems as graphs, we represent the state variable (q, p) as the node feature, while currently, edge
features are not utilized. Our model is composed of three GCN layers to extract features of the
input states, preceded by three fully connected linear layers for the regression of Hamiltonian value.
We choose the mish function as the non-linear activation function. Prior works (Greydanus et al.,
2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2021) have utilized tanh or softplus activations,
hypothesizing that the relu activation may hinder parameter optimization due to its piecewise linear
nature, as the HNN loss defined in Equation 2 involves calculating derivatives of the output with
respect to the inputs. After conducting several trials, we observed that the mish activation produced
more stable and improved results compared to tanh or softplus activations in our case. More details
regarding the network architecture are further described in the SM B.1.
Upon the framework that we described so far, we represent our model as fθ ; parameterized by neural
network parameters θ. To account for the varying input (xi ) and output (ẋi ) scales across different
systems, we employ the log-cosh function as our loss function. This choice enhances the robustness
of our model to data with diverse system dynamics, as it mitigates the impact of differing data scales.
                                           X
                                               log cosh ẋi − J∇x fθ (xi )

                            LTi (fθ ) =                                                             (3)
                                       i   i
                                     (x ,ẋ )∼Ti



In the inner loop of our variation of MAML, the model adapts to a new task TS∁ ,i by updating the
parameters with one gradient step using K = 50 phase space points for each task.


                                      θi′ = θ − α∇θ LTS∁ ,i (fθ )                                   (4)


In the outer loop using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), meta optimization across systems
is done by updating the parameters as below.
                                                    X
                                    θ ← θ − β∇θ             LTS∁ ,i (fθi′ )                         (5)
                                                        i


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The relative error throughout the time rollout for the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-
initialized model at adaptation step 50 for the predicted coordinates (top) and energy (bottom). The
solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard error of 10 runs.


3.3   E VALUATING THE META - TRAINED MODEL

We evaluate the performance by making a few-step gradient descent on the unseen type of system
during the meta training phase with K = 50 data points. The model adaptation to the unseen system
is done by updating the parameters as follows.
                                         θ ← θ − α∇θ LTS,i (fθ )                                        (6)
Using the adapted model at each step, we integrate our model output using the LSODA integrator (Pet-
zold, 1983) to achieve the system dynamics. Then, the performance was achieved by calculating the
relative error between the predicted and ground truth trajectory points. We perform our experiments
on NVIDIA RTX A6000 by performing 10 independent runs as default to ensure the stability of our
results and report the average and standard error values. We again further describe the related details
for the training and adaptation process in the SM B.2.


4     R ESULTS

4.1   Q UANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MODEL PERFORMANCE

For each system, we evaluated the adaptation performance on unseen systems for the meta-trained
model and compared it with the pre-trained model that doesn’t utilize meta learning, and the scratch
model which was adapted from random-initialized weights. We conducted up to 50 adaptation
steps and computed the relative error between the predicted and the ground truth coordinates and
energies at each time rollout and adaptation step. The measured relative error is defined as Err(t) =
∥ẑ(t) − z(t)∥2 /(∥ẑ(t)∥2 + ∥z(t)∥2 ), as described in (Finzi et al., 2020). This error metric enables us
to quantify the error independent of the data scale and tends towards unity as the predictions become
orthogonal to the ground truth or ∥ẑ∥ ≫ ∥z∥. Compared to metrics like mean squared error, the
above notion of bounded relative error provides a more accurate representation of the prediction
performance. Finally, we calculated the geometric moving average of the relative error to account for
the multiplicative accumulation of the error from the numerical integration involved.
In Figure 1, the relative error in the predicted trajectories serves as an indicator of the overall accuracy
of the adapted models, while the energy metric demonstrates that the physics of the system remains
well-behaved during the prediction. Considering both predicted coordinates and energy, our results
demonstrate that the meta-trained model robustly outperforms the other two baselines.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The relative error across the adaptation step for the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-
initialized model at adaptation step 50 for the predicted coordinates (top) and energy (bottom). The
solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard error of 10 runs.



We further examine the capability of fast adaptation of each model throughout the adaptation steps.
Figure 2 illustrates the decreasing trend of the relative error as the number of adaptation steps
increases from 0 to 50. Note that the meta-trained model requires significantly fewer adaptation
steps compared to the randomly initialized model, which corresponds to the vanilla HNN model.
Also, the relative error between the predicted coordinates shows that the fast adaptation shows a
significant difference as the system becomes more complex. Within a gradient step of less than 100,
the meta-trained model demonstrates faster and superior adaptation compared to both the pre-trained
model without meta learning and the HNN baseline.


4.2   Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE PREDICTED DYNAMICS

In Section 4.1, we observed that the meta-trained model consistently achieved a lower relative error
between the predicted and ground truth dynamics across both time rollouts and adaptation steps.
However, a small error in the predicted trajectory does not always guarantee accurate system dynamics
prediction. To provide more conclusive results, we examined the exact predicted dynamics of the
three adapted models after 50 steps. We conducted this analysis for the mass-spring, pendulum,
Hénon-Heiles, and magnetic-mirror systems, and the corresponding results are shown in Figure 3.
For the mass-spring system, both the meta-trained model and pre-trained model accurately predicted
the coordinates (x, px ) within 50 adaptation steps, while the random-initialized model required more
steps to adapt. Here, it is worth noting the behavior of the prediction of the surplus coordinates (y, py ).
In the real world, we cannot readily distinguish what coordinates remain physically meaningful
among different phase variables. Thus, it would be beneficial if our trained neural network could
also distinguish which one is necessary for describing the system. In the experiments, we confined
the dynamics of the system to a two-dimensional space, thus y, py should remain constant for the
mass-spring system. Comparing the predicted trajectories of the redundant coordinates between the
meta-trained model and the pre-trained model, we observed that the meta-trained model had a much
smaller scale in the prediction of unnecessary coordinates (y, py ).
Moving on to the pendulum system, the meta-trained model also provides better predictions than
the other two baselines. While the pre-trained model performed better than the random-initialized
model, the dynamics of θ and pθ were still out of phase compared to the meta-trained model. We also
observed a similar behavior in the prediction of the surplus coordinates (r, pr ), as observed in the
mass-spring system.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 a


 b


 c


 d


Figure 3: System dynamics through time rollout 0 to 10, generated from the meta-trained, pre-trained,
and random-initialized model each after 50 adaptation steps. Each row (a) to (d) corresponds to the
predictions with mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, and the magnetic mirror system respectively.


For the more complex systems exhibiting chaotic behavior, such as the Hénon-Heiles and magnetic-
mirror system, all four coordinates are necessary to describe the dynamics. In these scenarios,
the meta-trained model significantly outperformed the pre-trained model and random-initialized
model. Although the meta-trained model did not perfectly match the trajectory, it captured the overall
behavior of each coordinate dynamics more reasonably compared to the other baselines.

4.3   A NALYSIS ON THE LEARNED REPRESENTATION

Our objective in this section is to understand why the meta-trained model outperforms the other
baselines, particularly the pre-trained model. The existing difference between the meta-trained model
and the pre-trained model lies in the training strategy during the training process, while factors such
as the total iterations, along with other training conditions remained the same. To investigate the
impact of the training algorithm, we conducted the centered kernel alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al.,
2019) analysis on the three models. CKA offers a means to compare the representations of two layers
within a neural network, providing a similarity score ranging from 0 to 1. Furthermore, it is widely
recognized that early layers tend to learn general representations, while later layers tend to specialize
in specific features(Yosinski et al., 2014; Raghu et al., 2019; 2020; Alabdulmohsin et al., 2021).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   mass-spring                     pendulum                      Hénon-Heiles               magnetic-mirror
        10 1                            10 1                          10 1                           10 1
1-CKA
        10 3                            10 3                          10 3                           10 3

        10 5                            10 5                          10 5                           10 5
               0       500       1000          0     500       1000          0       500      1000          0     500    1000
               Adaptation step                 Adaptation step                 Adaptation step              Adaptation step
                             meta-trained model            pre-trained model          random-initialized model
Figure 4: The measured CKAs in the last layer between the model before adapting (i.e. right after
finishing meta-training or pre-training), and during the adaptation up to 1000 steps. The CKA values
are transformed to 1-CKA to make a clearer visualization. The solid line and the shaded area each
represent the average and the standard error of 10 runs.


Upon this observation, we examine the CKA between the model’s last layer before adaptation and its
state at each adaptation step, ranging from 1 to 1000. Figure 4 shows these 1000 individual 1-CKA
measurements, each comparing the model before adaptation to its state at a specific step during the
adaptation process. In all four cases, the meta-trained model consistently exhibited substantially lower
1-CKA values compared to the other models. This finding suggests that the representations learned
during the adaptation process closely resemble those of the meta-trained model when it serves as the
starting point. Drawing from insights gained in the prior works utilized meta learning (Lee et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2023), and the manifold hypothesis (Fefferman et al., 2016), we interpret the meta-trained
model gives the representation of the fundamental structure of underlying Hamiltonian dynamics.
Thus making the meta-trained model acquire a generalized understanding of the diverse domain
of distinct physical law. During the evaluation, the model adeptly adapts to unknown dynamics
by leveraging the generalized physics learned during the meta training phase. Consequently, this
observation provides further support for our initial assumption that meta learning can capture general
representations across a broad domain of Hamiltonian manifolds.


4.4        A BLATION ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS

First, we present the ablation studies to scrutinize the impact of both the choice of integrator and
the number of data points K in the adaptation task. We experimented with symplectic integrators
ranging from 1st to 4th order to ensure energy conservation compared to the LSODA integrator
employed in our primary experiments. And, since we are considering scenarios where abundant data
is available for known systems but sparse data for the target unknown system, we varied the test data
size as K ∈ (5, 10, 20, 50) to investigate the data efficiency of the meta-trained model relative to
other baselines. The ablation results for varying integrator and K each detailed in SM C.1 and C.2,
reveal several key findings. 1) LSODA integrator performs adequately for dynamics that do not
involve large time scales, making it a reliable choice for most scenarios considered in this study. 2)
Meta-trained model demonstrates the data efficiency when adapting to unseen tasks. This suggests
that the meta-trained model is not only data-efficient but also robust, capable of adapting well when
data for the target system is sparse.
Second, we demonstrate the generalization ability of the meta-trained model by not just testing the
adaptation to a single-held-out system scenario as in the previous sections but also checking the
adaptation performance on various types of unseen systems (i.e. performing the adaptation task
to multi-held-out-system scenario). This task involved four models, each of which was initially
trained for adaptation to one of the following systems; mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, and
magnetic-mirror. We conducted an additional adaptation task using namely the 2D harmonic oscillator
system and the Kepler system. We evaluated the performance of these models in terms of relative
error for both predicted coordinates and energy, with detailed results presented in SM C.3. The
results indicate that the meta-trained model is capable of effectively adapting to more than just a
single type of unseen system, further suggesting the potential of a general model for real-world
applications. This underscores the robustness and versatility of the generalized representation learned
by the meta-trained model.


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Third, we compared the meta-trained model to the existing baselines in domain generalization for
learning the physical dynamics. Although there is none that aims to generalize across the type of
dynamical systems as we have already discussed in Section 2.3, it is important to recognize that
the methods from previous works are not appropriate in our broader scope of generalization. We
considered CoDA (Kirchmeyer et al., 2022), which showed the best performance across prior methods
for generalizing dynamics across multi-environment within a fixed system setting, and DyAd (Wang
et al., 2022), which is a representative example of a non-optimization-based (model-based) meta-
learning method as our baselines. The results in SM C.4, and C.5 show that the meta-trained model
outperforms the CoDA and DyAd baselines for the generalization problem in cross domain settings.
Moreover, note that in some cases, the existing baselines struggled to adapt.

4.5   L IMITATIONS OF OUR APPROACH

In our experiments, we treated all systems as conservative. However, data from unknown physics
may not satisfy these conditions, raising concerns about its applicability to real-world scenarios.
Correspondingly, we performed the adaptation task to a damped mass-spring system with a damping
term −cẋ. From the results in SM C.6, we can see that the non-conservative feature disturbs the
adaptation. This is due to the damping term −cẋ, Equation 1 is violated, which hinders the validity of
Equation 2 during adaptation. Thus to make use of our approach, both the data used in meta training
and adaptation should not differ in their intrinsic nature.
Furthermore, we extend our analysis to two-body and three-body systems, going beyond the scenarios
on single-particle tasks, thereby opening the door to real-world applications. This extension allows
us to explore the dynamics of two-body systems as a direct continuation, and three-body systems as
a more challenging problem due to their chaotic behavior. However, we acknowledge that further
refinement is required for the meta learning configuration for non-single-particle tasks. Here, we
present the preliminary results for the two-body and three-body systems in the SM C.7.

5     D ISCUSSION
While previous studies have focused on generalizing system dynamics across different environments
under consistent physical laws, our work takes a step further by aiming for generalization across
diverse system domains. Specifically, we tackle the challenge of identifying the shared representation
of physical systems across various functional forms of Hamiltonian. In this perspective, our work
presents unique contributions compared to existing literature. Here, we leverage the power of meta
learning algorithm to uncover the representation of the Hamiltonian manifold within neural networks.
In our comparison between the meta-trained model and other baseline models, we provide compelling
evidence that the neural network learns the Hamiltonian of an unseen system by identifying the
general representation for Hamiltonian dynamics itself, rather than directly constructing the functional
form of the Hamiltonian of the given system. This finding highlights the ability of meta learning to
capture and exploit the underlying structure of Hamiltonian mechanics. To support our claim, we
conduct a CKA analysis on the trained networks. This analysis provides valuable insights into why
the meta-trained model outperforms the other baselines across different physics. By examining the
similarity between representations before and during the adaptation process, we gain an understanding
of how the meta-trained model effectively learns and adapts to diverse physical systems. Overall, our
work contributes to the field by demonstrating the efficacy of meta learning in discovering shared
representations of physical systems across distinct functional forms of Hamiltonian.
In nature, each physical system operates according to its unique governing law, which is rooted
in fundamental principles. In the scope of this work, systems with different functional forms of
Hamiltonian are expressed with one Hamilton’s equation. Building upon this observation, we propose
an approach that harnesses the power of meta learning algorithms to embed these fundamental
physical principles into neural networks. Our method allows us to capture and represent these general
physical principles within the neural network architecture, thereby providing a means to interpret
neural networks in a physical context. A key advantage of our approach is that we imply minimal
predefined physical priors or inductive biases. Instead, it leverages the data-driven capabilities of
deep learning to uncover the underlying physics. This marks a significant step forward in developing
a more comprehensive and general model for discovering physics through the lens of neural networks.



                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea NRF-2022R1A2B5B02001752.

R EFERENCES
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Hartmut Maennel, and Daniel Keysers. The impact of reinitialization on
  generalization in convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00267, 2021.
Vladimir Igorevich Arnol’d. Mathematical methods of classical mechanics, volume 60. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Suresh Bishnoi, Ravinder Bhattoo, Jayadeva Jayadeva, Sayan Ranu, and N M Anoop Krishnan.
  Learning the dynamics of physical systems with hamiltonian graph neural networks. In ICLR 2023
  Workshop on Physics for Machine Learning, 2023.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal Maclau-
  rin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao Zhang.
  JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Yuhan Chen, Takashi Matsubara, and Takaharu Yaguchi. Neural symplectic form: Learning hamilto-
  nian equations on general coordinate systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:16659–16670, 2021.
Miles Cranmer, Sam Greydanus, Stephan Hoyer, Peter Battaglia, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
 Lagrangian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04630, 2020.
Ch Efthymiopoulos, M Harsoula, and G Contopoulos. Resonant normal form and asymptotic normal
  form behaviour in magnetic bottle hamiltonians. Nonlinearity, 28(4):851, 2015.
Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis.
  Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 29(4):983–1049, 2016.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Marc Finzi, Ke Alexander Wang, and Andrew G Wilson. Simplifying hamiltonian and lagrangian
 neural networks via explicit constraints. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 13880–13889, 2020.
Samuel Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Samuel James Greydanus, Timothy David Strang, and Isabella Caruso. Nature’s cost function:
  Simulating physics by minimizing the action. In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Physics for Machine
  Learning, 2023.
Nate Gruver, Marc Anton Finzi, Samuel Don Stanton, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Deconstructing
  the inductive biases of hamiltonian neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michel Hénon. Numerical exploration of hamiltonian systems. Chaotic Behavior of Deterministic
 Systems (Les Houches, 1981), pp. 53–170, 1983.

Michel Hénon and Carl Heiles. The applicability of the third integral of motion: some numerical
 experiments. Astronomical Journal, Vol. 69, p. 73 (1964), 69:73, 1964.

Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural
  networks: A survey, 2020.

Xiajun Jiang, Ryan Missel, Zhiyuan Li, and Linwei Wang. Sequential latent variable models for
  few-shot high-dimensional time-series forecasting. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Muhammad Firmansyah Kasim and Yi Heng Lim. Constants of motion network. In Alice H. Oh,
 Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2022.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.

Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Yuan Yin, Jérémie Donà, Nicolas Baskiotis, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and
 Patrick Gallinari. Generalizing to new physical systems via context-informed dynamics model.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01889, 2022.

Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.

Seungjun Lee, Haesang Yang, and Woojae Seong. Identifying physical law of hamiltonian systems
  via meta-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Qiaofeng Li, Tianyi Wang, Vwani Roychowdhury, and M. K. Jawed. Metalearning generalizable
  dynamics from trajectories. Phys. Rev. Lett., 131:067301, Aug 2023.

Paulette Libermann and Charles-Michel Marle. Symplectic geometry and analytical mechanics,
  volume 35. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

Ziming Liu and Max Tegmark. Machine learning conservation laws from trajectories. Physical
  Review Letters, 126(18):180604, 2021.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2019.

Linda Petzold. Automatic selection of methods for solving stiff and nonstiff systems of ordinary
  differential equations. SIAM journal on scientific and statistical computing, 4(1):136–148, 1983.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature
  reuse? towards understanding the effectiveness of maml. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maithra Raghu, Chiyuan Zhang, Jon Kleinberg, and Samy Bengio. Transfusion: Understanding
 transfer learning for medical imaging. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-
 Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
 Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1060–1069. PMLR, 2016.
Steindor Saemundsson, Alexander Terenin, Katja Hofmann, and Marc Deisenroth. Variational
  integrator networks for physically structured embeddings. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3078–3087. PMLR, 2020.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Victor Bapst, Kyle Cranmer, and Peter Battaglia. Hamiltonian graph
  networks with ode integrators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12790, 2019.
Gautam Singh, Jaesik Yoon, Youngsung Son, and Sungjin Ahn. Sequential neural processes. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt,
  Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric
  Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas,
  Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris,
  Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0
  Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature
  Methods, 17:261–272, 2020.
Rui Wang, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Meta-learning dynamics forecasting using task inference.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21640–21653, 2022.
Yuan Yin, Ibrahim Ayed, Emmanuel de Bézenac, Nicolas Baskiotis, and Patrick Gallinari. Leads:
  Learning dynamical systems that generalize across environments. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:7561–7573, 2021.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep
  neural networks? In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2014.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     DATASET SPECIFICATION
A.1    T YPES OF SYSTEMS USED

Below are the descriptions of the systems that are used for the dataset.

Mass-Spring One of the most simplest physical system is one particle, frictionless mass-spring
system, where m, k are the mass of the particle, and spring constant respectively.
                                                 p2x   kx2
                                           H=        +
                                                 2m     2
Pendulum The Hamiltonian of a pendulum system is slightly more complex than the mass-spring
case. Here, m, g, l denotes the mass of the particle, gravitational acceleration, and length of the
pendulum respectively.
                                           p2
                                   H = θ 2 + mgl(1 − cos θ)
                                          2ml
Hénon-Heiles Up to here, the given dynamical system was rather simple. Hénon-Heiles gives the
chaotic dynamics of a star around a galactic center with its motion constrained on a 2D plane (Hénon
& Heiles, 1964; Hénon, 1983). In the below Hamiltonian of the Hénon-Heiles system, λ is conven-
tionally taken as unity.
                                                                        y3

                               1 2      2     1 2       2          2
                         H = (px + py ) + (x + y ) + λ x y −
                               2              2                          3
Magnetic-Mirror Here we introduce a system that has the most complicated form of Hamiltonian in
our experiments. From the works of (Efthymiopoulos et al., 2015), the Hamiltonian of the magnetic
bottle type system is given as follows.
                    1 2             1    1        1    1         1         1 6
              H=      (ρ̇ + ż 2 ) + ρ2 + ρ2 z 2 − ρ4 + ρ2 z 4 − ρ4 z 2 +     ρ
                    2               2    2        8    8        16        128
Two-Body From now on, we expand our system with more than two particles. In the two-body
system case, we consider the gravitational interaction between two particles. Then the Hamiltonian of
the two-body system can be written as follows. Note that G is the gravitational constant, and m1 , m2
are the masses for each of the two bodies.
                                          p21   p2   Gm1 m2
                                   H=         + 2 −
                                         2m1   2m2  |r1 − r2 |
Three-Body Adding a particle to the two-body system gives the three-body system. Although the
Hamiltonian of the three-body system is an incidental extension of the two-body case, its dynamics
cannot be described by a closed-form expression, thus exhibits chaotic behaviour.
                        p21   p2  p2   Gm1 m2     Gm2 m3     Gm3 m1
                 H=         + 2 + 3 −           −          −
                       2m1   2m2 2m3  |r1 − r2 | |r2 − r3 | |r3 − r1 |

A.2    DATASET GENERATION

Using the Hamiltonian described in Section 3.1, we obtained the state trajectories (q, p) by employing
the LSODA integrator implemented in SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020). The trajectories were integrated
over the interval [0, 10] with 200 steps. Subsequently, we calculated the corresponding time derivatives
(q̇, ṗ) using JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and Equation 1. For simplicity, all the constants from the
Hamiltonian (i.e., mi , k, li , g, G) were set to 1. The initial conditions employed for each system are
described below.

Mass-Spring The initial state (x0 , px 0 ) is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution over the
interval [−1, 1]2 . The redundant coordinate (y0 , py 0 ) is set to (0, 0) as a fixed value.
Pendulum  The  initial state (θ0 , pθ 0 ) is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution over the
interval − π2 , π2 × [−1, 1]. The redundant coordinate (r0 , pr 0 ) is set to (1, 0) as a fixed value.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hénon-Heiles The initial state (x0 , y0 , px 0 , py 0 ) is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution
over the interval [−1, 1]4 .
Magnetic-Mirror The initial state (ρ0 , z0 , pρ 0 , z0 ) is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution
over the interval [−1, 1]4 .
Two-Body The initial coordinate for the first body (x10 , y1 0 ) is randomly sampled from a uniform
distribution over the interval [0.5, 1.5]2 , and (px1 0 , py1 0 ) is calculated to obtain a nearly-circular orbit.
Then, the initial state for the second body (x20 , y2 0 , px2 0 , py2 0 ) is set to (−x10 , −y1 0 , −px1 0 , −py1 0 )
Then we slightly perturbed px , py by adding a Gaussian noise (multiplied by a constant of 0.1) to the
velocity of both two bodies. Here, the velocities are equivalent to the canonical momentum px and
py , as we assume the masses m1 and m2 to be equal to 1.
Three-Body The initial state for the three-body system is obtained in a similar way to that of the
two-body, except the initial coordinate for the first body (x10 , y1 0 ) is randomly sampled from a
uniform distribution over the interval [0.8, 1.2]2 . Again, (px1 0 , py1 0 ) is set to obtain a nearly-circular
orbit. The initial state for the second and third body is obtained by rotating the first and second body
each by an angle of 2π 3 . Here, the Gaussian noise term that is added to each of the bodies is multiplied
by a constant of 0.05.
Following the above description, we generated 10000 trajectories for each system.

A.3    DATASET CONFIGURATION FOR META TRAINING

The composition of the system types used in our meta training scenario is listed in Table 1.

                 Table 1: Dataset configuration for meta learning Hamiltonian systems
             system to test                         systems for meta training
              mass-spring                  pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror
               pendulum                   mass-spring, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror
             Hénon-Heiles                   mass-spring, pendulum, magnetic-mirror
            magnetic-mirror                  mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles
               two-body              mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror
              three-body             mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror



B     N EURAL NETWORK IMPLEMENTATION
B.1    N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE

In our experiments, we constructed our model as follows: GCNConv(4, 200) - Mish - GCNConv(200,
200) - Mish - GCNConv(200, 4) - Mish - GlobalMeanPool - Linear(4, 200) - Mish - Linear(200, 200)
- Mish - Linear(200, 1) - Mish, where GCNConv and Linear correspond to the graph convolutional
layer and the fully connected layer implemented in PyTorch respectively. Thus, the model outputs a
single-dimensional scalar value. After the forward pass, the derivative of the output with respect to
the input is computed to obtain the time-derivative of the input state, utilizing Equation 1. Note that
we did not heavily tune the hyperparameters regarding the network architecture, because we focus on
the difference between the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-initialized model, not obtaining
state-of-the-art results.

B.2    T RAINING PROCESS

Mass-Spring For both meta-training and pre-training, we used a learning rate of α = 0.001 for the
gradient step on the inner loop, and the Adam optimizer on the outer loop with a learning rate of
β = 0.0005. The inner gradient update was 1 step, with a total of 5000 iterations on the outer loop.
The number of task batches is set to 10, and the number of phase points used for each task was 50
(i.e. among the 200 points in each trajectory, 50 points were randomly sampled for meta training).
For evaluation, we used the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S.1: The relative error for the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-initialized model with
respect to the predicted coordinates (top) and energy (bottom) using different integrators. The solid
line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard error of 10 runs.


Pendulum All conditions were set to be the same as those of the mass-spring system.
Hénon-Heiles All conditions were set to be the same as those of the mass-spring system, except for
the iterations on the outer loop which was set to 10000.
Magnetic-Mirror All conditions were set to be the same as those of the mass-spring system, except
for the iterations on the outer loop which was set to 30000.
Two-Body For both meta-training and pre-training, we used a learning rate of α = 0.001 for the
gradient step on the inner loop, and the Adam optimizer on the outer loop with a learning rate of
β = 0.0005. We set 10000 iterations on the outer loop. The other conditions were set to be the same.
Three-Body All conditions were set to be the same as those of the two-body system, except for the
β which is set to 0.0005.


C     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

C.1   A BLATION ON INTEGRATORS

Figure S.1 shows the evaluation performance of meta-trained, pre-trained, and randomly-initialized
models across scenarios using different integrators; LSODA, and the 1st~4th order symplectic
integrator. The LSODA integrator consistently yields the best results in most cases. While symplectic
integrators are known for their ability to maintain energy conservation, their advantages become more
apparent in long-term dynamics. However, the time range considered in this study is not sufficient to
fully capture the benefits of symplectic integrators. Nonetheless, their impact could be significant
when extended to longer time scales. So in our experiments, we use LSODA as our primary integrator.


C.2   A BLATION ON K

Figure S.2 presents the evaluation performance of meta-trained, pre-trained, and randomly-initialized
models under varying K in the adaptation task. The ablation results indicate that the meta-trained
model consistently performs well at low K values across adaptation tasks. Furthermore, its perfor-
mance markedly improves as the data size K increases, which reflects the efficient adaptability of the
meta-trained model.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S.2: The relative error for the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-initialized model with
respect to the predicted coordinates (top) and energy (bottom) with various number of data points K
used. The solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard error of 10 runs.


C.3   G ENERALIZATION FOR MULTI - HELD - OUT SYSTEM

Here, we present the adaptation performance of the meta-trained models in Section 4 to the multi-
held-out system scenario for the extent of the single-held-out scenario demonstrated in Section 4.
For example, we performed the adaptation task of the meta-trained model trained with a pendulum,
Hénon-Heiles, and the magnetic-mirror system not only for the mass-spring system, but also with the
newly introduced 2D harmonic oscillator, and the Kepler system as well.
The relative errors in terms of both predicted coordinates and energy for this test are presented in
Figure S.3, and S.4. The results demonstrate that the meta-trained models exhibit proficient adaptation
both to the newly introduced 2D harmonic soscillator system and the Kepler system.


Figure S.3: The relative error throughout the time rollout of the 2D harmonic oscillator system for
the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-initialized model at adaptation step 50 with respect to the
predicted coordinates (top) and energy (bottom). The solid line and the shaded area each represent
the average and the standard error of 10 runs.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S.4: The relative error throughout the time rollout of the Kepler system for the meta-trained,
pre-trained, and random-initialized model at adaptation step 50 with respect to the predicted coordi-
nates (top) and energy (bottom). The solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and
the standard error of 10 runs.
 a


 b


 c


Figure S.5: The example of predicted dynamics for the 2D harmonic oscillator system (a), and each
good (b) and bad (c) examples of Kepler system.


We also show the example of the predicted dynamics for both the 2D harmonic oscillator and the
Kepler system in Figure S.5. There exists a situation for the Kepler system where the meta-trained
model does not perform well, which implies insufficient adaptation steps for this case.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 a


 b


 c


 d


Figure S.6: The prediction of each system dynamics from the meta-trained after 50 adaptation steps,
and CoDA after 50 and 10000 steps. Each row (a) to (d) corresponds to the predictions tested with
mass-spring, pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, and the magnetic mirror system respectively.

               True dynamics                         True dynamics                      Predicted dynamics              Predicted dynamics
 -1.5                                  -1.5                                     -1.5                            -1.5

y 0.0                                py 0.0                                 y 0.0                             py 0.0


  1.5                                  1.5                                      1.5                             1.5
        -1.5        0.0        1.5            -1.5        0.0        1.5               -1.5    0.0      1.5            -1.5    0.0      1.5
                    x                                     px                                    x                               px
               Figure S.7: The predicted dynamics of the magnetic-mirror system using DyAd.

C.4     C OMPARISON WITH C O DA

The comparison of the meta-trained model between CoDA and DyAd is depicted in Figure S.6. From
the results, the dynamics from CoDA after 50 steps (red dotted line) are not sufficient to match the
performance of the meta-trained model, so we also made a comparison with the CoDA after 10000
steps (red dashed line), which also failed to meet the expectations.


                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 a


 b


Figure S.8: (a) shows the dissipative dynamics of the mass-spring system as the damping coefficient
c changes. The leftmost subfigure in (b) indicates the geometric moving average of the relative error
at time 10 for different values of damping coefficient c. The three right subfigures in (b) represent the
relative error through the time rollout with different values of c for each three models.


Although CoDA is reported to outperform MAML-based methods in the scope of generalization
across environments within a fixed system, our results show that MAML-based method advantages
CoDA in our broader scope of definition (i.e. generalization across different types of systems).

C.5   A DAPTATION WITH DYA D

Contrary to CoDA, where inputs are represented by the state variables (q, p) of the system, DyAd
relies on image sequence inputs. To this end, we generated sequences of images with dimensions
2 × 128 × 128, where each channel corresponds to the xy space and px py space, respectively.
However, the weak supervision term in DyAd’s encoder loss (the first term in Equation 7),
                     X                 X                         X
              Lenc =     ∥ĉ − c∥2 + α   ∥ẑc(i) − ẑc(j) ∥2 + β  ∥∥ẑc(i) ∥2 − m∥2                   (7)
                        c∈C                i,j,c                    i,c

                                                                                     (i)
where g is the encoder network, x is the input, ẑ (i) = g(x(i) ), and ĉ(i) = W ẑc + b is an affine
transformation of zc which act as a hidden feature for task c, was not directly applicable to our
scenario due to the varying nature of physical parameters across different systems. To adapt this
notion to our needs, we have chosen to represent the physical parameter as the energy of the system.
While it may not be exact to say that the explicit functional form of energy is common to all systems,
the use of energy as a form of weak supervision can effectively utilize the minimal concept of
physical parameters across different dynamical systems. We conducted an adaptation task for the
magnetic-mirror system using the meta-trained model, which was previously trained on mass-spring,
pendulum, and Hénon-Heiles systems. The results show that, as illustrated in Figure S.7, DyAd is
not appropriate to our scope of domain generalization.

C.6   A DAPTATION TO DISSIPATIVE SYSTEM

Here, we performed an adaptation task to the damped mass-spring system with damping term −cẋ
with the same meta-trained model that was used to adapt to the original mass-spring system (i.e.
meta-trained with conservative pendulum, Hénon-Heiles, magnetic-mirror system). From Figure S.8,
we can see that the meta-trained model with conservative systems cannot easily make an adaptation
to a dissipative system, which indicates a definite limitation in our problem setting.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.7   D EMONSTRATION ON LARGER SYSTEMS

In this section, we present preliminary results for the two-body and three-body tasks. We recognize
that the training conditions, such as the learning rate for adaptation, were not sufficiently refined. As
a result, while the CKA exhibits behavior similar to that observed in other single-particle tasks as
shown in Figure S.10, the prediction accuracy remains suboptimal, as illustrated in Figure S.9. The
predicted trajectories are depicted in Figure S.11. It should be noted that while none of the models
successfully capture the overall dynamics, the meta-trained model tries to capture the trend than the
others. This suggests that with further refinement of the training conditions, the meta-trained model
holds promise for achieving more accurate predictions.

                          Rel. err. btw. coords.
                                                   10 1
                                                              two-body           10 1
                                                                                            three-body

                                                   10 2                          10 2

                                                   10 3                          10 3

                                                          0       5         10          0       5        10
                                                                Time                           Time
                      meta-trained model                              pre-trained model         random-initialized model
Figure S.9: The relative error throughout time rollout for the meta-trained, pre-trained, and random-
initialized model. The solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard error
of 10 runs.


                                                              two-body                      three-body
                                            10 1                                 10 1
                         1-CKA


                                            10 3                                 10 3

                                            10 5                                 10 5
                                                          0     500       1000          0       500      1000
                                                          Adaptation step                 Adaptation step
                      meta-trained model                              pre-trained model         random-initialized model
Figure S.10: The measured CKAs in the last layer between the model before making adaptation and
during adaptation. The solid line and the shaded area each represent the average and the standard
error of 10 runs.


                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 a


 b


     Figure S.11: The example predicted trajectories of (a) two-body, (b) three-body systems.


                                               21
