Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


REAL SEUDO FOR REAL - TIME CALCIUM IMAGING
ANALYSIS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Closed-loop neuroscience experimentation, where recorded neural activity is used
         to modify the experiment on-the-fly, is critical for deducing causal connections
         and optimizing experimental time. A critical step in creating a closed-loop ex-
         periment is real-time inference of neural activity from streaming recordings. One
         challenging modality for real-time processing is multi-photon calcium imaging
         (CI). CI enables the recording of activity in large populations of neurons how-
         ever, often requires batch processing of the video data to extract single-neuron
         activity from the fluorescence videos. We use the recently proposed robust
         time-trace estimator—Sparse Emulation of Unused Dictionary Objects (SEUDO)
         algorithm—as a basis for a new on-line processing algorithm that simultaneously
         identifies neurons in the fluorescence video and infers their time traces in a way
         that is robust to as-yet unidentified neurons. To achieve real-time SEUDO (re-
         alSEUDO), we optimize the core estimator via both algorithmic improvements
         and an fast C-based implementation, and create a new cell finding loop to enable
         realSEUDO to also identify new cells. We demonstrate comparable performance
         to offline algorithms (e.g., CNMF), and improved performance over the current
         on-line approach (OnACID) at speeds of 120 Hz on average.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Closed loop experiments enable neuroscientists to modify or adapt presented stimuli or introduce
perturbations, such as optogenetic stimulation, in real-time based on new observations of the neural
activity. Such experiments are critical for both optimizing experimental time, e.g., by optimally se-
lecting stimuli to fit neural response models (Charles et al., 2018), or by deducing causality instead
of only functional connectivity. Despite this critical need, closed loop experiments are incredibly
difficult as they require real-time processing of neural data, which can be computationally intensive
to process. In particular, population-level recordings using modern technologies often require signif-
icant computation to even extract individual neuronal activity traces, e.g., in high-density recordings
or in fluorescence microscopy.
One particularly challenging recording technology is fluorescence microscopy, in particular multi-
photon calcium imaging (CI). CI has progressed significantly since its inception with optical ad-
vances enabling larger fields of view, and therefore higher data throughput. While neuroscientists
now have access to hundreds-to-thousands of neurons at a time (up to even millions), the neuronal
time traces are only indirectly observed as fluorescing objects in the full image. To extract each neu-
ron’s activity, a number of methods have been developed, including matrix factorization approaches,
deep learning approaches, and others (we refer to a recent review for a more complete coverage of
all the available methods and their nuances (Benisty et al., 2022)).
Almost all current calcium image processing methods rely on batch processing: i.e., using a full
video all at once to simultaneously identify the neurons in the data and their time traces. For ex-
ample, a common approach is to identify cells in a mean image (the image containing the average
fluorescence per pixel over all time) and then to extract the time-trace from the video given the
neuron’s location. Real-time processing does not afford such luxury. Instead, frames must be pro-
cessed as they are collected. Furthermore minimal data can be stored and used, as large image
batches reduce algorithmic speed. Finally, the incomplete knowledge of the full set of cells in the


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


video can cause unintended cross-talk as new cells firing may overlap with known cells, causing a
well-documented effect of false transients (Gauthier et al., 2022).
We thus present an algorithm capable of demixing CI data frame-by-frame in real-time. Our design
goals are to operate at > 30 Hz with minimal temporary data storage. Our primary contributions
are: 1) A fast implementation of the SEUDO algorithm, 2) A new feedback loop to identify cells in
real time using the SEUDO output, and 3) patch-based parallelization that enables high-throughput
calcium trace estimation across larger fields of view.


2     BACKGROUND

Traditionally, CI analysis has been performed on full imaging videos. The goal of these algorithms
is to extract from a pixel-by-time data matrix Y 2 RM ⇥T , where M is the number of pixels in
each frame and T is the number of frames, a set of neural profiles X 2 RM ⇥N (one for each of
N neurons) and a corresponding set of time traces         2 RN ⇥T . The former of these has, as each
column of X, a single component profile depicting which pixels constitute that fluorescing object,
and how strong that pixel is fluorescing. The latter has as each row the corresponding time traces
that represent how bright that object was at each frame. These time-traces are particularly important
for relating neural activity to each other via population dynamics, or to stimuli and behavior.
In typical approaches, full videos are required to either 1) identify summary images (e.g., mean or
max images (Pachitariu et al., 2013; Diego & Hamprecht, 2014; Petersen et al., 2018; Klibisz et al.,
2017)) to identify cells in, 2) to create a dataset within which points are clustered into cells (Kaifosh
et al., 2014; Spaen et al., 2019; Mishne et al., 2018; Reynolds et al., 2017; Apthorpe et al., 2016;
Soltanian-Zadeh et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2021; Soltanian-Zadeh et al., 2019; Kirschbaum et al.,
2020), or 3) to perform simultaneous cell identification and demixing (Pnevmatikakis et al., 2016;
Pachitariu et al., 2016; Charles et al., 2022; Haeffele & Vidal, 2019; Inan et al., 2017; Maruyama
et al., 2014; Mishne & Charles, 2019; Song et al., 2017; Giovannucci et al., 2019) (e.g., via matrix
factorization or dictionary learning). For example, in the latter example, the data decomposition is
solved via a regularized optimization, e.g.,
                       c b = arg min kY
                       X,                        X k2F + RX (X) + R ( ),                             (1)
                                     X,

where k·k2F is the Frobenius norm (sum of squares of all matrix elements), and RX (X) and R ( )
are regularization terms for the profiles and time-traces, respectively. While many regularization
combinations exist, common terms include sparse neural firing, sparse overlaps, non-negativity, and
spatial locality. Regardless, all methods require all frames to identify the fluorescing components,
with the exception of OnACID (Giovannucci et al., 2017) and FIOLA Cai et al. (2023).
OnACID and FIOLA operate in an on-line manner, utilizing the buffer of last lb residuals rt =
yt Xct Bft where X and c represent the spatial and temporal profiles of already recognized
cells and B and f represent the spatial and temporal profiles of the known background signal.
Both methods use a local Constrained Non-negative Matrix Factorization (CNMF) (Pnevmatikakis
et al., 2016) in the spatial and temporal vicinity of that point. CNMF is an off-line algorithm that
repeatedly performs alternating optimizations on [X, B] and on [c, f ] using the full dataset, until it
converges to a designated precision. Both methods require initialization periods, and FIOLA further
requires GPU and CPU optimizaiton, raising the computational infrastructure costs. We seek a
solution that does not need any initialization data and can be run on simpler CPU machines for
easier incporporation into user’s workflows.

2.1   S PARSE E MULATION OF U NKNOWN D ICTIONARY O BJECTS

One primary challenge in fully on-line settings is the incomplete knowledge of all fluorescing com-
ponents at the experiment onset. Even in off-line methods, incomplete identification of cells can
create scientifically impactful cross talk—termed false transients—in inferred activity (Gauthier
et al., 2022; Inan et al., 2017). Another challenge is identifying new components from few frames:
ideally from individual frames to reduce memory usage. Recent work has provided an algorithm
that solves both challenges: The Sparse Emulation of Unused Dictionary Objects (SEUDO) algo-
rithm (Gauthier et al., 2022).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A                      infer        B                                                       C         motion corrected data

                                                                                                                                     Gaussian filter
                          adapt                                                                                                     (noise reduction)

                                              Data          Spatial profiles Time traces
                                                                                        Data acquisition                   Data modeling                             known component
                                                                                                                                                                         activity
                                                                                                                     residuals                   run SEUDO on
                                                                                                           Data modeling                          current frame
D single
            profile                                                                                                                 Update
                                  typical
                                  model                                                             Short-term                   component list                   Long-term
             true                                                           RealSEUDO Framework                                  Merge             Add
                      false       SEUDO
 activity


                                   model
                                               single SEUDO cell                                                                         Split



                                                     =
fluor.
 avg.


Figure 1: The realSEUDO algorithm. A: Real-time inference of cells and their activity from calcium
imaging is crucial to closed-loop experiments. B: Typical calcium imaging demixing requires batch
processing. C: We propose a method based around the SEUDO estimation algorithm that can iden-
tify cells in real time by robustly removing known cells and using the residuals to identify new cells
in the data. D: realSEUDO builds on the SEUDO algorithm that is robust to missing cells. SEUDO
was developed to prevent false activity in known cells from unknown cells (left) by explicly model-
ing contamination as a sparse sum of small Gaussian blobs (right). SEUDO cells further provide an
approximation of the missing, structured fluorescence in the frame.

SEUDO is a robust time-trace estimator for neuronal time traces. Given a single fluorescence video
frame yt , and a set of known profiles X, SEUDO models contamination as W c where W is a basis
of small Gaussian bumps that linearly construct the interfering components, weighted by the sparse
coefficients c (i.e., most c values are zero). SEUDO then solves the optimization
                                  h                                                i
            bt = arg min min kyt X t k2 , kyt X t W ck2 + kck1 +                       ,        (2)
                                                 2                    2
                                            ,c 0

where and are model parameters and the internal min selects from the two internal expres-
sion that which has the minimal value. Since SEUDO operates per-frame, yt , P hi, c are all vec-
tors. While SEUDO has demonstrated the ability to remove false transients (Gauthier et al., 2022),
SEUDO’s application has been limited to off-line post-processing due to: (1) slow computational
speed, and (2) the need for pre-defined profiles X.

2.2                 T HE FISTA A LGORITHM

The computational bottleneck in SEUDO is a weighted LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996) optimization,
which can be implemented with the Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA) that
implements a momentum gradient descent (Beck & Teboulle, 2009). FISTA optimizes
                                 ⇥                              ⇤
                            min F (x) ⌘ f (x) + g(x) : x 2 Rn ,                            (3)
where f (x) is a smooth convex function with Lipschitz constant L > 0, such that krf (x)
rf (y)k  Lkx yk8x, y 2 Rn , e.g. in SEUDO f (x) = kyt X t W ck22 , and g(x) is a
continuous convex function that is typically non-smooth, e.g., g(x) = kxk1 . Each descent step of
FISTA consists of an ISTA descent step and a momentum step:
                                       2                                        3
                                                        ✓                   ◆ 2
                                                L                1
                    xk = arg min 4g(x) +           x      yk       rf (yk )     5             (4)
                                    x            2               L

                                     yk+1      =         xk + ⌘k (xk          xk 1 ),                                                                                            (5)
                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                           1+            1+4t2k
where the parameter ⌘k gradually reduces with ⌘k = ttkk+11 , tk+1 =                                                                  2                   , t1 = 1.

3              R EAL - TIME SEUDO
Here we develop Real-time SEUDO (realSEUDO) that resolves the primary limitations of SEUDO
and extends the algorithm significantly from a time-trace estimator to a real-time cell identification


                                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


method. Specifically we improve the computationally intensive momentum descent algorithm used
to solve Equation equation 2 by reducing the number of steps of momentum descent, implementing
parallelism, optimizing internal computations (e.g., of smoothness parameters), and reducing the
complexity of the original fitting problem without a substantial loss of quality by manipulating it
inputs. Moreover we add a new algorithm that automatically recognizes the neurons that have not
previously been seen and adds them to the SEUDO dictionary. Finally, we present a patch-based
parallelism that avoids the slowdown of running LASSO in higher dimensions.
realSEUDO 1 operates at high level as follows (Fig. 1): For simplicity we assume that we begin with
no known profiles. When significant activity occurs, triggering a SEUDO cell, that cell is stored in
a temporary array. Profiles are moved from the temporary profiles to the static set of profiles when
they disappear from the current frames. The static profile set is then used to identify the activity
of those components in future frames, with unexplained components becoming SEUDO cells and
cycling back into the temporary profiles, followed by an update of the static profile set.

3.1   SEUDO OPTIMIZATION

Our first step in creating realSEUDO is to vastly increase the speed of SEUDO to operate at > 30 fps.
The original implementation of SEUDO relied on the TFOCS library (Becker et al., 2011) in MAT-
LAB. We began by improving the run-time by switching from MATLAB’s interpreted programming
language running TFOCS to a fast implementation of LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996) via FISTA (Beck
& Teboulle, 2009) in the C++ compiled language. To further improve performance, we optimized
the C++ code with the use of templates to eliminate the function call overhead in tight loops, and
also employ parallelism, based on the POSIX threads with TPOPP library wrapper (Babkin, 2010).
To prevent a bottleneck from the passing of data through Matlab’s OOP API at the MATLAB/C++
interface, we switched to the non-OOP version of the MATLAB-to-C API.
While beneficial, simply coding SEUDO in C++ was not sufficient to achieve the desired processsing
rate. We further improved runtimes with optimizations to the computation of the cost function and
derivatives. The partial LASSO component of SEUDO that performs optimization on a single frame
y using the FISTA algorithm can be written as arg min f ( ) + g( ), where f = ky                k22
is the least-squares portion and g = k k1 is the `1 penalty. In the FISTA algorithm the spaces of
time traces and Gaussian kernels are unified, with representing a concatenation of X and W ,
    representing a concatenation of    and c. With the number of pixels in the frame M , number
of neurons N , and number of Gaussian kernels K, y 2 RM ,           2 RM ⇥(N +K) ,      2 RN +K ,
   2 RN +K , with the first N elements of corresponding to being equal to 0.
In working with this optimization program, a number of internal computations become bottlenecks:
specifically computing the gradients r f and r (f + g), the Lipshitz smoothness estimation, and
the momentum/stopping criteria.
We reduce the burden of the gradient computations by both reducing the number of times the gra-
dient must be used, and by improving the internal gradient computation. For the former, we note
that naive implementations compute both a step in the direction of r f and then in the direction of
r (f + g). Moreover, we noted that these two steps in slightly different directions cause the gra-
dient to dither around the optimum. We thus instead only take a step in the direction of r (f + g)
(similar to (Beck & Teboulle, 2009)). For the latter, computing r (f + g) requires matrix vector
multiplications with and its transpose. Since is sparse, to save memory and computation, we
avoided storing the matrix explicitly, instead generating it on the fly in an efficient convolution.
Specifically, the gradient r f requires computing T         , which we reorganize to compute in two
passes: The first pass:
                             X                           df         X
                    vj =            yj     ji i ,             =2            jm vj ,              (6)
                                                        d m
                          1iN +K                                 1jM

the first computes intermediary variables, and the second uses these values to compute the gradient
dimensions.
This split into two passes factors out repeated computations, and reduces the time complexity from
O(n3 ) to O(n2 ). Moreover, the computation of each pass becomes highly parallelizable, with parti-
tioning of the first pass by j and of the second pass by m, and efficiently skipping the iterations over
the zero elements in the sparse matrix .


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To improve the efficiency of estimating the Lipschitz constant L, note that L =
max(krf (x1 ) rf (x2 )k/kx1 x2 k). We found that for our cost function, we could approx-
imate L with independent computations in each dimension. This estimation reduced the number of
steps by as much as 30% over typical computations of L before each step based on the local gradient.
The momentum descent central to solving the partial LASSO tends to spend many steps on stopping
the momentum, especially with the large values of the Lipshitz constant L (i.e. the non-momentum
steps are small). One such case is “circling the drain” around the minimum, with the momentum
causing the overshoot in one dimension while another dimension is stopping. Another case is when
a dimension is moved past the boundary (e.g., x       0 for SEUDO). The momentum continues to
push the solution to negative values, producing suboptimal solutions and increasing the number of
steps necessary. FISTA includes a parameter ⌘ that progressively limits the top speed of descent to
reduce such problems. We improved these cases by resetting the momentum to zero on a dimension
when it either attempts to cross into the negative values or when its gradient changes sign. The
dimensional momentum stopping stops abruptly at the right time, obviating the need for slowing
and thus we can simplify FISTA by fixing ⌘ = 1.
We have also experimented with using the dimensional momentum stopping on a different kind of
optimization problems, on momentum optimization of the neural network training, where it provided
a substantial improvement. While FISTA performed worse than simple gradient descent, modified
FISTA produced the same error rate and squared mean error in about 10 times fewer training passes
than simple descent, or about 10 times lower error rate and 1.5 times lower mean square error in
the same number of passes. The FISTA algorithm incorporating all these extensions is presented in
Algorithm 2 in Supplement.
As a third step, we modified the optimization program (the SEUDO model) itself to achieve the final
speedups. In the original SEUDO, Gaussian components in W are spaced apart by one pixel. We
instead found that this tight spacing is redundant. The kernels with radius r cover (⇡ ⇤r2 ) pixels, and
thus each pixel is covered by (⇡⇤r2 ) kernels with varying weights. This redundancy results in FISTA
continuing to adjust the kernel coefficients c after the neural activations x converge. Reducing the
number of kernels thus reduces both the number of gradient descent steps and the per-step cost,
accelerating the computation more than quadratically. For a kernel with diameter of 30 pixels this
improves the performance by a factor of over 100 without substantial degradation of false transients
removal or the recognition of the interfering components’ shape W c.
We tested our speedups against the original SEUDO on 45000 frames across 50 cells from Gauthier
et al. (2022). SEUDO ran at 5.8-6.9 s/cell on a Macintosh M1. The optimized C++ implementation
without the MATLAB C++ API reduced the runtime to 0.9-1.1 s/cell (a 6-7x improvement). Sparse
SEUDO provided further acceleration to a run time of 0.2 s, with 0.1 s for the computation and 0.1 s
for the overhead of converting data between Matlab and native code; a total of a 29-34.5x speed-up.



3.2   AUTOMATIC CELL RECOGNITION

With our improvements, the core SEUDO algorithm was able to run in real time, and we next moved
on to the cell recognition feedback loop that forms the realSEUDO algorithm. As realSEUDO
must rely only on past video frames to identify new profiles, we designed realSEUDO to run on
a frame-by-frame basis. At a high level, our automatic cell recognition first runs SEUDO on the
current incoming (denoised) frame given the known profiles Xstab identified thus far. The loop
then identifies contiguous bright areas in the residual frames, i.e., the SEUDO cells resulting from
SEUDO, and places them in a ‘temporary profile’ array Xtemp . These temporary profiles are then
updated (via merging with new potential profiles) given new, incoming, frames until they are stable
and moved to the stable, known profile list Xstab that is updated less frequently by addition, merging
and splitting of temporary profiles.
Procedually, we first preprocess each incoming frame with the goal of reducing noise to improve
profile recognition. Typical calcium imaging analysis often uses running averages in space and time
for noise reduction. We thus implement both a spatial Gaussian filter, as well as a running average
of several sequential frames. We keep the window length as a tunable parameter that can be set to
one to perform frame-by-frame processing and minimize temporal blurring of neural activity.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


After each frame is denoised, we estimate the activation level for each of the stable profiles Xstab
using the fast version of the SEUDO estimator. We denote the activation level for the k th profile at
time t as kt . SEUDO also returns a robust residual that contains all the fluorescence that was not
captured by Xstab . We then run the residual through SEUDO a second time using the temporary
profiles Xtemp to test if any temporary profile represents the fluorescence well and should be moved
to Xstab from Xtemp . The residual after this second application of SEUDO represents completely
unknown profiles and are analyzed separately to determine if a new member of Xtemp should be
created.
Starting from the bottom up, the detection of new temporary profiles is based on finding the areas of
the image that stand above the noise level. The noise level is evaluated by noting that most of each
video frame has no activity, indicating that the median pixel value will be very close to the median
value of the pixels in an all-dark frame containing the same noise. The half-amplitude of the noise
  ha can be estimated as:
                                      ha = median(yt )    min(yt ).                               (7)
In some cases different areas of the image may contain a different amount of background lighting
(e.g., changes in neuropil), which can skew the noise estimate. To overcome this challenge, we
split the larger image into sections, with each section computing a local median which is smoothly
interpolated between section of the image. This can be thought as either a krigging procedure or a
cheap approximation to a local median evaluated independently for each pixel in the image.
To merge new profiles into the exiting profiles when adding new profiles to Xtemp , we compute an
overlap score. The overlap computation is not a plain spatial overlap but includes a heuristics that
identifies when one profile is mostly contained in another. The condition for merging two profiles
in Xtemp is based on the comparison of numbers of common and unique pixels between profiles,
where P1 and P2 are numbers of pixels in each of two profiles, U1 and U2 are the numbers of unique
pixels in each profile, C is the number of common pixels, B1 and B2 are the perimeters of bounding
boxes for each profile, and ktemp is a constant with an empirically chosen value of 0.75:
               U1  B1 ⇤ 0.5     or U2  B2 ⇤ 0.5       or    C    ktemp ⇤ min(P1 , P2 )             (8)
After a profile is moved from Xtemp to Xstab , a different score is computed pair-wise between the
new profile and each existing profile, to decide whether they should be left separate, or merged, or
one of profiles split. If a merge or split is performed, the original profiles are removed from Xstab
and the results entered recursively into Xstab as new profiles. The score for two profiles A and B
in Xstab is computed based on the brightness and measures of least-squares fit of the cells into each
other 1) as whole cells (i.e., ↵AB = hA, Bi/hA, Ai) and 2) using only the overlapping region (i.e.,
  AB = hAol , Bi/hAol , Aol i where Aol is the profile A restricted to the region overlapping with B).
  AB is used as a measure of difference in brightness, against which the fit of the whole cells ↵AB
is compared as a measure of proximity in shape. Specifically we compute two ratios ⇢AB and ⇢BA
are computed as
                                         ↵AB                      ↵BA
                                ⇢AB =          ,          ⇢BA =         .                          (9)
                                          AB                        BA

A higher value of ⇢AB (always  1) means that cell A fits better inside cell B. The value of 1 means
that it fits entirely inside cell B. The same principle applies symmetrically to ⇢BA .
The scores express the following logic: If two temporal profiles are a close match in cross-section,
they likely represent the same cell and should be merged. If they overlap only partially, they likely
represent separate cells. If one cross-section is inside the other, look at relative brightness: if the
smaller cross-section is also weaker, it’s likely a weaker partial activation of the same cell and should
be merged, if the smaller cross-section has a close or higher brightness, the larger cross-section likely
represents an intertwining of two cells that has to be split.

3.3   PATCHING AND PROFILE MATCHING

realSEUDO, although highly efficient for smaller patches, is still based on the LASSO algorithm that
reduces in efficiency with much larger frames. Thus we adopt a patching scheme that breaks each
frame into small patches that can be parallelized to maintain the high framerate by utilizing the multi-
threading in many modern processors. Patching, however, requires matching profiles across patches.
Traditionally profiles discovered in data split into patches is to add overlap margins to the patches


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and to use profiles overlap in this region to determine matchings in neighboring patches. Additional
margins, however, introduces redundant computation and decreases computational efficiency.
In realSEUDO we note that the logic behind the scoring we use to merge profiles in Xstab and
Xtemp within each patch can also be used to score the match of profiles across patches. Specifically,
we extend the matching to include the profile temporal activity as an additional dimension to find
matching cells in neighboring patches via consecutive gluing of the profiles. The highest score
is assigned to the bidirectional match of both spatial and temporal dimensions, a lower score to
symmetrical match of spatial dimensions and asymmetrical match of temporal dimension, a yet
lower score to an asymmetrical match of both kinds of dimensions. We have observed successful
matches even with zero margin, using the neighboring strips of pixels around the perimeters of the
patches as the spatial dimension for matching.


4   R ESULTS

Simulated data experiments: We first applied all three algorithms to a simulated video created with
Neural Anatomy and Optical Microscopy simulation (NAOMi) (Song et al., 2021). Specifically we
simulated the neural activity over 20000 frames at 30Hz with fame size of 500x500 pixels. There
are approximately 450 cells visible in this dataset (i.e. fluorescing cells intersecting the plane of
imaging). We benchmarked the patch-based parallel processing of realSEUDO 80x80 pixel patches.
For comparison we ran the off-line CNMF (a staple batch-based calcium imaging demixing algo-
rithm) and OnACID, the computationally similar on-line method. realSEUDO found 201 true cells,
identified as strongly correlated with ground-truth cells, while OnACID found 152 and CNMF (the
offline method) found 308 (Fig. 2A-B). Furthermore, both realSEUDO and OnACID found many
fewer false positives than CNMF, presumably because they cannot be fooled by small fluctuations
integrated over the full recording (Fig. 2C-D). Note that to remove the confound of post-processing
we followed prior work Song et al. (2021) in using the CNMF raw fluorescence traces instead of
the model-based denoised traces. On average, realSEUDO processed 67.8 frames per second end-
to-end, while OnACID ran at 9.2 fps.
Applications to in-vivo mouse CA1 recordings We applied realSEUDO to an in vivo calcium
imaging recordings from mouse hippocampal area CA1 previously described in Gauthier et al.
2022 (Gauthier et al., 2022). They consisted of 36 videos, each sized 90x90 pixels with 41750
frames sampled at 30 Hz. The outputs had previously been verified manually by Gauthier et al.
2022 (Gauthier et al., 2022) with human labeling of CNMF outputs. We applied realSEUDO to all
videos and compared the outputs with the current online cell demixing algorithm OnACID (Giovan-
nucci et al., 2017), as well as a popular offline algorithm, CNMF (Giovannucci et al., 2019), as an
additional baseline.
We benchmarked realSEUDO against OnACID (an online analysis tool) and CNMF (an offline anal-
ysis tool) on real in-vivo calcium imaging movies (Fig. 3). Algorithmic performance was measured
on an x86-64 computer with 48 CPU cores (Intel Xeon 6248R), 2 hyperthreads per core, 78 GB
of memory, and without the use of a GPU. The initialization times were not included. On aver-
age, realSEUDO processed 162 frames per second compared to 26 processed by OnACID and 13
by CNMF: an improvement of 6.5x and 12.5x respectively (Fig. 3C). Quality-wise, we found that
OnACID exhibited difficulties with adapting to larger ranges of pixel brightness, sometimes miss-
ing bright cells. Scaling pixel values improved OnACID results, but only mildly (one additional
cell). Numerically OnACID and CNMF appear similar but they identified different components.
SEUDO results were most similar to CNMF, and with additional cells identified, and less false pos-
itives (Fig. 3B). Finally, the per-transient manual classification provided by (Gauthier et al., 2022)
enabled us to assess if realSEUDO inherited the false transient removal properties of SEUDO. For
a reasonable value of = 0.15, realSEUDO had a true positive rate of 75% and a false positive rate
of 24%. While these numbers are a bit lower than the numbers reported in (Gauthier et al., 2022), in
that study the authors average N=3 frames to reduce noise, while maintained single-frame analysis.
This can be evident by the fact that missed transients were very small: realSEUDO kept 98% of real
fluorescence and only 15% of false fluorescence.
Additional in-vivo tests: As final test we applied all three algorithms (realSEUDO, OnACID,
CNMF) to a 2000-frame mesoscope video example collected by the Yuste lab at Columbia Uni-


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          A                                       Profiles found in the NAOMi data                                                  B              Hits and false alarms
                                                CNMF           OnACID                  realSEUDO                  NAOMi profiles                        CNMF       OnACID
                                                                                                                                                            realSEUDO


     Strong pairs
                                                                                                                                                 300


                                                                                                                                    # profiles
                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                 100
                                                   100 m              100 m                  100 m                          100 m                  0
                                                                                                                                                       Hits False Ambig-
                                                                                                                                                            alarms uous
                                                                                                     C Temporal correlations to ground truth cells
     Weak pairs


                                                                                                                       CNMF (offline)       OnACID (9.4+/- 0.3 Hz)
                                                                                                                                  realSEUDO (67.8+/- 24.1 Hz)
                                                                                                              100
                                                   100 m              100 m                  100 m
                                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                     # profiles
                                                                                                                  60
     Un-paired


                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                   0
                                                   100 m              100 m                  100 m                 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                                                                                                           Correlation with ground truth
          D Example matched profiles to ground truth traces
                                                           Ground truth             CNMF             OnACID                         realSEUDO
                                Profile 1
              Fluorescence (AU)
     Profile 3     Profile 2


                                            0                             2000                          4000                                                6000
                                                                                 Frame number (simulated at 30 Hz)


Figure 2: NAOMi results: A) Found cells in NAOMi for CNMF, OnACID and realSEUDO separated
into Hits (strong or weakly correlated) and false alarms (uncorrelated). B) realSEUDO finds more
cells than OnACID with minimal false positives. C) Temporal correlations for found “hits”. D)
Examples time-traces show correlation to ground truth.


versity and provided with the OnACID github package as a demo. For this example we similarly
saw improved cell detection and runtime improvement in terms of fps (Fig. 3B).


5   D ISCUSSION

We present here an online method for cell detection and fluorescence time-trace estimation from
streaming CI data: realSEUDO. realSEUDO is based on the SEUDO robust time-trace estimator
that reduces bias due to unknown cells while also providing approximate shapes of the unknown
fluorescing objects. To build realSEUDO we 1) improved SEUDO’s slow runtime via significant
modifications at the code, algorithmic, and model levels 2) built a new feedback loop that allowed
SEUDO (which has no cell finding component currently) to identify cells in real-time. Overall,
realSEUDO can achieve frame processing rates of 80-200 fps, depending on cell density. While our
goal was to exceed the typical 30 Hz data collection rate common to many experiments, the high
processing efficiency leaves additional time to compute feedback in future closed loop systems.
Moreover, realSEUDO can scale with faster recording rates as calcium indicators become faster,
e.g., GCaMP8 (Zhang et al., 2023).
realSEUDO’s implementation exhibits a higher degree of parallelism than OnACID, however both
are likely constrained by the employed tools. Specifically, the measurements in Fig. 3C show very
little fps fluctuation with respect to cell count for OnACID, to the point where the error bars are


                                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Estimated Spatial Profiles                                                                                                                                             real-SEUDO
A                                                                                              Estimated Activity                             C                   300                   OnACID

                                                                                                                                                                  250


                                                                                                                                              Frames/second
                                                                                                                                                                  200


                                                                  Δ F/F (AU)
                                                                                                                                                                  150

                                                                                                                                                                  100

                                                                                                                                                                   50

                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                         20      40      60      80

            real-SEUDO            OnACID           CNMF                                                                                                                        Detected ROIs
                                                                                                                                                                   0.2

B                          OnAcid demo dataset                                                         Mouse CA1 dataset


                                                                                                                                              CPU seconds/frame
                                                                                                                                                                  0.18
                 24
                                                    real-SEUDO                                14                                                                  0.16
                           21
                      19                            OnACID
  # components


                                                                               # components
                                                                                                                                                                  0.14
                                                    CNMF                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                  0.12
                                                                                                                    7             8
                                                                                                   7
                                                       9                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                           7                                                                                                      0.08
                                       4           4
                                   2       2                                                                    0       0     1                                   0.06
                                                                                                                                                                          20      40      60         80
                  True          False Positives False Negatives                               True          False Positives False Negatives                                    Detected ROIs


Figure 3: (A) Selected cell profiles and time-traces generated by realSEUDO, OnACID, and CNMF
respectively on a subset of 2000 frames from a single image patch. (B) Counts of true positive, false
positive and false negative cells found by each algorithm for two different recordings: all 41,750
frames data from one video from Gauthier et al. (Gauthier et al., 2022) (right) and from the OnACID
demo (left). (C) Top: Total computational performance as a function of the number of detected cells
for realSEUDO and OnACID, evaluated on the full set of 36 movies from Mouse CA1. Bottom:
CPU use in CPU seconds per frame as a function of the number of detected cells for realSEUDO
and OnACID, evaluated on the same 36 recordings.

invisible, which might be due to a bottleneck in a single thread. realSEUDO has a lower latency
to the first events for a new cell, OnACID requires a history of 100 frames to recognize a cell,
while realSEUDO would produce the first events starting with the first frame that passes the low
brightness threshold. Alternatively, OnACID has a higher native scalability with respect to the frame
area, conditioned on similar cell counts. This likely result from OnACID’s algorithm restriction of
processing to areas in the immediate vicinity of known cells. realSEUDO can still achieve a high
processing efficiency with reasonable hardware with our parallelization. Future research may further
improve realSEUDO runtime by blanking out entire patches until activity is detected via simpler
activity detectors.
One strength of realSEUDO is that it can be initialized with either an empty profile set or a pre-
computed set, e.g., via prior analysis or via anatomical (z-stack) imaging. The ability to start from
nothing will be useful in mesoscope settings when the field-of-view may be changed on-the-fly, and
not requiring an initialization step will reduce start-up overhead. Furthermore, we note that many
of our speed adaptions deviate from the traditional gradient descent approach. In particular the
approximation of the Lipshitz constant and the changes in the momentum and stopping criteria. We
have observed that in other domains, in particular for training deep neural networks, these deviations
appear to also provide significant speedups. We thus will consider future research directions in
analyzing and quantifying the extent of these improvements across broader applications.
Limitations: While our results achieve the design criteria we initially set out, there are some poten-
tial barriers. For one, as with many real-time systems, the compute environment is very important
to configure correctly. We have found the importance of explicitly setting the Linux CPU manager
to enable the performance mode. The default automatic adaptable mode does not react properly to
CPU loads of less than 100% of the whole capacity, and significantly skews the benchmarking by
running the CPUs at low frequency.
While our core algorithm is written completely in C++, and thus open source, we have found MAT-
LAB convenient and efficient as a wrapper for prototyping wrappers for our core functions. Further
work will add Python wrappers to allow for seamless integration into both MATLAB and Python
pipelines, enabling realSEUDO to be more widely used. Finally, we focused here only on cell detec-
tion, assuming access to the on-line motion correction algorithm from OnAcid. Future work should
more holistically incorporate the full pipeline in C++.


                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Noah Apthorpe, Alexander Riordan, Robert Aguilar, Jan Homann, Yi Gu, David Tank, and H Sebas-
  tian Seung. Automatic neuron detection in calcium imaging data using convolutional networks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29:3270–3278, 2016.

Sergey A Babkin. The practice of parallel programming. Createspace, 2010.

Yijun Bao, Somayyeh Soltanian-Zadeh, Sina Farsiu, and Yiyang Gong. Segmentation of neurons
  from fluorescence calcium recordings beyond real time. Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–11,
  2021.

Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
 problems. SIAM journal on imaging sciences, 2(1):183–202, 2009.

Stephen R Becker, Emmanuel J Candès, and Michael C Grant. Templates for convex cone problems
  with applications to sparse signal recovery. Mathematical programming computation, 3:165–218,
  2011.

Hadas Benisty, Alexander Song, Gal Mishne, and Adam S Charles. Review of data processing of
  functional optical microscopy for neuroscience. Neurophotonics, 9(4):041402, 2022.

Changjia Cai, Cynthia Dong, Johannes Friedrich, Marton Rozsa, Eftychios A Pnevmatikakis, and
  Andrea Giovannucci. Fiola: an accelerated pipeline for fluorescence imaging online analysis.
  Nature Methods, 20(9):1417–1425, 2023.

Adam S Charles, Mijung Park, J Patrick Weller, Gregory D Horwitz, and Jonathan W Pillow. De-
  throning the fano factor: a flexible, model-based approach to partitioning neural variability. Neu-
  ral computation, 30(4):1012–1045, 2018.

Adam S. Charles, Nathan Cermak, Rifqi O. Affan, Benjamin B. Scott, Jackie Schiller, and Gal
  Mishne. Graft: Graph filtered temporal dictionary learning for functional neural imaging. IEEE
  Transactions on Image Processing, 31:3509–3524, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2022.3171414.

F. Diego and F. A. Hamprecht. Sparse space-time deconvolution for calcium image analysis. In
   NIPS, pp. 64–72, 2014.

Jeffrey L Gauthier, Sue Ann Koay, Edward H Nieh, David W Tank, Jonathan W Pillow, and Adam S
   Charles. Detecting and correcting false transients in calcium imaging. Nature Methods, 19(4):
   470–478, 2022.

Andrea Giovannucci, Johannes Friedrich, Matthew Kaufman, Anne K Churchland, Dmitri
  Chklovskii, Liam Paninski, and Eftychios A Pnevmatikakis. Onacid: online analysis of cal-
  cium imaging data in real time. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 2378–2388, 2017.

Andrea Giovannucci, Johannes Friedrich, Pat Gunn, Jérémie Kalfon, Brandon L Brown, Sue Ann
  Koay, Jiannis Taxidis, Farzaneh Najafi, Jeffrey L Gauthier, Pengcheng Zhou, Baljit S Khakh,
  David W Tank, Dmitri B Chklovskii1, and Eftychios A Pnevmatikakis. CaImAn an open source
  tool for scalable calcium imaging data analysis. Elife, 8:e38173, 2019.

Benjamin D Haeffele and René Vidal. Structured low-rank matrix factorization: Global optimality,
  algorithms, and applications. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 42
  (6):1468–1482, 2019.

Hakan Inan, Murat A Erdogdu, and Mark Schnitzer. Robust estimation of neural signals in calcium
  imaging. In NIPS, pp. 2905–2914, 2017.

Patrick Kaifosh, Jeffrey D. Zaremba, Nathan B. Danielson, and Attila Losonczy. Sima: Python soft-
  ware for analysis of dynamic fluorescence imaging data. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8, 2014.
  ISSN 1662-5196. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2014.00080. URL https://www.frontiersin.
  org/article/10.3389/fninf.2014.00080.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elke Kirschbaum, Alberto Bailoni, and Fred A Hamprecht. Disco: Deep learning, instance segmen-
  tation, and correlations for cell segmentation in calcium imaging. In International Conference on
  Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 151–162. Springer, 2020.
Aleksander Klibisz, Derek Rose, Matthew Eicholtz, Jay Blundon, and Stanislav Zakharenko. Fast,
  simple calcium imaging segmentation with fully convolutional networks. In Deep Learning in
  Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support, pp. 285–293.
  Springer, 2017.
Ryuichi Maruyama, Kazuma Maeda, Hajime Moroda, Ichiro Kato, Masashi Inoue, Hiroyoshi
  Miyakawa, and Toru Aonishi. Detecting cells using non-negative matrix factorization on calcium
  imaging data. Neural Networks, 55:11–19, 2014.
Gal Mishne and Adam S Charles. Learning spatially-correlated temporal dictionaries for cal-
  cium imaging. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP-2019), pp. 1065–1069. IEEE, 2019.
Gal Mishne, Ronald R Coifman, Maria Lavzin, and Jackie Schiller. Automated cellular structure
  extraction in biological images with applications to calcium imaging data. bioRxiv, pp. 313981,
  2018.
M. Pachitariu, A. M. Packer, N. Pettit, H. Dalgleish, M. Hausser, and M. Sahani. Suite2p: beyond
 10,000 neurons with standard two-photon microscopy. bioRxiv, 2016.
Marius Pachitariu, Adam M Packer, Noah Pettit, Henry Dalgleish, Michael Hausser, and Maneesh
 Sahani. Extracting regions of interest from biological images with convolutional sparse block
 coding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1745–1753, 2013.
Ashley Petersen, Noah Simon, and Daniela Witten. Scalpel: Extracting neurons from calcium
  imaging data. The annals of applied statistics, 12(4):2430, 2018.
E. A Pnevmatikakis, D. Soudry, Y. Gao, T. A. Machado, J. Merel, D. Pfau, T. Reardon, Y. Mu,
  C. Lacefield, W. Yang, Misha Ahrens, Randy Bruno, Thomas M. Jessell, DarcyÂ S. Peterka,
  Rafael Yuste, and Liam Paninski. Simultaneous denoising, deconvolution, and demixing of cal-
  cium imaging data. Neuron, 89(2):285–299, 2016.
S. Reynolds, T. Abrahamsson, R. Schuck, P. Jesper Sjöström, S. R. Schultz, and P. L. Dragotti.
   ABLE: An activity-based level set segmentation algorithm for two-photon calcium imaging data.
   eNeuro, 2017. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0012-17.2017.
Somayyeh Soltanian-Zadeh, Kaan Sahingur, Sarah Blau, Yiyang Gong, and Sina Farsiu. Fast and
  robust active neuron segmentation in two-photon calcium imaging using spatiotemporal deep
  learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(17):8554–8563, 2019.
Alexander Song, Adam S Charles, Sue Ann Koay, Jeff L Gauthier, Stephan Y Thiberge, Jonathan W
  Pillow, and David W Tank. Volumetric two-photon imaging of neurons using stereoscopy
  (vTwINS). Nature methods, 14(4):420, 2017.
Alexander Song, Jeff L Gauthier, Jonathan W Pillow, David W Tank, and Adam S Charles. Neural
  anatomy and optical microscopy (naomi) simulation for evaluating calcium imaging methods.
  Journal of neuroscience methods, 358:109173, 2021.
Quico Spaen, Roberto Ası́n-Achá, Selmaan N Chettih, Matthias Minderer, Christopher Harvey, and
  Dorit S Hochbaum. HNCcorr: a novel combinatorial approach for cell identification in calcium-
  imaging movies. Eneuro, 6(2), 2019.
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288, 1996.
Yan Zhang, Márton Rózsa, Yajie Liang, Daniel Bushey, Ziqiang Wei, Jihong Zheng, Daniel Reep,
  Gerard Joey Broussard, Arthur Tsang, Getahun Tsegaye, et al. Fast and sensitive gcamp calcium
  indicators for imaging neural populations. Nature, pp. 1–8, 2023.



                                                 11
