Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R-MAE: R EGIONS M EET M ASKED AUTOENCODERS
 Duy-Kien Nguyen1,2∗ Vaibhav Aggarwal1 Yanghao Li1
 Martin R. Oswald2 Alexander Kirillov1 Cees G. M. Snoek2                   Xinlei Chen1
 1                 2
   FAIR, Meta AI     University of Amsterdam


                                             A BSTRACT
            In this work, we explore regions as a potential visual analogue of words for self-
            supervised image representation learning. Inspired by Masked Autoencoding
            (MAE), a generative pre-training baseline, we propose masked region autoen-
            coding to learn from groups of pixels or regions. Specifically, we design an
            architecture which efficiently addresses the one-to-many mapping between images
            and regions, while being highly effective especially with high-quality regions.
            When integrated with MAE, our approach (R-MAE) demonstrates consistent im-
            provements across various pre-training datasets and downstream detection and
            segmentation benchmarks, with negligible computational overheads. Beyond the
            quantitative evaluation, our analysis indicates the models pre-trained with masked
            region autoencoding unlock the potential for interactive segmentation.1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
There has been a significant progress of self-supervised pre-training in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) over a short period of time, showing the potential of pre-trained language models from huge
amounts of data. This progress has been mainly brought about two lines of research, the autogressive
language model in GPT (Radford et al., 2018; 2019) and the masked language model in BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019). While being different in the design of pre-text task, both approaches learn to predict
missing words given the available content. Such reconstructive pre-training enables language models
to capture complex and long-range context in documents, resulting in a general learner for various
NLP downstream tasks (Brown et al., 2020).
Inspired by the reconstructive design of masked language modeling in NLP, recent self-supervised
learning approaches in computer vision also propose to directly predict masked patches from visible
image content (Peng et al., 2022; He et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022). Indeed, the idea of masked
autoencoding in vision proves its effectiveness in learning visual representations, reaching state-of-
the-art performance in image recognition (He et al., 2022; Woo et al., 2023). Among these methods,
Masked Autoencoding (MAE) (He et al., 2022) that employs an asymmetric design and a high
masking ratio proves to be a simple and powerful vision learner. Notably, Li et al. (2021) show that
unlike supervised or contrastive learning, MAE improves the upper bound of object detection and
segmentation compared to a long and optimal recipe of training from scratch.
However, for visual understanding, MAE has not yet reached the same performance level as language
models. Despite the benefit of learning from unlabeled data, MAE still lags behind in its scalabil-
ity (Zhai et al., 2022; Dehghani et al., 2023) and other emergent properties (e.g., one that explicitly
capture human-relatable segments (Caron et al., 2021)). This may come from the fact that the raw
pixel values are continuous signals of the visual world, whereas words are discrete human creations.
Motivated by this, we examine the concept of ‘region’ (Girshick et al., 2014) as a potential visual
analogue of words for pre-training, as regions offer similarly discrete information about which group
of pixels belong together. By learning from regions in the image, the model can hopefully be less
biased towards raw pixels and focus more on the grouping of pixels that encode parts, objects, and
scenes. Thus it can further advance the performance on tasks like object detection and segmentation.
Specifically, we propose ‘masked Region Autoencoding’ (RAE), as a reconstructive pre-text task to
learn from regions. In RAE, each region is represented as a binary region ‘map’, with each value
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at FAIR.
    1
        The code is provided at https://github.com/facebookresearch/r-mae


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


indicating whether a pixel belongs to the current region or not. We can then follow a similar procedure
in MAE to learn a region-aware representation by predicting masked portions of the input regions.
However, unlike MAE that reconstructs a single input image in its decoder, learning from regions
requires our pipeline to efficiently deal with one-to-many mappings. This is because a pixel in the
image can belong to an unknown number of regions. In addition, different from color channels in
pixels that appear in a pre-defined order (e.g., RGB), the reconstruction of multiple regions needs to
maintain permutation equivariance – a swap of two regions in the input should automatically lead to
a swap in the output. To address these challenges, we explore several architecture variants for RAE
and converge to a ‘length’ variant that compresses each spatial region to a single query vector. We
show our final design is both efficient and effective.
RAE is fully compatible with MAE. When integrated, we name our approach R-MAE, short for
Region-aware Masked Autoencoding. Since we use regions which are fully computable from mere
images, R-MAE enjoys the same range of applicability as MAE. Empirically, we find R-MAE can
generate useful representations for dense vision tasks such as object detection and segmentation,
which we thoroughly study with our experiments. Specifically, we highlight:

       • RAE alone reaches strong performance, especially when fed with high-quality, off-the-shelf
         regions (Kirillov et al., 2023) – better than MAE;
       • Even with regions from a simple clustering algorithm (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004),
         R-MAE offers consistent improvements over MAE on multiple settings, and reaches state-
         of-the-art performance without compromising pre-training efficiency;
       • Qualitative visualizations show our pre-training is indeed more region-aware, or instance-
         aware compared to others;
       • As a final demonstration, pre-trained R-MAE models can be potentially used as a promptable,
         ‘interactive segmenter’ beyond representation learning.


2    R ELATED W ORK

We first review two intrinsic properties of regions, which have driven their popularity:
Local. In machine learning algorithms images are typically treated as holistic entities (Krizhevsky
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020b), but real-world photos have rich spatial structures and local contents
can vary across the same scene (Asano et al., 2019). This became a strong motivation for the
well-known R-CNN series (Girshick et al., 2014; Girshick, 2015; Ren et al., 2015; He et al., 2017),
especially with Region-of-Interest (RoI) operations on local feature maps (Girshick, 2015). The same
holds for contrastive or Siamese learning (Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021;
Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Caron et al., 2021), where 2D signals are generally suppressed
into global vectors for inter-image contrast. Realizing its potential downside for localization, many
follow-up works (Xie et al., 2021c; Pinheiro et al., 2020; Roh et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2021; Xie
et al., 2021a;b; Yang et al., 2021; Gansbeke et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021; Hénaff et al., 2022)
have shifted focus on intra-image contrast, which use features from local geometric entities (e.g.
points (Wang et al., 2021), regions (Hénaff et al., 2021) or both (Bai et al., 2022)). Meanwhile,
reconstructive methods (He et al., 2022; Bao et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b) as
denoising autoencoders (Vincent et al., 2008) preserve the 2D structure. It is therefore unclear how
regions can further help in this regard.
Object-centric. Reconstructive learning is the dominating paradigm in pre-training natural language
representations (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), and while steady progress is made (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2022), computer vision models are still lagging behind. One crucial difference
between the two fields is that language consists of semantically meaningful discrete words, while
images are raw continuous signals recorded in pixels. Meanwhile, in vision, objects can serve as
a natural counterpart to words – they are constantly referred and manipulated as we interact with
the visual world (Koffka, 2013; Zhang & Maire, 2020), and they can often be captured, albeit not
perfectly, by regions (Uijlings et al., 2013; Arbeláez et al., 2014). By enhancing MAE’s region
awareness, we hope to uncover novel ways to bridge the gap between vision and language.
Next we discuss how regions are generated and utilized:


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Source of regions. Regions can come from various sources (e.g. human annotations (Lin et al.,
2014), spatial heuristics (Hénaff et al., 2021), clustering/segmentation (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher,
2004; Achanta et al., 2010), object proposals (Uijlings et al., 2013; Arbeláez et al., 2014), or motion
segmentation (Pathak et al., 2017)). Most recently, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) proposed by
Kirillov et al. (2023) stands out as a universal model for generating region proposals. As an initial
exploration, our study mainly focuses on pre-computed, clustering-based regions (Felzenszwalb &
Huttenlocher, 2004), but we also verify the effectiveness of R-MAE using regions generated from
SAM. Moreover, regions can be jointly discovered (Hénaff et al., 2022) or updated (Bai et al., 2022)
with representation learning, which is left for future work.
Use of regions. There are at least three other ways to leverage regions in MAE. One is to bias the
random masking strategy (Li et al., 2022a), which is less general and can be sensitive to region
qualities (Li et al., 2022a). Second is to revisit the RoI operation (Ren et al., 2015) and contrastive
learning, which is costly with Siamese encoders (He et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021), and has been
extensively studied (Hénaff et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021b; Wei et al., 2021) even
with MAE (Zhou et al., 2022). Third is to view regions as an extra modality, and treat the task
as a multi-modal learning one (e.g. with text (Geng et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2022) or a depth
map (Bachmann et al., 2022)). This is closest to our work, yet the lightweight design of R-MAE
makes it especially well-suited to learn representations using regions.


3     A PPROACH

Background on Masked Autoencoding. Since Masked Autoencoding (MAE) (He et al., 2022) is
the foundation and baseline of our approach, we first summarize it as background knowledge. As the
name suggests, MAE uniformly masks out a portion of an image and learns to reconstruct by directly
predicting raw pixel values. To provide a meaningful and challenging task for images, a high mask
ratio βI (e.g. 75%) is used by default. The reconstruction is compared against the ground-truth with a
simple ℓ2 loss.
As an autoencoder (Vincent et al., 2008), MAE instantiates its encoder and decoder with vision
transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). ViTs directly ‘tokenize’ images as sequences of
patches, which paves the way for MAE’s efficient encoder pre-training that removes (and not
replaces) masked tokens. Given visible tokens from the pixel encoder, the fixed-sized (8-block, 512-
dimensional) pixel decoder then reconstruct masked patches via pixel regression. After pre-training,
the pixel encoder is transferred as a visual backbone for downstream tasks (Li et al., 2022b).

3.1   RAE: M ASKED R EGION AUTOENCODING

Region maps. To perform masked region autoencoding, we first simply follow MAE and prepare
them to be ‘image-like’. Specifically, each region can be represented by a binary-valued region map
similar in size to the image. Each element on the map, with a value of either in 0 or 1, indicates
whether the corresponding location belongs to the region or not. Now, given any partially visible
region map (mask ratio βR ), we can ask the model to complete it, the same as MAE does for pixels.
Architecture. Similar to MAE, the proposed architecture contains an encoder and decoder for
region autoencoding. We follow MAE and simply use ViT blocks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) for
both. However, just a region encoder-decoder pair is insufficient, as our ultimate goal is to obtain a
pre-trained pixel encoder. Therefore, we maintain the pixel encoder, and use a neck of a single ViT
block to match dimensions and (optionally) propagate information before feeding into the region
decoder. Such a configuration also makes effective use of the abundant contextual information
available in the pixels to pre-train the encoder. See Fig. 1 for an overview.
One-to-many mapping. While regions can be considered as an additional modality to pixel-based
MAE, the problem addressed here presents a distinctive challenge that cannot be fully captured by
this view alone. Compared to other modalities (e.g. depth or semantic maps (Bachmann et al., 2022))
for which there is a one-to-one correspondence to pixels, the mapping between images and regions is
one-to-many: one pixel can belong to an unknown number of regions.
One naïve implementation is to merge the k regions in the channel axis. In this way, they can be
viewed as a single image, and the computations are shared in the intermediate blocks. But unlike


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Input                   R-MAE, the Length Variant                                   Target
                                         Weight Sharing

                                           Region


                                                          Pool
                                           Encoder                    Concatenation

                                                                               Region
                                                                               Decoder

                                           Region


                                                          Pool
                                           Encoder
                                                                                Neck


                                            Pixel                               Pixel


                                                                                                                  MAE
                                           Encoder                …            Decoder


Figure 1: Region-Aware Masked Autoencoder (R-MAE). The masked region autoencoding as a standalone
task learns to reconstruct multiple region maps in parallel given visible region and image patches. The region
encoder generates region embeddings by pooling features from visible region patches. The region decoder then
takes region embeddings and decodes them into region maps using image features from the pixel encoder. By
treating regions as queries, it effectively balances speed and accuracy. The design of our architecture allows its
integration with pixel reconstruction in MAE (de-highlighted).


natural images which have fixed channel orders (e.g., RGB), randomly sampled regions can appear in
any order. It would be ideal if the solution preserves permutation equivariance.
Fortunately, this happens to be the very problem encountered in object detection. The mainstream
solution, as promoted by R-CNN (Girshick et al., 2014), is to sample and stack regions in the batch
axis, and process each of them separately. In masked region autoencoding, this means each region
map will go through the encoder-decoder in isolation: If there are b images and k regions per image,
the network must be applied b×k times. This is expensive – so how to reduce the cost?
Regions as queries – the length variant.
Our final idea is inspired by DETR se-                Standard Cross-Attention                Modified for Spatial Expansion
ries (Carion et al., 2020; Nguyen et al.,
                                                                                                              …
2022), which uses ‘object queries’ as sub-
strates to decode objects. In a nutshell,
each region is first encoded and pooled
into a 1D embedding; then multiple region
                                                          weighted sum
embeddings are concatenated along the se-
                                                      attention
quence length (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)               scores
axis to form ‘region queries’; and finally,                                …
these region queries will decode region
                                                                           …                                  …
maps from the output of the pixel encoder
(through the neck, see Fig. 1 for details).
                                                                  Wv                                     Wv
Since ViT blocks are set operations w.r.t.
the input (Vaswani et al., 2017), this solu-                               …                                  …
tion is permutation equivariant by design.
                                                                  values              query              values         query
The last decoder block is responsible for
expanding region queries spatially. Note            Figure 2: The region query is spatially expanded in the length
that because the decoder has two sets of            variant. We modify the standard cross-attention layer (Carion
inputs, its blocks follow the three-layer de-       et al., 2020) (left). Given a region query, it is summed with all
sign (Carion et al., 2020), with an extra           value vectors to expand its spatial axes (right). A small MLP
cross-attention layer that uses outputs from        head is attached afterwards. This design enables the recon-
the neck to generate keys and values. Dif-          struction of region maps from the region queries efficiently.
ferent from standard attention layers that


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Query       MoCo v3        MAE         R-MAE          Query        MoCo v3        MAE         R-MAE


Figure 3: Attention maps from a Vision Transformer pre-trained with R-MAE. In each group from left
to right we show the original image with the selected query (denoted by red square); three attention maps
corresponding to the query generated from i) MoCo v3; ii) MAE; and iii) R-MAE. All methods are pre-trained
on COCO train2017. In every row from top to bottom, we show 3 types of the query: i) rigid objects,
ii) non-rigid objects, iii) multiple objects. Regions with darker red colors in the attention map denote larger
attention weights. Compared to the baselines, the attention map from R-MAE is more instance-aware.


compute a weighted sum (with keys) over values to produce the output (Fig. 2, left), we expand the
query by directly adding it to all the values (Fig. 2, right). A small MLP head is attached afterwards
to predict region maps on these spatially expanded features. Since this variant alleviates the linear
complexity w.r.t. number of regions k, and still maintains the desired property w.r.t. permutation, we
choose it as the default for RAE. Since this variant alleviates the linear complexity w.r.t. the number
of regions k, and still maintains the desired property w.r.t. the permutation, we choose it as the default
for masked region autoencoding.
Loss. While the ℓ2 loss fits real-valued pixel predictions, by default we use the cross-entropy loss for
binary-valued regions which is effective for binary classification.

3.2   R-MAE: R EGIONS M EET MAE

As masked region autoencoding is fully compatible with MAE, they can be trained in conjunction
by simply restoring the pixel encoder and applying a joint loss with an equal weight (see Fig. 1).
Note that: (i) The pixel branch feeds to the region branch, but not vice versa; (ii) The mask is shared
between two branches which prevents information leak and creates a more challenging pre-text task.
We name this framework R-MAE, short for Region-aware Masked Autoencoding.
Interestingly, Fig. 3 shows that when pre-trained with R-MAE using unsupervised, image-computable
region maps (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004), ViT features are shown to be more instance-
aware. In particular, its attention map focuses more on the objects given the query compared to the
reconstructive (MAE (He et al., 2022)) and contrastive (MoCo v3 (Chen et al., 2021)) baselines. The
ViT features pre-trained with R-MAE reveal its localization capabilities through the attention map,
with strong focus on objects across different locations.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS
Source of regions. By default, we use regions generated from the unsupervised, image-computable
Felzenswalb-Huttenlocher (FH) algorithm (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004). It is fast, efficient
and covers the whole image that underlies classic object proposal methods (e.g. selective search (Ui-
jlings et al., 2013)). The use of FH region maps allows our self-supervised method to inherit the wide
applicability on multiple domains. In addition, we also ablate regions from different sources such as,
panoptic regions – ground-truth annotations from the COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014), and regions
generated by the SAM model (Kirillov et al., 2023).


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             48                                               43                                           11

  COCO detection box (APb)
                                      APb                                                                                            R-MAE batch


                                                                                   ADE20K segm. (mIoU)
                                                                                                                                     R-MAE length


                                                                                                             # FLOPs (B)
                             47                                               42                                                     R-MAE channel
                                                                                                                                     MAE
                                                                                                                           10
                             46                                               41

                             45                                        mIoU
                                                                              40
                                                                                                                            9
                                  1         2       4         8          16                                                      1         2         4       8        16
                                       number of regions (log-scale)                                                                  number of regions (log-scale)
 (a) RAE performance w.r.t. number of regions.                                                                  (b) Complexity of RAE variants in R-MAE.

         variant APb APm mIoU                                source APb APm mIoU                                                strategy FLOPs APb APm mIoU
         channel 46.1 40.9 42.0                              FH       47.2 41.8 42.1                                                  MAE 9.7b 50.1 44.6 45.9
         batch 47.2 41.8 43.3                                panoptic 45.9 40.7 43.4                                            RAE ↔ MAE 9.8b 50.3 44.8 46.6
         length 47.2 41.8 42.1                               SAM      50.6 45.1 46.8                                            RAE ← MAE 9.8b 50.6 45.0 46.8
                                                             MAE      50.1 44.6 45.9                                            RAE → MAE 9.8b 50.3 44.7 46.2
                             (c) RAE variants.              (d) RAE source of region.                                           (e) Integration with MAE in R-MAE.
Table 1: Ablation studies on detection and segmentation. We show: (a) A higher number of regions helps to
improve the performance of masked region autoencoding (RAE); (b, c) The length variant that treats ‘regions as
queries’ provides the best trade-off between accuracy and complexity among the three variants we have studied;
(d) High-quality regions from SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) contribute to significantly boost the performance of
RAE, better than MAE; (e) The integration between RAE and MAE in the R-MAE framework, where we find
the asymmetric design that only feeds pixels to regions works best. Default settings are shaded in gray .


Pre-training datasets. Deviating from prior practices (Bao et al., 2022; He et al., 2022), we develop
RAE and R-MAE by pre-training on COCO train2017 (Lin et al., 2014). This is due to the
scene-centric nature of the images in COCO and the presence of ground-truth regions which can
serve as useful oracles. Following (Hénaff et al., 2021), FH is run at three scales: {500, 1000, 1500},
which also set the minimum cluster sizes. Since this dataset (118k images) is significantly smaller
than ImageNet (1.4m), we pre-train for 4k epochs instead of 800 (He et al., 2022). For fairness, we
also pre-train ViTs with R-MAE on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) for 800/1600 epochs. In this case,
we extract FH region maps with a single scale of 1000 as in Hénaff et al. (2021).
Other pre-training details. Unless otherwise specified, we exactly follow MAE (He et al., 2022) for
hyper-parameters. Our base learning rate is set to 1e-4, which offers better stability during training and
maintains the baseline performance (see Appendix). The length variant is used. ViT-B (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020) is set as the pixel backbone, and a 1-block, 128-dimensional ViT is used for the neck, the
region encoder and the region decoder. A 3-layer MLP acts as the region predictor after the decoder
block. k=8 regions are randomly sampled per image with replacement, and a mask ratio of βR =0.75.
When combined with pixel regression in MAE in R-MAE framework, the pixel branch feeds the
region branch, and the random masks are shared.
Downstream transfers. The pre-trained vision transformers serve as the backbone for downstream
tasks. We simply use the recipe from ViTDet (Li et al., 2022b) for object evaluation on COCO, and
report mean Average Precision (AP) for both box detection (APb ) and instance segmentation (APm ).
Specifically, the learning rate is linearly warmed up for the first 250 iterations and decayed at 0.9 and
0.95 fractions of the total number of training steps by a factor 10. The input image size is 1024 × 1024
with large-scale jitter between a scale range of [0.1, 2.0]. We finetune for 100 epochs with batch size
of 64. For semantic segmentation, we evaluate on ADE20K and report mean Intersection-over-Union
(mIoU) as the main metric following MAE (He et al., 2022) (e.g., run each setting 3 times and take
the mean). In sum, all hyper-parameters here are following standard practices for fair comparisons of
pre-training settings.

4.2                          E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Ablation studies. In Tab. 1, we ablate the most important design choices in RAE and R-MAE: Tab. 1a
shows the performance of the RAE alone w.r.t. the number of regions. RAE improves when more


                                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


regions per image are sampled during pre-training. From Tabs. 1b and 1c, we conclude the channel
variant is efficient due to the share of computation in the intermediate blocks of the architecture, but
lags behind in the performance. This proves that learning permutation equivariance of multiple region
maps within an image is non-trivial. While the batch variant effectively deals with the permutation of
regions and demonstrates strong performance, it comes with high computational cost (see Tab. 1b).
By treating regions as queries, the length variant provides the best trade-off between speed and
accuracy, which is important to process multiple regions per image.
In Tab. 1d, we compare the performance of RAE with regions from different sources: FH regions as
our default setting, panoptic regions from COCO ground-truth (Lin et al., 2014) and regions generated
by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). While panoptic regions only improve on semantic segmentation,
region maps from SAM contribute to boost the performance of RAE by a large margin on all tasks
compared to the default FH regions. Surprisingly, RAE alone with SAM regions outperforms MAE
(50.6 vs. 50.1 for APbox and 46.8 vs. 45.9 for mIoU) with less computational requirements (more
details in Appendix). This validates that masked region autoencoding is an effective pre-text task
especially when fed with high-quality regions.
                                                                                       48                                            43


                                                            COCO detection box (APb)
While SAM regions are superior in accuracy, we still                                             APb


                                                                                                                                          ADE20K segm. (mIoU)
                                                                                                                              mIoU
focus on regions generated by FH (Felzenszwalb &
Huttenlocher, 2004) – a fast and simple clustering
algorithm. Unlike SAM, FH algorithm is fully unsu-                                     47                                            42
pervised and therefore best aligned with the notion
of self-supervised learning – our focus of research.
                                                                                       46                                            41
With FH regions, we show in Tab. 1e the results of                                          60         70      75        80     90
our full pre-training pipeline, R-MAE, by integrat-                                                         mask ratio
ing RAE and MAE. Specifically, we jointly optimize                                      (a) Change region mask ratio only.
masked region autoencoding with pixel reconstruc-
tion from MAE in R-MAE. The asymmetric design                                          48                                            43
                                                            COCO detection box (APb)


that only feeds representation from pixels to regions                                            APb


                                                                                                                                          ADE20K segm. (mIoU)
                                                                                                                              mIoU
(←) achieves the best results compared to joint (↔)
and regions to pixels (→). Thanks to the lightweight                                   47                                            42
length variant of our RAE, the improvement comes
with very minor computational costs: the region                                        46                                            41
branch only adds ∼1% FLOPs to the MAE baseline
(9.8b vs. 9.7b).2                                                                           60         70      75        80     90
Mask ratios. We study mask ratio as the most impor-                                                         mask ratio
tant hyper-parameter from MAE in Figs. 4a and 4b.           (b) Jointly change region and image mask ratio.
Starting from the default value 0.75, we either vary
the region ratio alone, or jointly with the image one.      Figure 4: Masking strategy in R-MAE. Mask
In both cases, we share the random masks whenever           ratio matters – we either change the region mask
possible (among the image and its regions) to mini-         ratio (βR ) alone (above), or jointly change it with
mize the information leak. The results suggest that         the image mask ratio (βR =βI , bottom). In both
a high mask ratio (∼0.75) is still required.                cases, a high mask ratio (∼0.75) is required.

Next, we generalize our finding and show that R-MAE performs well with high-quality regions from
SAM, with more pre-training data, and on the long-tailed object detection task.

   method     APb     APm     mIoU        Table 2: Pre-training on high-quality regions generated by
   MAE        50.1    44.6    45.9        SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). Similar to RAE, R-MAE pre-trained
                                          with SAM regions on COCO images outperforms MAE, showing the
   R-MAE      51.4    45.9    47.1        effectiveness of learning from regions.

Pre-training on high-quality regions. We show in Tab. 1d that RAE alone is an effective task when
provided high-quality regions. Similarly, when integrated with MAE, R-MAE demonstrates the same
behaviour as shown in Tab. 2, improving over the strong baseline from MAE.
More data on COCO. The second generalization is on pre-training data scale – if adding more
data changes our observation. To this end, we add COCO unlabeled2017, and again pre-train
   2
     Technically for R-MAE, computing regions is also an overhead. Yet FH is O(n log (n)) w.r.t. number of
pixels (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004) and pre-computable using cpus. Empirically we find it’s negligible.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              train2017 only           +unlabeled2017           Table 3:     More pre-training data
   method                                                       on COCO with train2017 +
             APb APm mIoU              APb APm mIoU
                                                                unlabeled2017 set.        R-MAE con-
   MAE       50.1 44.6   45.9          51.5 45.9  48.4          tinues to outperform MAE without
   R-MAE     50.6 45.0   46.8          52.1 46.1  48.7          changing any hyper-parameters.


R-MAE with FH regions for 4k epochs following Hu et al. (2022). Results are summarized in Tab. 3.
Without changing any hyper-parameters, R-MAE continues to outperform MAE.

  method     APb    APbrare   APm    APm
                                       rare   Table 4: Comparison on LVIS detection between MAE and
  MAE        37.7   25.4      35.8   25.1     R-MAE with FH regions. We include LVIS-specific metrics
                                              for long-tail recognition (APrare ). The consistent improvement
  R-MAE      38.3   26.7      36.2   26.4     is observed especially for rare objects.
Comparison on LVIS detection. As a generalization of the downstream task, we further report the
evaluation of R-MAE and MAE on the LVIS benchmark (Gupta et al., 2019). This dataset includes
∼2m high-quality instance segmentation labels for 1203 categories that exhibit a natural, long-tailed
object distribution. Unlike COCO, there is a significant imbalance in class distribution with many
rare classes having very few (e.g., <10) training examples. We use the same training recipe as Li
et al. (2022b) for LVIS. We directly evaluate the backbones pre-trained with FH regions on COCO
train2017. The results are presented in Tab. 4, where we observe a similar gain as on COCO
detection. Notably, R-MAE shows a bigger improvement on the rare, or tail classes, suggesting the
priors learned in R-MAE is more decoupled from category labels.
 # ep method       FLOPs APb APm mIoU                  Table 5: State-of-the-art comparison with ImageNet
      SemMAE        4.3×  -    -   46.3                pre-training among MAE variants. FLOPs for each
                                                       method is reported as relative to R-MAE.
  800 MixedAE       2.6× 50.3 43.5 48.7
      R-MAE           1× 51.3 45.7 46.6                    method           APb       APm        mIoU
      MultiMAE      2.5×  -    -   46.2                    supervised       47.9      42.9       47.4
      LoMaR         1.8× 51.4 45.7  -                      MoCo v3          47.9      42.7       47.3
 1600 MixedAE       2.6× 51.5 44.5 49.8                    BEiT             49.8      44.4       47.1
      Long-Seq MAE  4.3× 52.1 46.2  -                      R-MAE            52.3      46.4       47.5
      R-MAE           1× 52.3 46.4 47.5                Table 6: Comparison with other pre-training methods.
State-of-the-art comparison with ImageNet pre-training. In Tab. 5 we summarize our comparison
among latest MAE variants (Hu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022a; Bachmann et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023) on COCO object detection and instance segmentation, along with ADE20K
semantic segmentation. The transferring recipe follows ViTDet (Li et al., 2022b) for COCO object
detection and instance segmentation (i.e., 100 epochs with batch size of 64), and MAE (He et al.,
2022) for ADE20K semantic segmentation (i.e., 100 epochs with batch size of 16). All methods are
pre-trained on ImageNet (Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2022).
R-MAE is the most efficient among all MAE variants in terms of computation in FLOPs. For example,
Long-Seq MAE (Hu et al., 2022) and SemMAE (Li et al., 2022a) are more than 4× as expensive due
to a longer sequence length.
It should also be noted that MultiMAE (Bachmann et al., 2022) employs regions extracted from a
state-of-the-art detector (i.e., Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2021)) and SemMAE (Li et al., 2022a)
utilizes regions generated by a variant of iBot (Zhou et al., 2022). In contrast, R-MAE simply learns
to reconstruct FH regions which can be generated by an efficient clustering algorithm.
Across all the methods compared, R-MAE achieves the best results on object detection and instance
segmentation. For semantic segmentation, it comes as a second, only behind the most recent MixedAE
work (Chen et al., 2023) which is more expensive in compute.
To complete our picture for comparison, we also included results with other types of ImageNet-based
pre-training in Tab. 6. This incudes supervised learning with labels, contrastive learning (Chen et al.,
2021), and masked token prediction (Bao et al., 2022). We outperform on all the benchmarks.
Qualitative results. Fig. 5 shows the region reconstruction of R-MAE pre-trained with FH regions.
R-MAE for interactive segmentation. Since the pre-training task is to complete regions, our
pre-trained R-MAE model can naturally act as ‘interactive segmenter’ (Sofiiuk et al., 2020). In fact,


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Image                    GT region                     Image                     FH region


Figure 5: Qualitative results on COCO val2017 images, using R-MAE pre-trained with unsupervised region
maps (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004), and then applied on either COCO ground-truth regions (left column)
or FH regions used during pre-training (right column). The image group contains 1) the masked image, 2)
the image reconstruction, 3) the original image. The region group has 1) the masked region, 2) the region
reconstruction, 3) the original region, 4) regions in the corresponding image. Besides results, the figure also
gives a sense of the differences between ground-truths and regions used in R-MAE. Surprisingly, the algorithm
pre-trained with FH regions can generalize well to ground-truth ones.

                                                              Figure 6: Interactive segmentation with R-
                                                              MAE. Here we show R-MAE’s region predic-
                                                              tions on COCO val2017 set, given images and
                                                              only masked region maps severing as a proxy to
                                                              a potential user’s input. Going from left to right,
                                                              the user prompts more information. The model
                                                              is pre-trained with a fixed region masking ra-
                                                              tio (75%) but generates high-quality masks even
 image    GT     mask 90%       mask 85%      mask 80%        with significantly higher masking ratio (90%).


if we view the visible foreground/background patches as prompts (Kirillov et al., 2023), then RAE
shares the same task nature as SAM. While our focus is on representation learning, not on generation
quality – which leads to distinctions in design (e.g., efficient decoding of multiple regions with the
length variant), R-MAE can still perform interactive segmentation, which we show next.
Specifically, we ask it to take the image along with some patches-of-interest as its inputs after
pre-training. In an interactive segmentation setting, these patches can be provided by user clicks
or eye gazing. A reasonable model can then predict the object corresponding to the given patches.
From Fig. 6, we can see that the pre-trained model can indeed predict high-quality regions even with
90% of the patches masked, and continue to refine when more hints are supplied (from left to right).

5    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented a simple yet effective approach (R-MAE) to explore an important vision
concept – region in MAE (He et al., 2022). Through quantitative and qualitative results, we showed
R-MAE is indeed more ‘region-aware’, and can consistently help downstream performance on
localization-related tasks (e.g. detection and segmentation).
Limitations. While regions share resemblances to words (e.g., in being discrete), there are other
aspects of words that regions may still lack (e.g., it’s debatable if they provide enough semantics).
Therefore, our work is still a first step towards truly closing the gap to words for large language
models in NLP. Nevertheless, we believe our exploration is valuable towards uncovering the visual
analogue of words in computer vision, and can inspire more future efforts along this direction.
While regions from SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) significantly boost the performance of R-MAE, SAM
itself initializes from MAE, is computationally expensive, and requires large-scale learning with
human in the loop. A possible next step is to nail down the true reason why SAM regions are helpful,
and minimize the complexities in this pipeline.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine Süsstrunk.
  Slic superpixels. Technical report, EPFL, 2010.
Pablo Arbeláez, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Jonathan T Barron, Ferran Marques, and Jitendra Malik. Multiscale
  combinatorial grouping. In CVPR, 2014.
Yuki M Asano, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. A critical analysis of self-supervision, or
  what we can learn from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.13132, 2019.
Roman Bachmann, David Mizrahi, Andrei Atanov, and Amir Zamir. Multimae: Multi-modal
  multi-task masked autoencoders. In ECCV, 2022.
Yutong Bai, Xinlei Chen, Alexander Kirillov, Alan Yuille, and Alexander C. Berg. Point-level region
  contrast for object detection pre-training. In CVPR, 2022.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. BEiT: BERT pre-training of image transformers. In ICLR,
  2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
  Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In ECCV, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Jun Chen, Ming Hu, Boyang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient self-supervised vision pretraining
  with local masked reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00790, 2022a.
Kai Chen, Zhili Liu, Lanqing Hong, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, and Dit-Yan Yeung. Mixed autoencoder
  for self-supervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2023.
Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeff Wu, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, David Luan, and
 Ilya Sutskever. Generative pretraining from pixels. In ICML, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020b.
Xiaokang Chen, Mingyu Ding, Xiaodi Wang, Ying Xin, Shentong Mo, Yunhao Wang, Shumin Han,
  Ping Luo, Gang Zeng, and Jingdong Wang. Context autoencoder for self-supervised representation
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03026, 2022b.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In CVPR, 2021.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Bowen Cheng, Anwesa Choudhuri, Ishan Misra, Alexander Kirillov, Rohit Girdhar, and Alexander G
  Schwing. Mask2former for video instance segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10764, 2021.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, and et al. Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion
 parameters. In ICML, 2023.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, , and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In ACL, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Pedro F Felzenszwalb and Daniel P Huttenlocher. Efficient graph-based image segmentation. IJCV,
  2004.
Wouter Van Gansbeke, Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, and Luc Van Gool. Unsupervised
 semantic segmentation by contrasting object mask proposals. In ICCV, 2021.
Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Lisa Lee, Dale Schuurams, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Multimodal
  masked autoencoders learn transferable representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14204, 2022.
Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In ICCV, 2015.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate
  object detection and semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2014.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. LVIS: A dataset for large vocabulary instance
  segmentation. In CVPR, 2019.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In ICCV, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022.
Ronghang Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Saining Xie, and Xinlei Chen. Exploring long-sequence masked
  autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07224, 2022.
Olivier J. Hénaff, Skanda Koppula, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and
  João Carreira. Efficient visual pretraining with contrastive detection. In ICCV, 2021.
Olivier J. Hénaff, Skanda Koppula, Evan Shelhamer, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Jaegle, Andrew Zisser-
  man, João Carreira, and Relja Arandjelović. Object discovery and representation networks. In
  ECCV, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. In ICCV, 2023.
Kurt Koffka. Principles of Gestalt psychology. Routledge, 2013.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. CACM, 2017.
Gang Li, Heliang Zheng, Daqing Liu, Chaoyue Wang, Bing Su, and Changwen Zheng. Semmae:
  Semantic-guided masking for learning masked autoencoders. In NeurIPS, 2022a.
Yanghao Li, Saining Xie, Xinlei Chen, Piotr Dollár, Kaiming He, and Ross Girshick. Benchmarking
  detection transfer learning with vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11429, 2021.
Yanghao Li, Hanzi Mao, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Exploring plain vision transformer
  backbones for object detection. In ECCV, 2022b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, Lubomir D. Bourdev, Ross B. Girshick, James
  Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO:
  common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Duy-Kien Nguyen, Jihong Ju, Olaf Booij, Martin R Oswald, and Cees GM Snoek. Boxer: Box-
  attention for 2d and 3d transformers. In CVPR, 2022.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing, 2008.
Deepak Pathak, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Trevor Darrell, and Bharath Hariharan. Learning features
  by watching objects move. In CVPR, 2017.
Zhiliang Peng, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Qixiang Ye, and Furu Wei. Beit v2: Masked image modeling
  with vector-quantized visual tokenizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06366, 2022.
Pedro O. Pinheiro, Amjad Almahairi, Ryan Y. Benmalek, Florian Golemo, and Aaron Courville.
  Unsupervised learning of dense visual representations. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pretraining. OpenAI preprint, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI preprint, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Byungseok Roh, Wuhyun Shin, Ildoo Kim, and Sungwoong Kim. Spatilly consistent representation
  learning. In CVPR, 2021.
Amanpreet Singh, Ronghang Hu, Vedanuj Goswami, Guillaume Couairon, Wojciech Galuba, Marcus
 Rohrbach, and Douwe Kiela. Flava: A foundational language and vision alignment model. In
 CVPR, 2022.
Konstantin Sofiiuk, Ilia Petrov, Olga Barinova, and Anton Konushin. f-brs: Rethinking backpropagat-
  ing refinement for interactive segmentation. In CVPR, 2020.
Jasper RR Uijlings, Koen EA Van De Sande, Theo Gevers, and Arnold WM Smeulders. Selective
  search for object recognition. IJCV, 2013.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and
  composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In ICML, 2008.
Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning for
  self-supervised visual pre-training. In CVPR, 2021.
Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer.
  Masked feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training. In CVPR, 2022.
Fangyun Wei, Yue Gao, Zhirong Wu, Han Hu, and Stephen Lin. Aligning pretraining for detection
  via object-level contrastive learning. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Sanghyun Woo, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, In So Kweon, and
  Saining Xie. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. In
  CVPR, 2023.
Tete Xiao, Colorado J Reed, Xiaolong Wang, Kurt Keutzer, and Trevor Darrell. Region similarity
  representation learning. In ICCV, 2021.
Enze Xie, Jian Ding, Wenhai Wang, Xiaohang Zhan, Hang Xu, Peize Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Ping Luo.
  Detco: Unsupervised contrastive learning for object detection. In ICCV, 2021a.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Enze Xie, Jian Ding, Wenhai Wang, Xiaohang Zhan, Hang Xu, Peize Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Ping Luo.
  Unsupervised object-level representation learning from scene images. In NeurIPS, 2021b.
Zhenda Xie, Yutong Lin, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Propagate yourself:
  Exploring pixel-level consistency for unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2021c.
Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Jianmin Bao, Zhuliang Yao, Qi Dai, and Han Hu.
  Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling. In CVPR, 2022.
Ceyuan Yang, Zhirong Wu, Bolei Zhou, and Stephen Lin. Instance localization for self-supervised
  detection pretraining. In CVPR, 2021.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In CVPR, 2022.
Xiao Zhang and Michael Maire. Self-supervised visual representation learning from hierarchical
  grouping. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba.
  Semantic understanding of scenes through the ade20k dataset. IJCV, 2019.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. ibot:
   Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. In ICLR, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF R-MAE
Masking strategy. Different from Li et al. (2022a) which deploys a biased sampling strategy using
semantic parts, we aim to verify the effectiveness of R-MAE without changing the distribution of
masked images. Therefore, during the pre-training stage, we simply follow the random uniform
masking strategy as used in MAE (He et al., 2022). To ensure the task on the region side is meaningful,
we first sample the mask applied to the image, then sample from region maps that have at least one
visible foreground patch.
To best describe our implemented model for masked region autoencoding (RAE) and the final R-MAE
framework, we resort to a more mathematical formulation of the problem and our solutions below.
Basic notations. We denote R ∈ RH×W ×k as the region maps corresponding to the input image,
where k is the number of regions, and H, W are the dimensions of the input. Our model first patchifies
R, and then masks R with a ratio of βR . The patch size p used in the regions is the same as the input
image. The full sequence length is denoted by N = H       W
                                                      p · p .

RAE channel variant. Here, we merge k region maps in the channel dimension, resulting in an input
sequence of visible patches vR ∈ RN ·(1−βR )×(k·p·p) . This can be seen as converting region maps
R ∈ RH×W ×k into an image of k channels. The region encoder takes vR as its input to generate
region embeddings:
                                  vrenc = R−Encoder(vR ),                                      (1)
where vrenc ∈RN ·(1−βR )×pE is the region encoder’s output.
We then add image features from the pixel encoder to the region embeddings from the region encoder.
The augmented visual features are passed into the region decoder in order to make predictions for
masked region patches:
                               ′

                              vrenc = MaskFill f (vrenc ), [mask] ,                            (2)
                                                     ′       ′

                              vrdec = R−Decoder vrenc + vpenc ,                                (3)
        ′
where vrenc ∈ RN ×pD is the region embeddings filled with the [mask] token and vrdec ∈ RN ×pD is
the output of the region decoder.
By treating R as an image of k channels, the channel variant demonstrates great efficiency during the
pre-training process. This variant, however, fails to deal with the permutation equivariance between k
regions – the shuffling of the outputs is not guaranteed given shuffled inputs.
RAE batch variant. The RAE batch variant processes each region independently in the batch
dimension. Note that the image features are shared among all k different regions.
Given R={Ri }ki=1 , Ri ∈ RH×W , our region encoder projects each visible patch of Ri into a region
embedding:
                                 vrenci = R−Encoder(vRi ),                                      (4)
where vRi ∈ RN ·(1−βR )×(p·p) are visible patches of Ri , and vrenci ∈ RN ·(1−βR )×pE is the output of
the region encoder.
                                            ′           ′
We then take the sum of the image features vpenc and vrenc i
                                                             , and feed it to the region decoder for
prediction:
                             ′

                            vrenci
                                   = MaskFill f (vrenci ), [mask] ,                              (5)
                                                   ′          ′

                            vrdeci = R−Decoder vrenci + vpenc ,                                  (6)
        ′
where vpenc   ∈ RN ×pD is the image features from the pixel encoder filled with [mask] token.
            ′
Similarly, vrenci ∈ RN ×pD is region embeddings filled with the [mask] token. Here, f : pE → pD
denotes the linear projection and vrdeci ∈ RN ×pD is the region decoder output which is then used to
predict masked patches of Ri .
While preserving the permutation equivariance3 of k region maps, the RAE batch variant can be
computationally expensive and resource-intensive (i.e., the total number of FLOPs increases linearly
w.r.t. k).
    3
        If one permutes the order for the k input regions, the output will be shuffled in the exactly same order.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Query        MoCo v3        MAE         R-MAE          Query           MoCo v3    MAE          R-MAE


Figure 7: Additional visualizations of attention maps on COCO val2017. In each group from left to right
we show the original image with the selected query (denoted by red square); three attention maps corresponding
to the query generated from i) MoCo v3 (Chen et al., 2021); ii) MAE (He et al., 2022); and iii) R-MAE; all
pre-trained on COCO train2017. Darker red colors in the attention map have larger attention weights.


RAE length variant. Inspired by the design of object queries in the DETR decoder (Carion et al.,
2020), the RAE length variant encodes each region map into a single vector using region encoder.
The region queries will be concatenated along the sequence length dimension as follows:

                              vrenci = AvgPool R−Encoder(vRi ) ,                            (7)
                                  vemb = Concat(vrenc1 , ..., vrenck ),                                   (8)

where vRi ∈ RN ·(1−βR )×(p·p) are visible patches of Ri , vrenci ∈ RpE is the region embedding of i-th
region, vemb ∈ Rk×pE denotes the region queries, and AvgPool is the average pooling operation.
Different from the pixel decoder, the region decoder contains three sub-layers in each block: self-
attention, cross-attention, and feed-forward (Vaswani et al., 2017). In addition, we use a Neck module
to provide cross-attention with information from pixels as context. The blocks in Neck share the
same design as the ones in the pixel decoder:
                                                           ′
                                          vcontext = Neck(vpenc ),                                        (9)
       ′
where vpenc is the image features filled with [mask] tokens and vcontext ∈ RN ×pD is the output of
Neck. The region decoder then decodes region queries with context information:
                                 vquery = R−Decoder(f (vemb ), vcontext ),                               (10)
where vquery ∈ Rk×pD is the output of the query decoder. Since masked region autoencoding predicts
R ∈ Rk×H×W during the pre-training, we modify the cross-attention sub-layer of the last region
decoder layer to expand each region embedding in vquery into a region map as follow (see Fig. 2):

                                   vrdec = W ⊤ vcontext + vquery [:, None],                              (11)

where W ∈ RpD ×pD is a learnable weight, vquery [:, None] ∈ Rk×1×pD 4 , and vrdec ∈ Rk×N ×pD . The
expansion in our cross-attention sub-layer can be viewed as the attention operation on each feature
vector of vcontext (i.e., the attention score of a single feature over itself is equal to 1). A 3-layer MLP


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Image                    GT region                      Image                  FH region


Figure 8: Additional qualitative results on COCO val2017 using R-MAE pre-trained with unsupervised
region maps (Felzenszwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004), and then applied on either COCO ground-truth regions (left
column) or FH regions used during pre-training (right column). The image group contains 1) the masked image,
2) the image reconstruction, 3) the original image. The region group has 1) the masked region, 2) the region
reconstruction, 3) the original region, 4) regions in the corresponding image.


projection, g : RpD → Rp·p , is then applied onto vrdec with a binary cross entropy loss to reconstruct
R.
                     ′                                                                          ′
Cross-feeding. Let vpenc  denotes the output of the pixel encoder filled with [mask] token and vrenc
denotes the output of the region encoder filled with [mask] token before the pooling function. We
examine three different cross-feeding styles between regions and pixels: RAE → MAE (region-to-
pixel), RAE ← MAE (pixel-to-region), and RAE ↔ MAE (bidirectional). The default design in
R-MAE follows RAE ← MAE (e.g. see Fig. 1), and we detail the other two below.
In RAE → MAE (region-to-pixel), we add region features to the pixel features and feed it as the input
to the pixel decoder in order to regress the masked image patches:
                           ′

                          vrenc i
                                  = MaskFill h(vrenci ), [mask] ,                                (12)
                                 ′              ′             ′
                                vrenc = Concat(vrenc  , ..., vrenc   ),                                   (13)
                                                    1              k

                                                        ′                ′
                                vpdec = P−Decoder vpenc       + AvgPool vrenc    ,                        (14)
                                             ′
where dD is the dimension of pixel decoder, vrenci
                                                   ∈ RN ×dD is the output of the region encoder filled
with [mask] token for i-th region, and h : pE →dD is a linear projection layer.
RAE ↔ MAE (bidirectional) feed in both directions.

B        M ORE C OMPARISONS OF OUR MAE VS . R-MAE

                           pre-train             COCO           COCO++          ImageNet
                         learning rate        APb   APm        APb  APm        APb   APm
                         MAE w/ 1.5e-4        49.9  44.4       51.6 45.7       51.6  45.9
                         MAE w/ 1e-4          50.1  44.6       51.5 45.9       51.8  46.1

Table 7: MAE with different base learning rates. For ImageNet w/ 1.5e-4, we directly cite the results from
ViTDet (Li et al., 2022b), while others are from our own experiments. Our default setting (w/ 1e-4), chosen due
to better stability, can reproduce all MAE results.

MAE baselines. We first show the comparison of MAE with different base learning rates: 1.5e-
4 in (He et al., 2022) and 1e-4 in our study. Here, models are pre-trained either on ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) with 1600 epochs, or on COCO (train2017)/COCO++ (train2017 +
    4
        [:, None] indicates the dimension expansion of vquery , as in numpy.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


unlabeled2017) with 4k epochs. All other settings are set as default. Tab. 7 shows that MAE
with 1e-4 rate is able to reproduce ViTDet (Li et al., 2022b). The only reason for this change is
better pre-training stability which allows us to incorporate additional loss from the masked region
autoencoding. Our R-MAE shows further improvements beyond Tab. 7.

                     pre-train settings            region       FLOPs     APb    APm       mIoU
                     MAE                              -          9.7b     50.1   44.6      45.9
                     RAE, default                                4.7b     47.2   41.8      42.1
                                                      FH
                     RAE, pD =256                                4.8b     47.6   42.2      42.9
                     RAE, pD =256                                4.8b     49.9   44.2      46.0
                                                    SAM
                     RAE, pD =256, βI =βR =.6                    7.3b     50.6   45.1      46.8

Table 8: Exploring better regions from SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to validate RAE. We simply swap FH
regions with off-the-shelf SAM ones, and with a larger decoder and changes in mask ratios, we find RAE alone
can achieve better results with less compute.

Better regions. To further validate the design of masked region autoencoding (RAE), we explore
better regions generated by an off-the-shelf segmentation model from SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to
replace FH. With a larger region decoder and mask ratio 60%, RAE alone can achieve better results
than MAE with less compute in FLOPs as shown in Tab. 8. Interestingly, we find that RAE with
high-quality regions from SAM benefits from a masking ratio of 60%. We hypothesize that SAM
regions contain highly semantic information that is of less redundancy and therefore require a lower
masking ratio (i.e., the masked language modeling only predicts a few missing words ∼15%).

                                          ViT-Base                             ViT-Large
               pre-train
                             APb      APm     mIoU      FLOPs      APb      APm    mIoU        FLOPs
               MAE           51.8     46.1     47.9      9.7b      55.6     49.3    52.3        20.6b
               R-MAE         52.3     46.4     47.5      9.8b      55.8     49.7    52.5        20.7b

Table 9: Larger backbones pre-trained on ImageNet. Here, R-MAE is pre-trained to reconstruct FH regions.
The gains from R-MAE can hold despite less relative computation overheads of only 0.5%.

Larger backbones. Tab. 9 shows the scaling trend of model size when pre-trained on ImageNet. Over-
all, the gains can hold at ViT-L (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), despite even more negligible computational
overheads of only 0.5% with larger backbones.

                      fine-tune               linear-eval           Table 10: ImageNet classification as down-
   pre-train                                                        stream task for MAE and R-MAE. The repre-
                  Acc@1      Acc@5         Acc@1      Acc@5
                                                                    sentation from R-MAE is more locally focused
   MAE             83.6       96.6          68.0       87.3         and less fit for linear-eval, but fine-tuning fixes
   R-MAE           83.6       96.6          60.6       82.4         the gap.

ImageNet classification. To give a more complete assessment, we also evaluate our pre-trained
models on ImageNet classification. To be consistent with MAE (He et al., 2022), we pre-train the
ViT with R-MAE on ImageNet for 1600 epochs. It can be seen from Tab. 10 that our R-MAE
achieves the same performance with MAE when being fine-tuned end-to-end. Interestingly, the linear
probing performance of R-MAE lags behind MAE by a large margin. This observation indicates that
our R-MAE is more focused on local patterns rather than global average features suited for image
classification.
   pre-train      accuracy          Table 11: Fine-grained classification using Flower dataset (Nilsback & Zisser-
   MAE              95.8            man, 2008) as downstream task for MAE and R-MAE. The representation from
                                    R-MAE is better on capturing fine-grained details.
   R-MAE            96.2

Fine-grained classification. As the representation of R-MAE is more locally focused, we eval-
uate both models pre-trained with R-MAE and MAE on fine-grained classification using Flower
dataset Nilsback & Zisserman (2008). Both models are pre-trained on ImageNet for 1600 epochs.
Tab. 11 shows that R-MAE outperforms MAE in this task which again confirms the effectiveness of
R-MAE in learning local representation.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATIONS
We provide extra qualitative results of our pre-trained models in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.

D     A SSET L ICENSES
    Dataset                                           License
    ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)                      https://image-net.org/download.php
    COCO (Lin et al., 2014)                           Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
    ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2019)                        Creative Commons BSD-3 License Agreement
    LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019)                         Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
    Oxford 102 Flower (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008)    MIT License


                                                     18
