Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A NT GPT: C AN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS H ELP
L ONG - TERM ACTION A NTICIPATION FROM V IDEOS ?
 Qi Zhao∗                    Shijie Wang∗                 Ce Zhang                   Changcheng Fu
 Brown University            Brown University             Brown University           Brown University

 Minh Quan Do           Nakul Agarwal                   Kwonjoon Lee                Chen Sun
 Brown University       Honda Research Institute        Honda Research Institute    Brown University



                                             A BSTRACT
         Can we better anticipate an actor’s future actions (e.g. mix eggs) by knowing what
         commonly happens after the current action (e.g. crack eggs)? What if the actor also
         shares the goal (e.g. make fried rice) with us? The long-term action anticipation
         (LTA) task aims to predict an actor’s future behavior from video observations in the
         form of verb and noun sequences, and it is crucial for human-machine interaction.
         We propose to formulate the LTA task from two perspectives: a bottom-up approach
         that predicts the next actions autoregressively by modeling temporal dynamics;
         and a top-down approach that infers the goal of the actor and plans the needed
         procedure to accomplish the goal. We hypothesize that large language models
         (LLMs), which have been pretrained on procedure text data (e.g. recipes, how-tos),
         have the potential to help LTA from both perspectives. It can help provide the
         prior knowledge on the possible next actions, and infer the goal given the observed
         part of a procedure, respectively. We propose AntGPT, which represents video
         observations as sequences of human actions, and uses the action representation for
         an LLM to infer the goals and model temporal dynamics. AntGPT achieves state-
         of-the-art performance on Ego4D LTA v1 and v2, EPIC-Kitchens-55, as well as
         EGTEA GAZE+, thanks to LLMs’ goal inference and temporal dynamics modeling
         capabilities. We further demonstrate that these capabilities can be effectively
         distilled into a compact neural network 1.3% of the original LLM model size. Code
         and model are available at brown-palm.github.io/AntGPT.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Our work addresses the long-term action anticipation (LTA) task from video observations. Its desired
outputs are sequences of verb and noun predictions over a typically long-term time horizon for an
actor of interest. LTA is a crucial component for human-machine interaction. A machine agent could
leverage LTA to assist humans in scenarios such as daily household tasks (Nagarajan et al., 2020)
and autonomous driving (Gao et al., 2020). The LTA task is challenging due to noisy perception (e.g.
action recognition), and the inherent ambiguity and uncertainty that reside in human behaviors.
A common approach for LTA is bottom-up, which directly models the temporal dynamics of human
behavior either in terms of the discrete action labels (Sun et al., 2019b), or the latent visual represen-
tations (Vondrick et al., 2016). Meanwhile, human behaviors, especially in daily household scenarios,
are often “purposive” (Kruglanski & Szumowska, 2020), and knowing an actor’s longer-term goal
can potentially help action anticipation (Tran et al., 2021). As such, we consider an alternative
top-down framework: It first explicitly infers the longer-term goal of the human actor, and then plans
the procedure needed to accomplish the goal. However, the goal information is often left unlabeled
and thus latent in existing LTA benchmarks, making it infeasible to directly apply goal-conditioned
procedure planning for action anticipation.
Our paper seeks to address these challenges in modeling long-term temporal dynamics of human
behaviors. Our research is inspired by prior work on the mental representations of tasks as action
grammars (Payne & Green, 1986; Pastra & Aloimonos, 2012) in cognitive science, and by large
language models’ (LLMs) empirical success on procedure planning (Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al.,


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2023). We hypothesize that the LLMs, which use procedure text data during pretraining, encode
useful prior knowledge for the long-term action anticipation task. Ideally, the prior knowledge can
help both bottom-up and top-down LTA approaches, as they can not only answer questions such as
“what are the most likely actions following this current action?”, but also “what is the actor trying to
achieve, and what are the remaining steps to achieve the goal?”
Concretely, our paper strives to answer four research questions on modeling human behaviors for
long-term action anticipation: (1) Does top-down (i.e. goal-conditioned) LTA outperform the bottom-
up approach? (2) Can LLMs infer the goals useful for top-down LTA, with minimal additional
supervision? (3) Do LLMs capture prior knowledge useful for modeling the temporal dynamics of
human actions? If so, what would be a good interface between the videos and an LLM? And (4) Can
we condense LLMs’ prior knowledge into a compact neural network for efficient inference?
To perform quantitative and qualitative evaluations necessary to answer these questions, we pro-
pose AntGPT, which constructs an action-based video representation, and leverages an LLM to
perform goal inference and model the temporal dynamics. We conduct experiments on multiple LTA
benchmarks, including Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022), EPIC-Kitchens-55 (Damen et al., 2020), and
EGTEA GAZE+ (Li et al., 2018). Our evaluations reveal the following observations: First, we find
that our video representation, based on sequences of noisy action labels from action recognition
algorithms, serves as an effective interface for an LLM to infer longer-term goals, both qualitatively
from visualization, and quantitatively as the goals enable a top-down LTA pipeline to outperform its
bottom-up counterpart. The goal inference is achieved via in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020),
which requires few human-provided examples of action sequence and goal pairs. Second, we observe
that the same video representation allows effective temporal dynamics modeling with an LLM, by
formulating LTA as (action) sequence completion. Interestingly, we observe that the LLM-based tem-
poral dynamics model appears to perform implicit goal-conditioned LTA, and achieves competitive
performance without relying on explicitly inferred goals. These observations enable us to answer
the final research question by distilling the bottom-up LLM to a compact student model 1.3% of the
original model size, while achieving similar or even better LTA performance.
To summarize, our paper makes the following contributions:
1. We propose to investigate if large language models encode useful prior knowledge on modeling the
temporal dynamics of human behaviors, in the context of bottom-up and top-down action anticipation.
2. We propose the AntGPT framework, which naturally bridges the LLMs with computer vision
algorithms for video understanding, and achieves state-of-the-art long-term action anticipation
performance on the Ego4D LTA v1 and v2 benchmarks, EPIC-Kitchens-55, and EGTEA GAZE+.
3. We perform thorough experiments with two LLM variants and demonstrate that LLMs are indeed
helpful for both goal inference and temporal dynamics modeling. We further demonstrate that the
useful prior knowledge encoded by LLMs can be distilled into a very compact neural network (1.3%
of the original LLM model size), which enables efficient inference.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Action anticipation can be mainly categorized into next action prediction (NAP) (Damen et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2018) and long-term anticipation (LTA) (Grauman et al., 2022). Our work focuses on the LTA
task, where modeling the (latent) goals of the actors is intuitively helpful. Most prior works on action
anticipation aim at modeling the temporal dynamics directly from visual cues, such as by utilizing
hierarchical representations (Lan et al., 2014), modeling the temporal dynamics of discrete action
labels (Sun et al., 2019b), predicting future latent representations (Vondrick et al., 2016; Gammulle
et al., 2019b), or jointly predicting future labels and features (Girdhar & Grauman, 2021; Girase et al.,
2023). As the duration of each action is unknown, some prior work proposed to discover object state
changes (Epstein et al., 2021; Souček et al., 2022) as a proxy task for action anticipation. The temporal
dynamics of labels or latent representations are modeled by neural networks, and are often jointly
trained with the visual observation encoder in an end-to-end fashion. To predict longer sequences
into the future for LTA, existing work either build autoregressive generative models (Abu Farha et al.,
2018; Gammulle et al., 2019a; Sener et al., 2020; Farha et al., 2020) or use timestep as a conditional
parameter and predict in one shot based on provided timestep (Ke et al., 2019). We consider these
approaches as bottom-up as they model the shorter-term temporal transitions of human activities.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Visual procedure planning is closely related to long-term action anticipation, but assumes that both
source state and the goal state are explicitly specified. For example, Chang et al. (2020) proposed
to learn both forward and conjugate dynamics models in the latent space, and plans the actions to
take accordingly. Procedure planning algorithms can be trained and evaluated with video observa-
tions (Chang et al., 2020; Bi et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Narasimhan et al., 2023;
Bansal et al., 2022), they can also be applied to visual navigation and object manipulation (Driess
et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023). Unlike procedure planning, our top-down LTA approach
does not assume access to the goal information. Our explicit inference of the high-level goals (with
LLMs) also differs from prior attempts to model the goal as a latent variable, which is optimized via
weakly-supervised learning (Roy & Fernando, 2022; Mascaro et al.).
Multimodal learning, such as joint vision and language modeling, have also been applied to the
action anticipation tasks. One approach is to treat the action labels as the language modality, and to
distill the text-derived knowledge into vision-based models. For example, Camporese et al. (2021)
models label semantics with hand-engineered label prior based on statistics information from the
training action labels. Ghosh et al. (2023) trains a teacher model with text input from the training set
and distills the text-derived knowledge to a vision-based student model. Sener & Yao (2019) transfers
knowledge from a text-to-text encoder-decoder by projecting vision and language representations
in a shared space. Compared to these prior work, our focus is on investigating the benefits of large
language models for modeling the temporal dynamics of human activities.
3     M ETHOD
We introduce our proposed AntGPT framework for LTA. An overview is shown in Figure 1.

3.1   L ONG - TERM ACTION A NTICIPATION

The long-term action anticipation (LTA) task requires predicting a sequence of Z actions in a long
future time horizon based on a video observation. In the LTA task, a long video V is split into
an ordered set of N annotated short segments {S j , aj }N                 j
                                                             j=1 , where S denotes the j-th segment in
video V and a denotes the corresponding action label in the form of noun-verb pair (nj , v j ). The
                 j

video is also specified with a stop time T , which is represented as the index of the last observed
segment. In this way, a video is split into the observed segments Vo and the future segments of the
video Vf whose labels {â(T +1) , ..., â(T +Z) } are to be predicted. A hyper-parameter Nseg controls
how many segments the model can observe. Concretely, we take the observable video segments
{S j }Tj=T −Nseg +1 from Vo as input and output action sequence {â(T +1) , ..., â(T +Z) } as predictions.
Alternatively, Ego-Topo (Nagarajan et al., 2020) takes a simplified approach, which only requires
predicting the set of future actions, but not their ordering.
Bottom-up and Top-down LTA. We categorize action anticipation models into bottom-up and top-
down. The bottom-up approach directly models the temporal dynamics from the history observations
and predicts future actions autoregressively or in parallel. The top-down framework first explicitly
infers the longer-term goal from the history actions, then plans the procedure according to both history
and the goal. We define the prediction procedure of bottom-up model Fbu as {â(T +1) , ..., â(T +Z) } =
Fbu (Vo ). Here aj denotes the j-th video segment’s action label, and T is the index of the last observed
segment. For the top-down model Ftd , we formulate the prediction procedure into two steps: First,
infer the goal by g = Gtd (Vo ), then perform goal-conditioned planning as {â(T +1) , ..., â(T +Z) } =
Ftd (Vo , g), where g corresponds to the long-term goal inferred by the top-down model.

3.2   V IDEO R EPRESENTATION

To understand the benefits of LLMs for video-based LTA, an important design choice is the inter-
face (Zeng et al., 2022; Surís et al., 2023) between visual inputs and the language model. We are
interested in investigating how to represent long-form videos in a compact, text-only bottleneck,
while being helpful for goal inference and procedure planning with LLMs. The video data often
contains complex and dynamic scenarios, with multiple characters, actions, and interactions occurring
over an extended period. While such rich information can be potentially captured by (pretrained)
visual embeddings or even “video tokens” (Sun et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2022), it remains unclear
what visual representation would be sufficient to compress the long observed video context, while
being friendly to the LLMs.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                      [ sharpen knife, cut onion, remove onion,
                                                       wash potato,..., put potato, fry potato
                                                                                                       peel potato, cut potato, remove potato ]                               "cook with potato"



      open faucet,..., wash meat, cut meat
                                                                 Temporal Model
                                                                                                                                                                        Large Language Model
                                                                                                         Action Recognition Model
                                                                              Cook with
                                                                               potato

             Temporal Model
                                                                  Goal Geneator
                                                                                                                                                               D1: open lid, .., press dough => baking cake
                                                                                                                                                               D2: move soil, ..., put soil => planting tree
                                                                                                                                                               D3: sand wood, .., hold wood => woodworking
                                                                                                                                                               Q: sharpen knife, ..., remove potato =>
                Bottom-up LTA                                            Top-down LTA
                                                                                                                                                                              Goal Prompts
                                 Video Observation                                                              Visual Observations

                                 (a) Overview of LTA Paradigms                                            (b) Actions as Video Representations                        (c) Few-shot Goal Generation with LLM



                                                                                                                                                "open faucet, wash onion, wash potato, ...,
                                                Teacher LLM                                                                                          open bag, wash meat, cut meat"


                                                                                                                                                       Large Language Model
                                                     Distillation Loss


                                                                                                                                      D1: open lid, .., press dough => pour flour, ..., squeeze dough
        "sharpen knife, ... ,                                                              Language Modeling Loss
          remove potato"
                                                     Student                                                                          D2: move soil, ..., put soil => take soil, ..., pack soil
                                                                                                                                      D3: sand wood, .., hold wood => hold sander, ..., sand wood
                                                                                                                                      Q: sharpen knife, ..., remove potato =>
          Input sequence
                                                                                                                                                          In-context-learning Prompts
                                             (d) Knowledge Distillation of LLM                                                                       (e) Few-shot LTA: In-context-learning



Figure 1: Illustration of AntGPT. (a) Overview of LTA pradigms. The bottom-up approach
predicts future actions directly based on observed human activities, while the top-down approach is
guided by high-level goals inferred from observations (hence allows procedure planning). (b) Actions
as video representations. A pre-trained action recognition model E takes visual observations Vo as
inputs and generates action labels, which can be noisy (shown in red). (c) Goal inferred by an LLM.
We provide few human-provided examples of action sequences and the expected high-level goals,
and leverage an LLM π to infer the goal via in-context learning. (d) Knowledge Distillation. We
distill a frozen LLM πt into a compact student model πs at sequence level. (e) Few-shot LTA by
in-context learning (ICL), where the ICL prompts can be either bottom-up or top-down.

We first consider the standard approach to represent video frames as distributed embedding representa-
tions, computed with pre-trained vision backbone models, such as the CLIP visual encoder (Radford
et al., 2021). For each video segment S j in Vo , the backbone extracts the representations of n
uniformly sampled frames from this segment to obtain E j = {e1 , e2 , . . . , en }. A neural network
can then take the embedding representation and predict action labels for the observed frames (action
recognition), or the future timesteps (action anticipation).
Our action recognition network E is implemented as a Transformer encoder. It takes in the visual
embeddings and one learnable query token as the input. We then apply two separate MLP heads to
decode the verb and noun from the encoded query token. For each observed video segment S j , the
recognition model E takes in randomly sampled image features Esj = {ea , eb , . . . , ek }, Esj ⊆ E j ,
and outputs the corresponding action â(j) for S j . This process is repeated for every labeled segment
in Vo , which results in Nseg actions {â(T −Nseg ) , ..., â(T ) }, in the format of noun-verb pairs. The
recognition model E is trained on the training set to minimize the Cross Entropy Loss between the
predictions and the ground-truth action labels.
How to Represent Videos for the LLMs? We consider a simple approach to extract video representa-
tions for a large language model. We first compute the embedding representation of Vo , and then apply
the action recognition model E to convert the distributed representation into discrete action labels,
which can be directly consumed by an off-the-shelf LLM. Despite its simplicity, we observe that this
representation is strong enough for the LLM to extract meaningful high-level goals for top-down LTA
(see Section 3.3), and can even be applied directly to perform both bottom-up and top-down LTA
with the LLMs. Alternative approaches, such as discretizing the videos via video captioning or object
detection, or projecting the visual embedding via parameter-efficient fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2021;
Merullo et al., 2023), can also be applied under our framework.


3.3   A NT GPT: L ONG - TERM ACTION A NTICIPATION WITH LLM S

We now describe AntGPT (Action Anticipation GPT), a framework that incorporates LLMs for the
LTA task. An LLM serves both as an few-shot high-level goal predictor via in-context learning, and
also as a temporal dynamics model which predicts the future actions conditioned on the observed
actions. It hence benefits top-down and bottom-up LTA, in full-shot and few-shot scenarios.


                                                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Few-shot Goal Inference. In order to perform top-down long-term action anticipation, we conduct
in-context learning on LLMs to infer the goals by taking the recognized action labels as inputs, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (b) and (c). The ICL prompts qgoal is formulated with examples in the format
of "<observed actions> => <goal>" and the final query in the format of "<observed
actions> =>". The observed actions for the in-context examples are based on ground-truth
annotations, and the observed actions in the final query are generated by recognition models. Since no
ground truth goals are available, we either use the video metadata as pseudo goals when it is available,
or design the goals manually. Figure 2 shows several examples for in-context goal inference with the
LLM. We treat the raw output of the LLM Tgoal = π(qgoal ) as the high-level goal.
Bottom-up and Top-down LTA. We now describe a unified framework to perform bottom-up and
top-down LTA. The framework largely resembles the action recognition network E which takes
visual embeddings as inputs, but has a few important distinctions. Let’s first consider the bottom-up
model B. Its transformer encoder takes sub-sampled visual embeddings Esj from each segment S j of
Vo . The embeddings from different segments are concatenated together along the time axis to form
the input tokens to the transformer encoder. To perform action anticipation, we append additional
learnable query tokens to the input sequence of the Transformer encoder, each of which corresponds
to a future step to predict. Each encoded query token is decoded into verb and noun predictions with
two separate MLP heads. We minimize the Cross Entropy Loss for all future actions to be predicted
with equal weights. Note that one can choose to use either bidirectional or causal attention masks for
the query tokens, resulting in parallel or autoregressive action prediction. We observe that this design
choice has marginal impact on performance, and use parallel decoding unless otherwise mentioned.
Thanks to few-shot goal inference with in-context learning, implementing the top-down model Ftd is
straightforward: We first embed the inferred goals Tgoal with a pre-trained CLIP text encoder. The goal
token is then prepended at the beginning of the visual embedding tokens to perform goal-conditioned
action anticipation. During training, we use ground-truth action labels to infer the goals via in-context
learning. During evaluation, we use the recognized action labels to infer the goals.
Modeling Temporal Dynamics with LLMs. We further investigate if LLMs are able to model
temporal dynamics via recognized action labels and perform action anticipation via autoregressive
sequence completion. We first study the fully supervised scenario, where we perform parameter-
efficient (optionally) fine-tuning on LLMs on the training set of an LTA benchmark. Both the input
prompt and the target sequence are constructed by concatenating the action labels separated with
commas. During training, the input sequences are formed either via teacher forcing (ground truth
actions), or the (noisy) recognized actions. The LLM is optimized with the standard sequence
completion objective. During inference, we use the action recognition model E to form input prompts
from the recognized action labels. We perform postprocessing to convert the output sequence into
action labels. Details of the postprocessing can be found in Section C.1. To perform top-down LTA,
we simply prepend an inferred goal at the beginning of each input prompt. The goals are again
inferred from ground-truth actions during training, and recognized actions during evaluation.
Knowledge Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) is applied to understand if the knowledge encoded
by LLMs about temporal dynamics can be condensed into a much more compact neural network
for efficient inference. For sequence models such as LLMs, the distillation loss is calculated as the
sum of per-token losses between the encoded feature (e.g. logits) sequences by the teacher and the
student. Formally, during distillation, given the input sequence x of length N , a well-trained LLM
as the teacher model πt , the student model πs is optimized to minimize the language modeling loss
                                  PN            (i)   (i)
Llm and distillation loss Ldist = i=1 DKL (ŷt ||ŷs ), where ŷt = πt (x) and ŷs = πs (x) are the
feature sequence encoded by πt and πs respectively, i is the token index of the target sequence, and
DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the teacher and student distribution. The teacher
model πt is frozen during training. An illustration is shown in Figure 1 (d).
Few-shot Learning with LLMs. Beyond fine-tuning, we are also interested in understanding
if LLM’s in-context learning capability generalizes to the LTA task. Compared with fine-tuning
model with the whole training set, in-context learning avoids updating the weights of a pre-trained
LLM. As illustrated in Figure 1 (e), an ICL prompt consists of three parts: First, an instruction
that specifies the anticipating action task, the output format, and the verb and noun vocabulary.
Second, the in-context examples randomly sampled from the training set. They are in the format of
"<observed actions> => <future actions>" with ground-truth actions. Finally, the
query in the format "<observed actions> => " with recognized actions. An example of


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Recognized Actions                            (a) Helpful Goal                          Future Actions

                                                                      Goal: Paint door and
                                                                      wood with paintbrush



           put stick     ...   paint door     ... paint paintbrush                             put container ...   dip paint    ...   paint door


                       Recognized Actions                            (b) Helpful Goal                          Future Actions

                                                                     Goal: Clean car and mat
                                                                     with vacuum cleaner



          pull vacuum    ...   put pipe       ...    clean mat                                 take mat       ... take vacuum ... clean car


                       Recognized Actions                            (c) Unhelpful Goal                        Future Actions

                                                                      Goal: Put on shoes



           put shoe      ...   pull shoe    ...     push container                             put container ...   open door    ... cut container



Figure 2: Examples of the goals inferred by LLMs. Goals are inferred from the recognized actions
of the 8 observed segments. The future actions are ground truth for illustration purposes.

the model’s input and output is shown in Figure A1 (b). Alternatively, we also attempt to leverage
chain-of-thoughts prompts (Wei et al., 2022) (CoT) to ask the LLM first infer the goal, then perform
LTA conditioned on the inferred goal. An example of CoT LTA is shown in Figure A1 (c).

4     E XPERIMENTS
We now present quantitative results and qualitative analysis on the Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022),
EPIC-Kitchens (Damen et al., 2020), and EGTEA Gaze+ (Li et al., 2018) benchmarks.
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Ego4D Grauman et al. (2022) The v1 dataset contains 3,670 hours of egocentric video of daily life
activity spanning hundreds of scenarios. We focus on the videos in the Forecasting subset which
contains 1723 clips with 53 scenarios. The total duration is around 116 hours. There are 115 verbs
and 478 nouns in total. The v2 dataset contains 3472 annotated clips with total duration of around
243 hours. There are 117 verbs and 521 nouns. We follow the datasets’ standard splits.
EPIC-Kitchens-55 (Damen et al., 2020) (EK-55) contains 55 hours egocentric videos of cooking
activities of different video takers. Each video is densely annotated with action labels, spanning over
125 verbs and 352 nouns. We adopt the train and test splits from Nagarajan et al. (2020).
EGTEA Gaze+ (Li et al., 2018) (EGTEA) contains 86 densely labeled egocentric cooking videos
over 26 hours. There are 19 verbs and 53 nouns. We adopt the splits from Nagarajan et al. (2020).
Evaluation Metrics. For Ego4D, we use the edit distance (ED) metric. It is computed as the
Damerau-Levenshtein distance over sequences of predictions of verbs, nouns or actions. We follow
the standard practice in Grauman et al. (2022) and report the minimum edit distance between each
of the top K = 5 predicted sequences and the ground-truth. We report Edit Distance at Z = 20
(ED@20) on the validation set and the test set. For EK-55 and EGTEA, we follow the evaluation
metric described in Nagarajan et al. (2020). The first K% of each video is given as input, and the
goal is to predict the set of actions happening in the remaining (100-K)% of the video as multi-class
classification. We sweep values of K = [25%, 50%, 75%] representing different anticipation horizons
and report mean average precision (mAP) on the validation sets. We report the performances on all
target actions (All), the frequently appeared actions (Freq), and the rarely appeared actions (Rare) as
in Nagarajan et al. (2020). A number of previous work reported performance on these two datasets.
The order agnostic LTA setup in these two datasets complements the Ego4D evaluation.
Implementation Details. We use the frozen CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) ViT-L/14 for image features,
and a transformer encoder with 8 attention heads, and 2048 hidden size for the recognition model.
To study the impact of vision backbones, we also include EgoVLP, a video backbone pre-trained on
Ego4D datasets. For the large language models, we adopt open-source Llama2-13B for in-context
learning and 7B model for fine-tuning. For comparison, we also use OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 Turbo for
in-context learning and GPT-3 curie for fine-tuning. More details and ablation study on recognition
model, teacher forcing, LLMs and other design choices are described in appendix.


                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   C AN LLM S I NFER G OALS TO A SSIST T OP - DOWN LTA?

We compare two LLMs, GPT-3.5 Turbo and Llama2-chat-13B, on goal inference: To obtain the
pseudo ground-truth goals for constructing the in-context examples, we use the video titles for
EGTEA, and the video descriptions for EK-55. We manually annotate the goals for Ego4D. We use
12 in-context examples to infer the goals. For EK-55 and EGTEA, we always use the recognized
actions in the first 25% of each video to infer the goals. For Ego4D, we set Nseg = 8.
We first use the Transformer encoder model described in Section 3.3 as the temporal model: It allows
us to study the standalone impact of goal conditioning by comparing the bottom-up and the top-down
LTA performances. The Transformer encoder takes in the same visual features as used for action
recognition. The text embeddings of the inferred goals are provided for the top-down variant. Table 1
shows results on Ego4D v1, EK-55, and EGTEA. We notice a clear trend that using the inferred
goals leads to consistent improvements for the top-down approach, especially for the rare actions of
EK-55 and EGTEA. We also noticed that both LLMs are able to infer helpful goals for top-down
LTA and GPT-3.5 Turbo generates goals slightly better than the ones from Llama2-chat-13B. We
also construct “oracle goals” using the video metadata provided by EK-55 and EGTEA datasets.
We observe that using the oracle goals leads to slight improvements, indicating that the inferred
goals already offer competitive performance improvements. Figure 2 provides some examples of the
helpful and unhelpful goals inferred by Llama2.

                                          Ego4d v1 (ED)                EK-55 (mAP)                   EGTEA (mAP)
 Method
                                          Verb ↓ Noun ↓ ALL ↑ Freq ↑ Rare ↑ ALL ↑ Freq ↑ Rare ↑
 image features                          0.735        0.753         38.2      59.3     29.0      78.7     84.7      68.3
 image features + Llama2 inferred goals 0.728         0.747         40.1      58.1     32.1      80.0     84.6      70.0
 image features + GPT-3.5 inferred goals 0.724        0.744         40.1      58.8     31.9      80.2     84.8      72.9
 image features + oracle goals∗               -         -           40.9      58.7     32.9      81.6     86.8      69.3
Table 1: Impact of goal conditioning on LTA performance. Goal-conditioned (top-down) models
outperforms the bottom-up model in all three datasets. We report edit distance for Ego4D, mAP for
EK-55 and EGTEA. All results are reported on the validation set.

4.3   D O LLM S M ODEL T EMPORAL DYNAMICS ?

 Model             Goal           Input       Verb ↓    Noun ↓                 Model          Goal   Verb ↓   Noun ↓
 Transformer     GPT-3.5     image features   0.724         0.744            GPT-3-curie      No      0.707      0.719
 GPT-3-curie     GPT-3.5      recog actions   0.709         0.729            GPT-3-curie      Yes     0.709      0.729
 Transformer   Llama2-13B    image features   0.728         0.747            Llama2-7B        No      0.704      0.705
 Llama2-7B     Llama2-13B     recog actions   0.700         0.717            Llama2-7B        Yes     0.700      0.717

Table 2: Comparison of temporal models for top-down                        Table 3: Top-down vs Bottom-up for
LTA. Results on Ego4D v1 val set.                                          LLM-based LTA. Results on v1 val set.
We further explore if LLMs can be directly applied to model temporal dynamics. We focus on the
Ego4D benchmark as it measures the ordering of the anticipated actions.
LLMs are able to model temporal dynamics. To utilize an LLM to predict future actions, we
adopt the same video representation as used for in-context goal inference but fine-tune the LLM
on the training set. For bottom-up LTA, we by default perform teacher forcing during training, and
concatenate the Nseg ground-truth action labels as the input sequence. Z ground-truth action labels
are concatenated as the target sequence. During evaluation, we concatenate Nseg recognized actions
as input, and postprocess the output sequence into Z anticipated actions. For top-down LTA, we
prepend the inferred goals to the input sequence.
We conduct top-down LTA with the open-sourced Llama2-7B LLM. During training, we adopt
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) and 8-bit quantization. We
compare with the transformer baseline with image features, and report results on Ego4D v1 validation
set in Table 2. We observe that leveraging the LLM as the temporal dynamics model leads to
significant improvement, especially for nouns. Additionally, we validate that simply adding more
layers (and hence increasing the model size) does not improve the performance of the image feature
baseline (see Table A1 in appendix), confirming that the improvement comes from the action


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


representation and better temporal dynamics modeling. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of
action-based representation, when an LLM is used for temporal dynamics modeling.
LLMs can perform few-shot temporal modeling. We further tested LLMs’ ability to model
temporal dynamics when only shown a few examples. We consider both in-context learning (ICL)
and chain-of-thoughts (CoT) and compare them with a transformer model trained from-scratch with
the same examples. The results are illustrated in TableA6. We observed that LLMs can model
temporal dynamics competitively in a few-shot setting. As expected, chain-of-thoughts outperforms
regular in-context learning, but both significantly outperform fine-tuning the Transformer model.
LLM-based temporal model performs implicit goal inference. We have shown that LLMs can
assist LTA by providing the inferred goals, and serving as the temporal dynamics model, respectively.
Does combining the two lead to further improved performance? Table 3 aims to answer this question.
We report results with fine-tuned Llama2-7B and GPT-3-curie as the temporal model, which use
Llama2-Chat-13B and GPT-3.5 Turbo for goal inference, respectively. We empirically observe that
the bigger models lead to better inferred goals, while the smaller models are sufficient for temporal
modeling. We observe that the bottom-up performance without explicitly inferred goals are on par
(marginally better) with the top-down models for both LLMs. This indicates the LLM may implicitly
inferred the goals when asked to predict the future actions, and performing explicit goal inference is
not necessary. In the following experiments, we stick with this implicit goal inference setup.
     Seq Type       Verb ↓   Noun ↓   Action ↓    Model       Setting      Verb ↓   Noun ↓    Action ↓
   Action Labels    0.6794   0.6757    0.8912       7B      Pre-trained    0.6794   0.6757     0.8912
  Shuffled Labels   0.6993   0.6972    0.9040      91M     From-scratch    0.7176   0.7191     0.9117
   Label Indices    0.7249   0.6805    0.9070      91M       Distilled     0.6649   0.6752     0.8826

Table 4: Benefit of language prior. Results on Table 5: LLM as temporal model. Results on Ego4D
Ego4D v2 test set. We replace original action se- v2 test set. Llama2-7B model is fine-tuned on Ego4D v2
quences to semantically nonsensical sequences.    training set. 91M models are randomly initialized.
Language prior encoded by LLMs benefit LTA. We further investigate if the language (e.g. goals
and action labels) used for our video representation is actually helpful to utilize the language priors
encoded by the LLMs. We first conduct experiments by replacing the action label representation
with two representations that we assume the pretrained LLMs are unfamiliar with: (1) Shuffled
Labels. We randomly generate a mapping of verbs and nouns so that the original verbs/nouns are
1-to-1 projected to randomly sampled words in the dictionary to construct semantically nonsensical
language sequence (e.g “open window” to “eat monitor”). (2) Label Indices. Instead of using words
to represent actions in the format of verb-noun pairs, we can also use the index of the verb/noun in
the dictionary to map the words to digits to form the input and output action sequence.
We fine-tune the Llama2-7B model on the three types of action representations on the Ego4D v2
dataset and report results on the test set. As shown in Table 4, the performance drops severely when
shuffled action labels or label indices are used, especially for verb. The performance gap indicates
that even LLMs have strong capability to model patterns beyond natural language (Mirchandani et al.,
2023), the encoded language prior from large-scale pre-training still significantly benefits long-term
video action anticipation.
LLM-encoded knowledge can be condensed into a compact model. We first introduce the baseline
model Llama2-91M, which is a 6-layer randomly initialized transformer decoder model with the
similar structure as Llama2-7B. The 91M model takes in the same input during training and evaluation
and follows the same post-processing. We then conduct model distillation to use the Llama2-7B
model tuned on Ego4D v2 training set as the teacher model and the same randomly initialized
Llama2-91M as the student model. Results on test set are shown in Table 5. We observe that the
distilled model achieves significant improvement comparing with model trained without distillation
in the second row (7.3% and 6.1% for verb and noun). It’s also worth noting that the distilled 91M
model even outperforms the 7B teacher model on all three metrics, while using 1.3% of the model size.
The results confirm that LLM-encoded knowledge on implicit goal inference and explicit temporal
modeling can be condensed into a compact neural network.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Method                   Version          Verb ↓          Noun ↓         Action ↓
               HierVL (Ashutosh et al., 2023)          v1           0.7239          0.7350          0.9276
                   ICVAE(Mascaro et al.)               v1           0.7410          0.7396          0.9304
                 VCLIP (Das & Ryoo, 2022)              v1           0.7389          0.7688          0.9412
               Slowfast (Grauman et al., 2022)         v1           0.7389          0.7800          0.9432
                       AntGPT (ours)                   v1        0.6584±7.9e-3   0.6546±3.8e-3   0.8814±3.1e-3
             Slowfast (Grauman et al., 2022)           v2           0.7169          0.7359          0.9253
              VideoLLM (Chen et al., 2023)             v2            0.721           0.725           0.921
            PaMsEgoAI (Ishibashi et al., 2023)         v2           0.6838          0.6785          0.8933
                Palm (Huang et al., 2023)              v2           0.6956          0.6506          0.8856
                    AntGPT (ours)                      v2        0.6503±3.6e-3   0.6498±3.4e-3   0.8770±1.2e-3
Table 6: Comparison with SOTA methods on the Ego4D v1 and v2 test sets in ED@20. Ego4d v1
and v2 share the same test set. V2 contains more training and validation examples than v1.

                                                             EK-55                               EGTEA
      Method
                                                 ALL         FREQ        RARE         ALL         FREQ        RARE
      I3D (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017)        32.7            53.3        23.0        72.1         79.3         53.3
      ActionVLAD (Girdhar et al., 2017)       29.8            53.5        18.6        73.3         79.0         58.6
      Timeception (Hussein et al., 2019a)     35.6            55.9        26.1        74.1         79.7         59.7
      VideoGraph (Hussein et al., 2019b)      22.5            49.4        14.0        67.7         77.1         47.2
      EGO-TOPO (Nagarajan et al., 2020)       38.0            56.9        29.2        73.5         80.7         54.7
      Anticipatr (Nawhal et al., 2022)        39.1            58.1        29.1        76.8         83.3         55.1
      AntGPT (ours)                         40.1±2e-2       58.8±2e-1   31.9±5e-2   80.2±2e-1    84.8±2e-1    72.9±1.2
Table 7: Comparison with SOTA methods on the EK-55 and EGTEA Dataset in mAP. ALL,
FREQ and RARE represent the performances on all, frequent, and rare target actions respectively.

4.4   C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE - ART

Finally, we compare AntGPT with the previous state-of-the-art methods. We choose the model design
settings such as recognition models and input segments number based on ablation study discussed in
appendix Section A. For Ego4d v1 and v2, we train the action recognition and fine-tune the LLM
temporal models with their corresponding training set. Table 6 shows performance comparisons on
Ego4D v1 and v2 benchmarks. We observe that AntGPT achieves best performance on both datasets
and largely outperforms other SoTA baselines. Since Ego4d v1 and v2 share the same test set, it
is also worth mentioning that our model trained solely on v1 data is able to outperform any other
models trained on the v2 data, which indicates the data efficiency and the promise of our approach.
For EK-55 and EGTEA, we compare the goal-conditioned AntGPT with the previous state-of-the-art
results in Table 7. AntGPT achieves the overall best performance on both datasets. We observe that
our proposed model performs particularly well on rare actions.

5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we propose AntGPT to investigate if large language models encode useful prior
knowledge on bottom-up and top-down long-term action anticipation. Thorough experiments with
two LLM variants demonstrate that LLMs are capable of inferring goals helpful for top-down LTA
and also modeling the temporal dynamics of actions. Moreover, the useful encoded prior knowledge
from LLMs can be distilled into very compact neural networks for efficient practical use. Our
proposed method sets new state-of-the-art performances on the Ego4D LTA, EPIC-Kitchens-55, and
EGTEA GAZE+ benchmarks. We further study the advantages and limitations of applying LLM on
video-based action anticipation, thereby laying the groundwork for future research in this field.
Limitations. Although our approach provides a promising new perspective in tackling the LTA task,
there are limitations that are worth pointing out. The choice of representing videos with fixed-length
actions is both efficient and effective for LTA task. However, the lack of visual details may pose
constraints on other tasks. Another limitation is the prompt designs of ICL and CoT are still empirical,
and varying the prompt strategy may cause significant performance differences. Finally, as studied
in our counterfactual experiments, the goal accuracy would have significant impact on the action
recognition outputs, and an important future direction is to improve the inferred goal accuracy, and
also take multiple plausible goals into account.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Nate Gillman for valuable feedback. This work is in part
supported by Honda Research Institute, Meta AI, and Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yazan Abu Farha, Alexander Richard, and Juergen Gall. When will you do what?-anticipating
  temporal occurrences of activities. In CVPR, 2018.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Kumar Ashutosh, Rohit Girdhar, Lorenzo Torresani, and Kristen Grauman. Hiervl: Learning
  hierarchical video-language embeddings. CVPR, 2023.
Siddhant Bansal, Chetan Arora, and CV Jawahar. My view is the best view: Procedure learning from
  egocentric videos. In ECCV, 2022.
Jing Bi, Jiebo Luo, and Chenliang Xu. Procedure planning in instructional videos via contextual
   modeling and model-based policy learning. In ICCV, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Guglielmo Camporese, Pasquale Coscia, Antonino Furnari, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Lamberto
  Ballan. Knowledge distillation for action anticipation via label smoothing. In ICPR, 2021.
J. Carreira and A. Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? A new model and the Kinetics dataset.
   In CVPR, 2017.
Chien-Yi Chang, De-An Huang, Danfei Xu, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles.
  Procedure planning in instructional videos. In ECCV, 2020.
Guo Chen, Yin-Dong Zheng, Jiahao Wang, Jilan Xu, Yifei Huang, Junting Pan, Yi Wang, Yali Wang,
 Yu Qiao, Tong Lu, et al. Videollm: Modeling video sequence with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.13292, 2023.
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al. The epic-kitchens
  dataset: Collection, challenges and baselines. TPAMI, 2020.
Srijan Das and Michael S Ryoo. Video+ clip baseline for ego4d long-term action anticipation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2207.00579, 2022.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Dave Epstein, Jiajun Wu, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun. Learning temporal dynamics from cycles
  in narrated video. ICCV, 2021.
Yazan Abu Farha, Qiuhong Ke, Bernt Schiele, and Juergen Gall. Long-term anticipation of activities
  with cycle consistency. GCPR, 2020.
Harshala Gammulle, Simon Denman, Sridha Sridharan, and Clinton Fookes. Forecasting future
  action sequences with neural memory networks. BMVC, 2019a.
Harshala Gammulle, Simon Denman, Sridha Sridharan, and Clinton Fookes. Predicting the future: A
  jointly learnt model for action anticipation. In ICCV, 2019b.
Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Hang Zhao, Yi Shen, Dragomir Anguelov, Congcong Li, and Cordelia Schmid.
   Vectornet: Encoding hd maps and agent dynamics from vectorized representation. In ICCV, 2020.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sayontan Ghosh, Tanvi Aggarwal, Minh Hoai, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. Text-derived knowl-
  edge helps vision: A simple cross-modal distillation for video-based action anticipation. In EACL,
  2023.
Harshayu Girase, Nakul Agarwal, Chiho Choi, and Karttikeya Mangalam. Latency matters: Real-time
  action forecasting transformer. In CVPR, 2023.
Rohit Girdhar and Kristen Grauman. Anticipative video transformer. In ICCV, 2021.
Rohit Girdhar, Deva Ramanan, Abhinav Gupta, Josef Sivic, and Bryan Russell. Actionvlad: Learning
  spatio-temporal aggregation for action classification. CVPR, 2017.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In CVPR, 2022.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Daoji Huang, Otmar Hilliges, Luc Van Gool, and Xi Wang. Palm: Predicting actions through language
  models@ ego4d long-term action anticipation challenge 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16545,
  2023.
Noureldien Hussein, Efstratios Gavves, and Arnold W. M. Smeulders. Timeception for complex
  action recognition. CVPR, 2019a.
Noureldien Hussein, Efstratios Gavves, and Arnold W. M. Smeulders. Videograph: Recognizing
  minutes-long human activities in videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05143, 2019b.
Tatsuya Ishibashi, Kosuke Ono, Noriyuki Kugo, and Yuji Sato. Technical report for ego4d long term
  action anticipation challenge 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01467, 2023.
Qiuhong Ke, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. Time-conditioned action anticipation in one shot. In
  CVPR, 2019.
Arie W Kruglanski and Ewa Szumowska. Habitual behavior is goal-driven. Perspectives on
  Psychological Science, 15(5):1256–1271, 2020.
Tian Lan, Tsung-Chuan Chen, and Silvio Savarese. A hierarchical representation for future action
  prediction. In ECCV, 2014.
Yin Li, Miao Liu, and James M Rehg. In the eye of beholder: Joint learning of gaze and actions in
  first person video. In ECCV, 2018.
Yujie Lu, Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Wenda Xu, Xin Eric Wang, Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang
  Wang. Neuro-symbolic procedural planning with commonsense prompting. ICLR, 2023.
Esteve Valls Mascaro, Hyemin Ahn, and Dongheui Lee. Intention-conditioned long-term human
  egocentric action forecasting @ ego4d challenge 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2207.12080.
Jack Merullo, Louis Castricato, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Linearly mapping from image to
  text space. ICLR, 2023.
Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas,
  Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large language models as general pattern machines.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721, 2023.
Tushar Nagarajan, Yanghao Li, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Kristen Grauman. Ego-topo: Environ-
  ment affordances from egocentric video. In CVPR, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Medhini Narasimhan, Licheng Yu, Sean Bell, Ning Zhang, and Trevor Darrell. Learning and
 verification of task structure in instructional videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13519, 2023.
Megha Nawhal, Akash Abdu Jyothi, and Greg Mori. Rethinking learning approaches for long-term
 action anticipation. In ECCV, 2022.
Katerina Pastra and Yiannis Aloimonos. The minimalist grammar of action. Philosophical Transac-
  tions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1585):103–117, 2012.
Stephen J Payne and Thomas RG Green. Task-action grammars: A model of the mental representation
  of task languages. Human-computer interaction, 2(2):93–133, 1986.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Debaditya Roy and Basura Fernando. Predicting the next action by modeling the abstract goal. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.05044, 2022.
Fadime Sener and Angela Yao. Zero-shot anticipation for instructional activities. In ICCV, 2019.
Fadime Sener, Dipika Singhania, and Angela Yao. Temporal aggregate representations for long-range
  video understanding. In ECCV, 2020.
Tomáš Souček, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Antoine Miech, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic. Look for the
  change: Learning object states and state-modifying actions from untrimmed web videos. In CVPR,
  2022.
Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A joint
  model for video and language representation learning. In ICCV, 2019a.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Carl Vondrick, Rahul Sukthankar, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia
  Schmid. Relational action forecasting. In CVPR, 2019b.
Jiankai Sun, De-An Huang, Bo Lu, Yun-Hui Liu, Bolei Zhou, and Animesh Garg. Plate: Visually-
   grounded planning with transformers in procedural tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
   7(2):4924–4930, 2022.
Dídac Surís, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
  reasoning. ICCV, 2023.
Hung Tran, Vuong Le, and Truyen Tran. Goal-driven long-term trajectory prediction. In WACV,
  2021.
Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Anticipating visual representations from
  unlabeled video. In CVPR, 2016.
Rui Wang, Dongdong Chen, Zuxuan Wu, Yinpeng Chen, Xiyang Dai, Mengchen Liu, Yu-Gang Jiang,
  Luowei Zhou, and Lu Yuan. Bevt: Bert pretraining of video transformers. In CVPR, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Fed-
  erico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke,
  and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598, 2022.
He Zhao, Isma Hadji, Nikita Dvornik, Konstantinos G Derpanis, Richard P Wildes, and Allan D
  Jepson. P3iv: Probabilistic procedure planning from instructional videos with weak supervision.
  In CVPR, pp. 2938–2948, 2022.



                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A BLATION S TUDY
In this section, we conduct ablation study on model designs for the Transformer model and LLM-
based model on Ego4D v1 and v2 to show how we choose the final settings. In the table, rows labeled
as gray denote the final setting we use to report in Table 6.

A.1    T RANSFORMERS : N UMBER OF LAYERS

We want to compare fine-tuned LLM with auto-regressive transformers trained from-scratch. However,
our transformer model and the large language model we used do not have comparable parameter
size. Here, we want to explore how parameter size affect the performance of the transformer and to
investigate whether the performance gap we demonstrated in 4.4 is due to model size. We ran the
transformer model with varying number of layers from 1 to 6 and the corresponding results are in
Table A1. We observed that adding more layers to the auto-regressive transformer model does not
help performance. This further substantiate our conclusion that large language models are better in
modeling action temporal dynamics.

                                     # layers   Verb ↓    Noun ↓
                                        1        0.739     0.758
                                        2        0.741     0.756
                                        3        0.743     0.756
                                        4        0.742     0.755
                                        5        0.743     0.757
                                        6        0.747     0.759

Table A1: Ablations on the number of layers to auto-regressive transformers. Transformers
are trained with actions labels from-scratch. Results on Ego4d v1 validation set. Layer number of
Transformer model barely influence its performance.

A.2    T EACHER FORCING

We developed a data augmentation technique to further boost the performance of our approach. When
reporting on test set, we can augment the training set with recognized action tokens which comes
from a recognition model that is trained on the validation set and makes inference on the training set.
In this way, we double our training set with more noisy data, the distribution of which is closer to the
recognized action tokens that we input into the fine-tuned model when making inference on the test
set. TableA4 shows the comparison between three training paradigms.

A.3    R ECOGNITION M ODEL

To study the impact of vision backbones, we altered the vision features from CLIP to EgoVLP and
trained on the same architecture. The result is shown in TableA2 We observed that recognition models
based EgoVLP features outperformed CLIP features. This is expected since EgoVLP is pretrained on
Ego4D datasets. This finding suggests that our approach is robust to different recognition models and
can be further improved with better recognition models.

A.4    L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We compared different LLMs for their performance on fine-tuning. TableA3 shows the result on
Ego4D v2 test set. We observe that Llama2-7B with PEFT performs better than fine-tuned GPT-3.

A.5    N UMBER OF INPUT SEGMENTS

Table A5 shows the influence of the number of input segments to LLM. A higher number of input
segments allows the LLM to observe longer temporal context. We choose the input segments from
{1, 3, 5, 8}. We did not go beyond 8 because that was the maximum segments allowed by the Ego4d
benchmark. In general, AntGPT’s performances on both verb and noun increase as we increase Nseg .
This is different from the vision baseline in Table 1, whose performance saturates at Nseg = 3.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Recog Model       Verb ↓   Noun ↓    Action ↓          Temporal Model        Verb ↓     Noun ↓   Action ↓
       CLIP         0.6794    0.6757    0.8912             GPT-3 curie         0.6969     0.6813   0.9060
      EgoVLP        0.6677    0.6607    0.8854             Llama2-7B           0.6794     0.6757   0.8912

Table A2: Ablation on recognition model.             Table A3: Ablation on LLM as temporal model.
Results on Ego4D v2 test set. EgoVLP as              Results on Ego4D v2 test set. Llama2-7B perform
recognition model brings better performance.         better than GPT-3 curie as tempral model.

        Input       Verb ↓   Noun ↓    Action ↓                      # seg      Verb ↓    Noun ↓
           gt       0.6794   0.6757    0.8912                            1      0.734      0.748
         recog      0.6618   0.6721    0.8839                            3      0.717      0.726
       gt+recog     0.6611   0.6506    0.8778                            5      0.723      0.722
                                                                         8      0.707      0.719
Table A4: Ablation on teacher forcing. Results
on Ego4D v2 test set. Using ground-truth and             Table A5: Ablations on input segments num-
recognized actions as training samples bring best        ber to LLM. Results on Ego4d v1 validation set.
performance.                                             Segment number of 8 brings best performance.


B     F EW- SHOT ACTION A NTICIPATION

                      Model            Learning Method      With Goal        Verb ↓      Noun ↓
                    Transformer              SGD               No            0.770       0.968
                  Llama2-chat-13B            ICL               No            0.761       0.803
                      GPT-3.5                ICL               No            0.758       0.728
                      GPT-3.5                ICL               Yes           0.775       0.728
                      GPT-3.5                CoT               Yes           0.756       0.725


Table A6: Few-shot results with LLM on Ego4D v1 validation set. The transformer baseline is
trained with the same 12 examples from training set as the in-context examples for LLM.
We conduct quantitative few-shot learning experiments on the Ego4D v1 validation set, and compare
the transformer-based model and LLM. The transformer baseline is trained on the same 12 examples
sampled from the training set of Ego4D as the in-context examples used by LLM. The transformer is
optimized by gradient descent. For top-down LTA with LLM, we compare the two-stage approach to
infer goals and predict actions separately, and the one-stage approach based on chain-of-thoughts.
Results are shown in Table A6. We observe that all LLM-based methods perform much better than
the transformer baseline for few-shot LTA. Among all the LLM-based methods, top-down prediction
with CoT prompts achieves the best performance on both verb and noun. However, the gain of
explicitly using goal conditioning is marginal, similar to what we have observed when training on
the full set. In Figure A1 (b) and (c), we illustrate the example input and output for ICL and CoT,
respectively. More examples can be found in Section D.

B.1     COUNTERFACTUAL PREDICTION

To better understand the impact of goals for action anticipation, we design a “counterfactual” pre-
diction experiment: We first use GPT-3.5-Turbo to infer goals for examples as we did above and
treat the outputs as the originally inferred goals, and then manually provide “altered goals” which
are different than the original goals but are equally reasonable. We then perform in-context learning
using both sets of the goals and with the same sequences of recognized actions as inputs to the
LLM. Figure A2 illustrates our workflow and two examples. In the second example, we can see that
although the recognized actions are the same, the output action predictions are all different. Despite
the differences, using "fix machine" as the goal generates actions highly related to fixing such as
"tighten nut" and "turn screw" while switching to "examine machine" leads to actions
like "test machine" and "record data". More examples can be found in Section D.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                              GT Observations                                                         Future Actions


                    put paintbrush      ...   paint wall     ...   paint wall      |    dip paintbrush      ...   paint wall     ...   dip brush    ...   paint wall

         (a) Predict Goal
         "Instruction: "What is the most possible goal according to given previous actions?
         D1: take fork, wash fork, put fork, take knife, wash knife, take spoon, wash spoon, put spoon => clean tableware
         Q: put stick, put stick, pull string, paint wall, paint wall, paint paint, paint paint, paint wall => "

         [Answer]:
         "painting a room"


         (b) Bottom-up: Predict Future
         "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
         D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle => cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
         Q: put stick, put stick, pull string, paint wall, paint wall, paint paint, paint paint, paint wall => "

         [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                  Verb_ED = 0.55
         "clean brush, dip brush, ..., paint wall, ..., paint wall, paint wall, clean brush"                                                                        Noun_ED = 0.55


         (c) Top-down: Predict Goal and Future
         "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
         D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle Q1: What's the goal according to previous actions? Q2: What are
         the future 20 actions? => The goal is gardening. Future 20 actions are: cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
         Q: put stick, put stick, pull string, paint wall, paint wall, paint paint, paint paint, paint wall Q1: What's the goal according to previous actions? Q2: What are
         the future 20 actions? => ”

         [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                  Verb_ED = 0.10
         "The goal is painting a room. Future 20 actions are: dip brush, paint wall, ..., dip brush, ..., paint wall, dip bush, paint wall"                         Noun_ED = 0.50


Figure A1: Illustration of goal prediction and LTA with LLMs: (a) High-level goal pre-
diction wth in-context learning (ICL). (b) Few-shot bottom-up action prediction with ICL.
(c) Top-down prediction with chain-of-thoughts (CoT). The green word indicates correctly
recognized actions (inputs to the LLM) and future predictions (outputs of the LLM), red
indicates incorrectly recognized or predicted actions. For this example, the ground-truth
observations are [put paintbrush, adjust paintbrush, take container, dip
container, paint wall, paint wall, dip wall, paint wall].

                           Original Prediction                                                                                 Counter Factual Predictions


             [Inferred Goal]: gardening or trimming plants                                                                     [Altered Goal]: harvesting crops



                                       [Observations Input]: take plant, take plant, take trimmer, take soil, take soil, take soil,
                                                                          take soil, take soil


                                [Prediction]:                                                                                            [Prediction]:
   "put plant, adjust plant, ..., adjoust soil, take trimmer, trim plant,                                "cut plant, cut plant, ..., fill basket, take basket, carry basket, put
     put trimmer, ..., put trimmer, take soil, pour soil, spread soil,                                       basket, ..., pour soil, put soil, take soil, pour soil, put soil"
                                 adjust soil"


                       [Inferred Goal]: fix machine                                                                            [Altered Goal]: examine machine



                                        [Observations Input]: screw screwdriver, hold pedal, hold pedal, hold lever, hold pipe,
                                                                   hold pipe, hold pipe, hold lever


                                [Prediction]:                                                                                        [Prediction]:
  "tighten bolt, adjust lever, ..., turn screw, adjust pipe, tighten nut,                               "adjust gauge, read gauge, ..., tighten bolt, loosen screw, remove
  hold lever, ..., tighten nut, hold pedal, adjust pipe, hold lever, turn                                 cover, examine circuit, ..., adjust setting, test machine, record
                                screwdriver"                                                                               data, put tool, close panel"


Figure A2: Illustrations of counterfactual prediction. We replace the originally inferred goal
(gardening or trimming plants and fix machine) with an altered goal (harvesting crops and examine
machine), and observe that the anticipated actions change accordingly, even with the same set of
recognized actions as the inputs to the LLM. Words marked in red highlight the different predictions.



Our qualitative analysis with the counterfactual prediction shows that the choice of goal can have
large impacts on the action anticipation outputs. This indicates another future direction to improve


                                                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the top-down action anticipation performance is to improve the accurate and quality of the predicted
goals, and to consider multiple plausible goals.

C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In this section, we provide additional details for the fine-tuning language model experiments on
Ego4D v1 and v2, as well as goal inference via in-context learning. We also provide additional
details for all the transformer models involved in experiments on all the datasets. Finally, we describe
the details of the different setups in Ego4d datasets versus EK-55 and Gaze. All experiments are
accompolished on NVIDIA A6000 GPUs.

C.1   P REPROCESSING AND P OSTPROCESSING

During preprocessing for fine-tuning, we empirically observe that using a single token to represent
each verb or noun helps the performance of the fine-tuned model. Since the tokenization is handled
by OpenAI’s API, some verbs or nouns in the Ego4D’s word taxonomy may span over multiple
tokens. For example, the verbs “turn-on” and “turn-off” are two-token long, and the noun “coconut”
is broken into three tokens. We attempt to minimize the token length of each Ego4D label without
losing semantic information of the labels, which are important to leverage prior knowledge in the
LLMs. As a result, we choose the first unique word to describe the verb and noun labels in the
Ego4D label vocabulary. This preprocessing is performed for both the input action sequences, and
the target action sequences for prediction. No additional task information is provided as input during
fine-tuning, as we observe that the fine-tuning training examples themselves clearly specify the task.
We observe that LLM models demonstrate strong capability on following the instructions as specified
by fine-tuning or in-context learning examples. However, the output sequences generated by the LLM
are sometimes invalid, and post-processing is needed before the predictions can be evaluated by the
edit distance metrics. Specifically, the standard Ego4D LTA evaluation protocol requires generating 5
sequences of long-term action predictions, each in the form of 20 verb and noun pairs.
We consider the following scenarios to trigger postprocessing on the LLM’s predictions: (1) the
output sequence length is different than expected (i.e. 20); (2) an action in the output sequence cannot
be parsed into a pair of one verb and one noun; (3) a predicted verb or noun is outside the vocabulary.
Table A7 shows the statistics on how often each type of incident would occur.
Instead of repeatedly sampling new responses from the LLM until it is valid, we choose to use a
simple post-processing strategy: First, inspect each action in the predicted sequence, and remove the
invalid ones. Second, truncate the sequence, or pad the sequence with the last predicted valid action
until the sequence length is as desired. We then map the predicted words into the fixed noun and verb
label space. This is achieved by retrieving the nearest neighbor of each word in our label vocabulary
based on Levenshtein distance.

                                   Incident        % over all instances
                                  Short Seq (1)            2.74%
                                  Long Seq (1)            12.93%
                                 Invalid Seq (2)          10.44%
                                Invalid Verb (3)           1.93%
                               Invalid Noun (3)            2.62%

Table A7: Statistics on scenarios which require post-processing. Invalid sequence refers to the
scenario where the output sequence contains invalid strings that cannot be parsed into pairs of a verb
and a noun. Invalid verb/noun refers to the scenario where the word is outside of the vocabulary.
Both scenarios often imply wrong sequence length.


C.2   B OTTOM - UP AND T OP - DOWN T RANSFORMER M ODELS I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS .

For the bottom-up model that establishes our vision baseline, we use frozen CLIP Radford et al.
(2021) image encoder (ViT-L/14@336px) as vision backbone. Each frame is encoded as a 768D


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


representation. For Ego4D, we use 3 layers, 8 heads of a vanilla Transformer Encoder with a hidden
representation dimension of 2048. We use Nesterov Momentum SGD + CosineAnnealing Scheduler
with learning rate 5e-4. We train the model for 30 epochs with the first 4 as warm-up epochs. All
hyper-parameters are chosen by minimizing the loss on the validation set. In our top-down models,
we used the compatible text encoder of the ViT-L/14@336px CLIP model as the text encoder. We
used Adam optimizer with learning rate 2e-4.
For EK-55, we extracted features of all provided frames from the dataset. For the transformer, we
use 1 layers, 8 heads with a hidden representation dimension of 2048. We use Adam optimizer with
learning rate 5e-5. All hyper-parameters are chosen by minimizing the loss on the validation set. In
our top-down models, we used the compatible text encoder of the ViT-L/14@336px CLIP model as
the text encoder. We used Adam optimizer with learning rate 5e-5.
For Gaze, we use 1 layers, 8 heads of a vanilla Transformer Encoder with a hidden representation
dimension of 2048. We use Nesterov Momentum SGD + CosineAnnealing Scheduler with learning
rate 2e-2. All hyper-parameters are chosen by minimizing the loss on the validation set. In our
top-down models, we used the compatible text encoder of the ViT-L/14@336px CLIP model as the
text encoder. We used Nesterov Momentum SGD + CosineAnnealing with learning rate 15e-3.

C.3   R ECOGNITION M ODEL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS .

For the recognition model, we use frozen CLIP Radford et al. (2021) image encoder (ViT-
L/14@336px) as vision backbone. For all the datasets, we randomly sample 4 frames from each
segments. Each frame is encoded as a 768D representation. We use 3 layers, 8 heads of a vanilla
Transformer Encoder with a hidden representation dimension of 2048. We use Nesterov Momentum
SGD + CosineAnnealing Scheduler with learning rate 1e-3. We train the model for 40 epochs with 4
warm-up epochs. All hyper-parameters are chosen by minimizing the loss on the validation set.

C.4   I NFERRING GOAL DESCRIPTORS USING LLM S

In Section 4.2, we describe an ablation study where goal descriptor is used for in-context learning.
More specifically, we use GPT-3.5 Turbo and Llama2-chat-13B to infer the goal by giving recognized
history actions and few samples as demonstrations with ICL as goal descriptors. An illustraion of the
goals can be found in Figure A1. For the experiments in Table 1, the goal descriptors are added as
LLM prompts in the form of "Goal:<goal> Observed actions:<observed actions>
=> ". We note that this ablation study poses an interesting contrast to the CoT experiments: Instead
of asking the LLM to jointly infer the goal and predict the action sequences, the ablation experiment
conducts goal inference and action prediction separately, and achieves slightly worse performance
than CoT.

C.5   A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON EPIC-K ITCHENS -55 AND EGTEA G AZE + EXPERIMENTS

In the experiment section, we describe two setups of the LTA task on different datasets. For the Ego4D
datasets, we measure the edit distance of future action sequence predictions while for EK-55 and
Gaze, we measure the mean average precision for all actions to occur in the future. The distinction
arises in how “action” is defined among these different datasets and setups. In Ego4D benchmarks,
we follow the official definition of action, which a verb-prediction and a noun-prediction combining
together to form an action. For EK-55 and Gaze, we adopt the task setup of Ego-Topo Nagarajan
et al. (2020) in order to compare with previous works. In their setup they defined “action” as only the
verb-prediction, excluding the noun-prediction in the final “action” prediction.

D     A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATION AND A NALYSIS
D.1   E XAMPLES OF A NT GPT P REDICTION

We provide four examples of bottom-up fine-tuned AntGPT in Figure A3, two of which are positive,
and the other two negative. Correctly recognized actions from the video observations (outputs of the
vision module, and inputs to the LLM) and future predictions (outputs of the LLM) are marked in
green while wrong observations or predictions are marked red. We observe that AntGPT is able


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to predict reasonable and correct future actions even when the recognized actions are not perfect.
However, when most of the recognized actions are incorrect (Figure A3c), the predictions would also
fail as expected. Finally, we observe that the bottom-up approach sometimes fail to implicitly infer
the long-term goal based on the observed actions. In Figure A3d, the actor keeps on mixing the ice
while the LLM predicts curry-cooking related activities.

D.2    A DDITIONAL E XAMPLES OF ICL AND C OT

Similarly with Figure 2, Figure A4 shows two additional examples of bottom-up prediction with ICL
and top-down prediction with CoT. We can further observe the influence of implicitly prediction future
goal from the two examples. In the first example, due to the low quality of recognized actions from
the video observation (repeating "play card"), the bottom-up prediction follows the observation
pattern to repeat "play card" while in the prediction of top-down prediction using CoT to consider
the goal, the model succeed to predict "take card" and "put card" alternatively which both
matches the ground-truth future actions and common sense in the scene of card playing better, with
the verb edit distance significantly goes down from 0.95 to 0.45. The second example shows a
failure example of using CoT. In this video of “playing tablet”, the top-down model predicts the goal
as “using electronic devices”, thus influencing the following future action prediction to hallucinate
actions like "operate computer". This behavior is intuitive, as an incorrect goal sampled by the
LLM is likely to mislead the predicted actions that conditioned on it. We believe adding additional
cues for goal inference, and explicitly model the different “modes” of the future to capture the goal
diversity would mitigate this behavior.

D.3    A DDITIONAL E XAMPLES OF C OUNTERFACTUAL P REDICTION

In Figure A5, we demonstrate four additional counterfactual prediction examples. In or-
der to predicting with explicit goal using ICL, we construct the prompts in the form of:
"Goal:<inferred/altered goal> Observed actions:<observed actions>
=> <future actions>" We observe that switching the goals from the “inferred goal” to the
“altered goal” indeed has huge impact on the predicted actions. This confirms that the goals are
utilized by the LLM to predict (or plan) the future actions to take. This behavior is consistent with
our observations in Figure A4.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Past Observations                                    Future Predictions


           [GT action labels]:
                wash car                   lift sponge                wash car                  wash window

                [Recognitioned actions in obervation]:
                  wash car, ..., squeeze sponge,...

                [LLM predicted action sequence]:
                  ..., wash car, wash car, ..., wash wiper, wash hand,...



                                                   (a) Positive Sample 1

                            Past Observations                                    Future Predictions


           [GT action labels]:
                roll dough                spread flour             adjust dough                      take stick

                [Recognitioned actions in obervation]:
                  put dough, ..., put flour,...

                [LLM predicted action sequence]:
                  ..., take dough, adjust dough, ..., take dough, take dough,...



                                                   (b) Positive Sample 2

                            Past Observations                                   Future Predictions


           [GT action labels]:
                dip bucket                 lift brush             lift paintbrush              move paintbrush
                [Recognitioned actions in obervation]:
                  put stick, ..., put paper, ...

                [LLM predicted action sequence]:
                  ..., remove wood, turn wood, ..., smooth wood, adjust wood,...



                                                  (c) Negative Sample 1

                            Past Observations                                   Future Predictions


           [GT action labels]:
                 hold jug                   put ice                   mix ice                          take lid
                [Recognitioned actions in obervation]:
                  put jug, ..., put ice, ...

                [LLM predicted action sequence]:
                 ..., scoop curry, put spoon, ..., put spoon, scoop rice,...



                                                  (d) Negative Sample 2

Figure A3: Four examples of results from fine-tuned AntGPT. The green word indicates correctly
recognized actions (inputs to the LLM) and future predictions (outputs of the LLM), red indicates
incorrectly recognized or predicted actions.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                            GT Observations                                                   Future Actions


              take card        ...         put card    ...     touch card       |    take card    ...     put card      ...   take card       ...   divide card
  (a) Predict Goal
  "Instruction: What is the most possible goal according to given previous actions?
  D1: take fork, wash fork, put fork, take knife, wash knife, take spoon, wash spoon, put spoon => clean tableware
  Q: play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card => "

  [Answer]:
  "playing card"

  (b) Bottom-up: Predict Future
  "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
  D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle => cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
  Q: play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card => "

  [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                   Verb_ED = 0.95
  "shuffle card, put card, play card, ..., play card, play card, play card"                                                                                   Noun_ED = 0.10


  (c) Top-down: Predict Goal and Future
  "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
  D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle Q1: What's the goal according to previous actions? Q2: What are
  the future 20 actions? => The goal is gardening. Future 20 actions are: cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
  Q: play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card, play card Q1: What's the goal according to previous actions? Q2: What are the
  future 20 actions? => "

  [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                   Verb_ED = 0.45
  "The goal is playing card. Future 20 actions are: shuffle card, put card, take card, ..., put card, take card, put card"                                    Noun_ED = 0.10


(a) Example 1, the ground-truth observations are [take card, put card, pack card, take
card, put card, take card, put card, touch card], the ground-truth predictions are
[take card, put card, take card, put card, pack card, take card, put card,
pack card, take card, put card, take card, put card, put card, pack card,
arrange card, take card, shuffle card, put card, take card, divide card].

                                            GT Observations                                                   Future Actions


              operate tablet         ...    take pen     ...   operate tablet   |   adjust pen ... operate tablet ... operate tablet ... adjust tablet

  (a) Predict Goal
  "Instruction: What is the most possible goal according to given previous actions?
  D1: take fork, wash fork, put fork, take knife, wash knife, take spoon, wash spoon, put spoon => clean tableware
  Q: take phone, operate phone, operate phone, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet => "

  [Answer]:
  "using electronic devices"

  (b) Bottom-up: Predict Future
  "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
  D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle => cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
  Q: take phone, operate phone, operate phone, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet => "

  [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                   Verb_ED = 0.60
  "put phone, take wire, ..., operate tablet, put tablet, take phone"                                                                                         Noun_ED = 0.55


  (c) Top-down: Predict Goal and Future
  "Instruction: What will be the possible next 20 actions according to given previous actions? You should follow the following rules...
  D1: tie leaf, carry leaf, put plant, adjust cloth, take plant, put plant, take sickle, take sickle Q1: What's the goal according to previous actions? Q2: What are
  the future 20 actions? => The goal is gardening. Future 20 actions are: cut plant, put sickle, ..., cut plant, cut plant, hold plant
  Q: take phone, operate phone, operate phone, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet Q1: What's the goal according to
  previous actions? Q2: What are the future 20 actions? => "

  [Answer]:                                                                                                                                                   Verb_ED = 0.50
  "The goal is using electronic devices. Future 20 actions are: take computer, open computer, ..., operate tablet, operate tablet"                            Noun_ED = 0.80


(b) Example 2, the ground-truth observations are [hold table, operate tablet, hold
pen, touch pen, take pen, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet],
the ground-truth predictions are [adjust pen, hold pen, operate tablet, operate
tablet, hold pen, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, operate
tablet, operate tablet, move pen, operate tablet, lift tablet, put tablet,
operate tablet, operate tablet, operate tablet, adjust tablet, operate
tablet, adjust tablet].

Figure A4: Promts and results of IcL and CoT. Here we show three experiments: (1) Predict the
final goal. (2) Botom-up predict future actions with ICL. (3) Top-down prediction by CoT prompting.
Green word means correct observations or predictions and red means wrong.

                                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Original Prediction                                    Counter Factual Predictions


           [Inferred Goal]: construction site                            [Altered Goal]: build a house



                          [Observations Input]: measure ladder, put rod, put rod, put rod,
                                        put rod, put rod, put rod, put metal


                    [Prediction]:                                                [Prediction]:
   "move metal, adjust metal, ..., adjust metal,                "takehammer, drive nail, .., put wood, measure
  lift metal, put metal, adjust metal, lift metal,              wood, cut wood, put wood, lift wood, put wood,
  put metal, adjust metal, lift metal, put metal"                      measure wood, cut wood, put wood"


     [Inferred Goal]: building firewood stack                             [Altered Goal]: woodworking



                           [Observations Input]: put wood, put wood, hold wood, put wood,
                                      put wood, put wood, hold wood, hold wood


                    [Prediction]:                                                [Prediction]:
    "put wood, put wood, put wood, put wood, put               "take saw, cut wood, cut wood, cut wood, put saw,
   wood, ..., put wood, put wood, hold wood, ...,              ..., put sandpaper, take paint, apply paint, ...,
           put wood, hold wood, hold wood"                             take wood, put wood, adjust wood"


              [Inferred Goal]: get dressed                              [Altered Goal]: organize clothes



                           [Observations Input]: take shirt, put shirt, take shirt, adjust
                               shirt, take shirt, take shirt, take shirt, adjust shirt


                    [Prediction]:                                                [Prediction]:
  "put shirt, take pants, put pants, adjust pants,              "put shirt, take pants, put pants, take socks,
    ..., take jacket, put jacket, adjust jacket,                ..., take jacket, put jacket, take hanger, ...,
         ..., take bag, put bag, adjust bag"                       hang jacket, adjust hangers, tidy closet"


           [Inferred Goal]: clean kitchen sink                            [Altered Goal]: wash dishes



                          [Observations Input]: wash faucet, wash faucet, wash faucet, wash
                               plate, wash faucet, take faucet, put faucet, put faucet


                   [Prediction]:                                                 [Prediction]:
  "wash sponge, put sponge, take soap, ..., rinse              "wash cup, wash spoon, put spoon, ..., wash bowl,
    sink, wipe sink, adjust faucet, turn faucet,                put bowl, wash pot, put pot, wash pan, ..., dry
    rinse sponge, ..., adjust towel, hang towel,                      dish, put dish, dry bowl, put bowl"
             adjust soap, close faucet"


Figure A5: Four examples of counterfactual prediction. LLM predict based on same observations
but different goals. On the left shows the results with the “inferred goal” generated by GPT-3.5-Turbo
according to observations generated by recognition model while the right part shows results with
manually designed “alternative goal”.


                                                         21
