Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


OVERCOMING A LIGNMENT C ONSTRAINTS : G-PATCH
FOR P RACTICAL A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON V I T S

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT

             This paper addresses the vulnerability of adversarial patches designed for vision
             transformers, which traditionally depended on precise alignment with patch loca-
             tions. Such alignment constraints hindered practical deployment in the physical
             world. We propose the G-Patch, a novel method for generating adversarial patches
             that overcomes this constraint, enabling targeted attacks from any position within
             the field of view. Instead of directly optimizing the patch using gradients, we
             employ a sub-network structure for patch generation. Our experiments demon-
             strate the G-Patch’s effectiveness in achieving universal attacks on vision trans-
             formers with a small size. Further analysis shows its resilience to challenges like
             brightness restriction, color transfer, and random noise, enhancing robustness and
             inconspicuousness in real-world deployments. Black box and real-world attack
             experiments validate its effectiveness even under challenging conditions. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recently, vision transformers (ViTs) have garnered significant attention due to their impressive
performance and their ability to surpass convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in various do-
mains (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a;b; Graham et al., 2021; Han et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2021). This remarkable performance has spurred in-
terest in examining the robustness of ViTs, particularly considering the well-known vulnerability of
CNNs to adversarial attacks (Bhojanapalli et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022; Salman et al., 2022; Shi
et al., 2022).
Drawing from the lessons learned with CNNs, adversarial attacks can be classified as universal
or non-universal. A non-universal attack typically makes minute modifications to the source im-
age (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2020a). These approaches exhibit a sig-
nificant drawback as they are customized for specific source images and have limited applicability
in the physical domains. Moreover, vision transformers have demonstrated remarkable robustness
against these types of attacks (Bhojanapalli et al., 2021), showing their resilience when facing such
adversarial attacks.
In contrast, the universal attack aims to create a patch that can be put alongside the target, without
prior knowledge of elements present in the scene (Brown et al., 2017). Adversarial patches have
proven highly effective against CNNs in the physical world, as they can be positioned anywhere
within the classifier’s field of view to launch an attack.
Unlike CNNs, vision transformers treat the input image as a sequence of image patches. To carry
out an adversarial patch attack, a commonly employed approach is to substitute certain input image
patches with adversarial samples (Fu et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2022). These studies have shown the
heightened vulnerability of vision transformers to adversarial patches. However, all the experiments
conducted so far have been limited to the digital domain to accurately locate the adversarial patches,
and even a slight shift of a single pixel could dramatically decrease the attack success rate (resulting
in a loss of 70% attack success rate).
To overcome these strict limitations and enable physical-world deployment, we propose a novel
approach that uses a sub-network structure to generate universal and targeted adversarial patches
    1
        Source codes are provided in the supply materials.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Network components: Generator (G-Patch generation), Deployer (random positioning),
Discriminator (victim network)


(G-Patch). Our model consists of three main components: the generator, deployer, and discrim-
inator. The generator is responsible for creating an adversarial patch. The deployer attaches the
generated patch to a random position on the source image. Finally, the victim network acts as the
discriminator, providing predictions based on the modified image. Notably, unlike generative adver-
sarial network (GAN) setups, the discriminator (victim network) remains unaltered throughout the
training process.
Our experiments demonstrate that the G-Patch can successfully launch attacks on various victim
models at any position within the field of view. These patches achieve a high targeted attack success
rate of over 90% while maintaining a small size of ∼12% of the source image. Further analysis re-
veals that the G-Patch exhibits strong robustness to brightness restriction, color transfer, and random
noise. This robustness to different distributions enhances their effectiveness during physical-world
deployment. To evaluate practical performance, we conducted tests on the success rate of the black
box attack and the real-world placement of the G-Patch. The findings indicate that the G-Patch
exhibits black box transferability and consistently demonstrates robust performance in physical en-
vironments.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We propose a new model to generate the adversarial patch for vision transformers (G-
         Patch), which can launch targeted attacks while overcoming the alignment constraints.
       • We demonstrate that G-Patch exhibits strong robustness to brightness restriction, color
         transfer, and random noise, enhancing its effectiveness and inconspicuousness in physical-
         world deployments.
       • The G-Patch is the first adversarial patch for vision transformers that can be deployed in
         black box and physical-world attacks.


2     R ELATED WORK

2.1   V ISION TRANSFORMER

The transformer was first introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017) for natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. Following the success in NLP, Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) proposed the vision transformer
(ViT) that leveraged non-overlapping patches as tokens input to a similar attention based architec-
ture. Since then, numerous models have been proposed to alleviate training challenges or enhance
the performance of vision transformer models. Touvron et al. (2021) introduced a teacher-student
strategy in their DeiT models that dramatically reduced the pre-training request. Liu et al. (2021)
proposed the SWIN transformer using the shifted windowing scheme that achieves greater effi-
ciency by limiting self-attention computation to non-overlapping local windows while also allowing


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for cross-window connection. As the vision transformer continues to advance, achieving state-of-
the-art performance and becoming increasingly accessible for pre-training (Zhang et al., 2021; Tu
et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023), it has seen widespread adoption in
diverse visual tasks, including video processing (Arnab et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022), dense predic-
tion (Ranftl et al., 2021) zero-shot classification (Radford et al., 2021), captioning (Li et al., 2022),
and image generation (Rombach et al., 2022).


2.2   A DVERSARIAL ATTACK

Adversarial attacks are widely employed to deceive deep learning models, resulting in remarkable
successes. The first adversarial attack for computer vision tasks was introduced by Szegedy et al.
(2013). Since their seminal work, numerous researchers have devised increasingly efficient tech-
niques for generating adversarial attacks (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2019; Karmon et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2017).
In computer vision tasks, adversarial attacks can be classified into two types, depending on their
reliance on the input image. The first type is non-universal adversarial attacks, which typically make
minute modifications to the source image. These attacks employ various optimization strategies such
as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), Projected Gradient Descent
(PGD) (Madry et al., 2017), and Skip Gradient (SGD) (Wu et al., 2020a). Such non-universal attacks
frequently go unnoticed during deployment, diminishing their detectability by human observers
across various tasks. However, these approaches often exhibit weaknesses due to their design being
tailored to specific source images or limited to the digital domain.
In contrast, the second type of attack, universal attacks, uses an additional object (patch) to eliminate
the requirement of relying on the input image. This patch replaces a portion of the source image and
launches an attack without prior knowledge of the other items within the scene. The first universal
attack approach was proposed by Brown et al. (2017). They used gradient-based optimization to
iteratively update the pixel values of the patch to find the optimal values that can cause the victim
model to misclassify the object (AdvPatch). The AdvPatch can be placed anywhere within the
classifier’s field of view, enabling attackers to craft physical-world attacks easily. Since then, many
studies have followed the same strategy to develop patches for physical-world attacks aimed at
deceiving classifiers or object detectors (Evtimov et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019; Thys et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2020b).


2.3   A DVERSARIAL ATTACK FOR VISION TRANSFORMER

Shortly after the introduction of the vision transformer, several researchers (Bhojanapalli et al., 2021;
Shao et al., 2021; Naseer et al., 2021; Paul & Chen, 2022) conducted studies demonstrating the
superior robustness of vision transformers compared to CNNs when the entire image is perturbed
with adversarial perturbations (non-universal attacks). However, subsequent research by Fu et al.
(2022) explored the vulnerability of vision transformers to adversarial patch attacks and found that
vision transformers are more susceptible to such attacks compared to CNNs. Additionally, Gu et al.
(2022) further showed that whereas vision transformers are generally resilient to patch-based natural
attacks, they are more vulnerable to adversarial patch attacks when compared to comparable CNNs.
All the preceding studies used a generation method similar to the one employed for CNNs, which
involves replacing certain parts of the input images with random noise and uses gradient-based opti-
mization to iteratively update the pixel values, aiming to find the optimal values that can deceive the
target model. However, unlike adversarial patches for CNNs, the patches they obtained for vision
transformers must be precisely aligned with the patches used for linear projection in transformers.
Gu et al. (2022) demonstrated that even a slight shift of a single pixel could dramatically decrease
the attack success rate. The strict requirement posed a significant challenge to the practicality of us-
ing adversarial patches in real-world scenarios, as misalignment between attack patches and image
patches is commonly encountered due to various factors. Consequently, it is crucial to develop meth-
ods for creating adversarial patches that account for these realistic conditions where misalignment
can occur.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3   N ETWORK

Instead of relying on direct gradient optimization of a random initial patch, our approach employs
a sub-network to generate the desired adversarial patch from a random initial input. The resulting
adversarial patch, known as the G-Patch, is affixed to a random position on the source image and then
sent to the discriminator for classification. The loss, calculated based on the prediction and target
class, is used to optimize the generator. The model can be divided into three functional components:
the generator, deployer, and discriminator, as shown in Figure 1.
Generator: The generator is a sub-network consisting of five convolutional layers, each accompa-
nied by batch normalization and ReLU activation layers. The first convolutional layer is responsible
for projecting and reshaping the 100-dimensional random input vector into a three-dimensional ten-
sor (4x4x1024 in the figure). The next four convolutional layers progressively upsample and refine
the feature maps, capturing more complex patterns and details. The last convolutional layer is fol-
lowed by a threshold layer instead of the batch normalization and ReLU layers. This threshold layer
ensures that the output values of the generator are limited to a specific range. The threshold layer is
defined as follows:
                                      T h(x) = k ∗ tanh(x) + k                                     (1)
where k is a hyperparameter to adjust the range of the output and tanh(x) applies the hyperbolic
tangent function element-wise. We add k here to ensure that all values in the output remain above 0.
In default, we use k = 0.5 to scale the range of the patch to 1, and for the following experiments, we
use different k to achieve brightness restriction. By changing the kernel size and stride of different
convolutional layers, we can change the size of the output adversarial patch.
                                       w×h×c
Deployer: Given an image x ∈ [0, 1]        with class y and the generated adversarial patch p. We
use Algorithm 1 to generate a binary mask M with the same shape of x at a random position.

Algorithm 1 Mask generation
    Input source image: x, adversarial patch: p
 1: M ← Zeros(x)                                                 ▷ all-zero mask M with shape x
 2: k ← Randint(0, M.shape[0] − p.shape[0])
 3: l ← Randint(0, M.shape[1] − p.shape[1])                    ▷ random position (k, l) within M
 4: for i ← k to k + p.shape[0] − 1 do
 5:     for j ← l to l + p.shape[1] − 1 do
 6:         M [i, j] ← 1            ▷ mask only includes elements within shape p at position (k, l)
 7:     end for
 8: end for
 9: return M


Then the modified image is generated by the deploy function T (p, x):
                                  T (p, x) = M ∗ p + (1 − M ) ∗ x                                   (2)

The deployer generates modified images by using the G-Patch to replace a random part of the source
image, distinguishing it from prior methods in which adversarial patches replaced input patches for
vision transformers.
Discriminator: The discriminator in our network is composed of the victim network (ViT-B/16 in
the figure). It can be replaced with various models to create G-Patches tailored for different target
networks or employ a combination of models to generate G-Patches for black-box attacks. Unlike
GANs, the discriminator in our network remains unaltered throughout the training process.
For a targeted attack, the final loss of our network can be formed as follows:
                                L = log(sof tmax(P r(ŷ|T (p, x))))                                 (3)
where the ŷ is the target class and ŷ ̸= y, P r is the prediction of the discriminator with respect to
class ŷ.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we first provide detailed information about the experimental setup used in our study.
Next, we show the G-Patches generated by our proposed model and evaluate their performance
on various victim networks. Our results highlight the effectiveness of these patches in launching
attacks from any position within the field of view. Furthermore, we conduct an analysis of the
robustness of the G-Patches. We investigate their resilience to brightness restrictions, color transfer,
and random noise, aiming to provide insights into their stability and effectiveness in the presence
of physical environmental disturbances. Lastly, we validate the practical applicability of the G-
Patch through black box attacks and by placing it in physical-world scenarios. These empirical
evaluations demonstrate that the G-Patch can effectively deceive vision transformers in complex
physical environments.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In our experiments, we use the weights and shared models from the Pytorch Image models repos-
itory (Wightman, 2019), which have been trained on the ImageNet1K dataset. Similar to the pre-
existing works, the effectiveness of the G-Patch is evaluated using white box attack settings, where
the G-Patch is trained and tested on the same models. Specifically, we choose the ViT and SWIN
transformer as the primary victim network architectures. These two networks exemplify crucial dif-
ferences in patch handling within vision transformers: while the ViT employs fixed, non-overlapping
patches, the SWIN transformer integrates varying patch sizes with shifts. We optimize our network’s
classification loss L using the Adam optimizer (lr = 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) and conduct
training for each configuration over 80 epochs, selecting the patch that achieves the highest per-
formance as the final output patch. Additionally, input images are standardized to dimensions of
224x224, with pixel values normalized to the range of [0,1] for consistency.
To assess the attack success rate (ASR), we begin by assembling a collection of images that are
accurately classified by victim models. The total number of these collected images is denoted as P .
we apply the G-Patch to this set of images and determine the number of images, denoted as Q, that
are classified as the target class. The ASR is then defined as Q
                                                               P , serving as a metric to measure the
effectiveness of the attack.
In order to evaluate the patch’s performance in the physical world, we use an HP laser printer to
print the adversarial patches on A4 paper. Then we position the printed adversarial patch alongside
the target object and capture photographs using a Google Pixel 6a smartphone. This physical-world
test incorporates various real-world factors such as camera angle changes, lighting variations, and
different types of noise.

4.2   P ERFORMANCE OF THE G-PATCH

             Table 1: Attack success rates of G-Patches on various vision transformers

                         Models                      Patch size
                                         48x48     64x64 80x80         96x96
                         ViT-B/16         6.7%     76.4%     97.1%     98.7%
                         ViT-L/16         2.7%     64.3%     88.7%     97.6%
                         SWIN-S/16       77.7%     95.7%     99.5%     99.9%
                         SWIN-B/16       59.5%     94.8%     99.3%     99.8%
                         DeiT-S/16       42.6%     97.3%     99.8%     99.9%
                         DeiT-B/16       19.6%     98.6%     99.9%     99.9%

The summarized attack success rates (ASR) for various vision transformers, with random patch
positions, are presented in Table 1. It is evident that regardless of the architecture or depth of
the vision transformers, the G-Patch can achieve a high attack success rate even with a relatively
small size (80x80, ∼12% of the input image area). Conversely, the control patch (natural image)
with the same size achieves less than ∼3% ASR across all models. These results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the G-Patch for launching attacks from any position within the field of view.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that the patch size needed to consistently deceive the model in this universal setting (targeted
attack with random positions) is significantly larger than that required for attacks with non-targeted
and aligned patches. For instance, Gu et al. (2022) show that 2% of the input image area (32x32)
is sufficient to deceive a DeiT-S into misclassification. However, as observed in attacks on CNN
models, non-targeted attacks are significantly easier to execute than targeted ones and require smaller
patch sizes to deceive the target network. Moreover, it’s essential to emphasize that the practical
feasibility of these two methods varies significantly, as patches demanding precise alignment are
rarely viable for real-world applications.
Some modified images created for the ViT-B/16 and SWIN-B/16 are shown in Figure 2. These
images demonstrate the flexibility of our patch placement methodology, as the G-Patch is positioned
randomly on the source image, regardless of its specific position or alignment.


                 Figure 2: Modified images and predictions with different models
                  (Top: G-Patch on SWIN-B/16; Bottom: G-Patch on ViT-B/16)



4.3     PATCH ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS

In order to evaluate the robustness of our G-Patch in real-world scenarios, we conducted an in-
vestigation into its performance when faced with challenges such as brightness restrictions, color
transfers, and random noise. These aspects of robustness hold utmost significance in real-world
deployments as they can substantially influence both the success rate of attacks and the visibility of
patches. In this session, we assess the impact of different features on the victim networks (ViT-B/16
and SWIN-B/16) using a fixed 80x80 patch size.


4.3.1    B RIGHTNESS RESTRICTION

Brightness restriction for the G-Patch can be easily implemented by adjusting the k value within
the threshold layer. The performance variations across different brightness ranges, as well as the
brightness distributions of certain brightness-restricted patches, are illustrated in Figure 3.
The results demonstrate that G-Patch exhibits remarkable robustness to brightness restrictions. Even
when the brightness range diminishes to just half of its original magnitude, the generated patch can
still preserve over 80% of its ASR on a more challenging ViT-B/16 model.
The observed higher level of robustness in the SWIN-B/16 model can be attributed to the model’s
inherent vulnerability. It requires comparatively less information to deceive the network, as demon-
strated in Table 1, where a G-Patch achieves superior performance on SWIN-B/16 with a smaller
patch size.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Figure 3: Attack success rates with different brightness ranges


                    Figure 4: Different color transferred G-Patches on ViT-B/16


4.3.2   C OLOR TRANSFER
Color transfer is a common occurrence in real-world deployments, often resulting from varying
lighting conditions or shifts in printer color accuracy. To perform color transfer, we introduce a
parameter δ and apply it to all values within specific channels (RGB color model). To prevent
potential overflow problems while manipulating colors, we use a brightness-restricted G-Patch with
a range of 0 to 0.8, as opposed to the original G-Patch, which ranges from 0 to 1. Notably, the
texture distribution of the G-Patch remains unchanged throughout this color transfer process.

                      Table 2: Attack success rates with different color transfer

                          Models                        Color
                                          original color color 1      color 2
                          ViT-B/16            91.6%        90.9%      90.7%
                          SWIN-B/16           99.6%        98.9%      99.7%

We show some color-transferred patches in Figure 4, and the performance of different patches is
presented in Table 2. We observe that the G-Patch consistently maintains nearly identical ASR
when subjected to different color transfers, irrespective of the structure employed. This performance
underscores that the G-Patch does not rely on color information to deceive victim networks.
This characteristic not only bolsters the G-Patch’s robustness when deployed under varying lighting
conditions but also equips it with the capability to reduce its visual conspicuousness through color
transfer during deployment.

4.3.3   R ANDOM NOISE
In real-world deployments, random noise represents one of the most prevalent challenges that an ad-
versarial patch must confront. Such noise can originate from multiple sources, including the camera
system (e.g., dust on the lens, image signal processing in the camera), environmental factors (e.g.,
fog, shadows), and even the patch itself (e.g.printer color accuracy, carrier texture). These challenges


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


create a substantial divide between digital attack results and physical-world results, rendering many
digital-domain attack techniques ineffective in the physical world.
To simulate the noise commonly encountered during real-world deployment, we generate random
noise based on different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR). In order to avoid overflow when adding strong
noise, we choose patches with a narrow brightness range (ranging from 0 to 0.6). The results of our
experiments are shown in Table 3.

                     Table 3: Attack success rates across different noise levels

                    Models                             SNR
                                    Ori.     10 dB      7 dB     5 dB      4 dB
                    ViT-B/16       86.5%     85.6%     83.2%    69.3%     58.6%
                    SWIN-B/16      99.3%     97.4%     83.6%    67.6%     44.2%

We observe that the performance of the G-Patch remains relatively stable even at an SNR of 7 dB
(20% random drift). The patch’s ability to maintain a high attack success rate in the presence of
such noise further reinforces its effectiveness and practicality.

4.4   B LACK BOX ATTACK

Conducting black box attacks in real-world deployments is an exceptionally challenging task. Prior
adversarial patches designed for vision transformers have shown very limited black box attack trans-
ferability (ASR less than 5%). To evaluate the black box attack performance of our G-Patch, we train
the patch on ViT-B, SWIN-S, and SWIN-T, and evaluate it on SWIN-B. The corresponding attack
success rates are summarized in Table 4.
Our observations indicate that the G-Patch requires a larger size to deceive a vision transformer
under a black box attack setting. However, it remains considerably more efficient than the control
patch (a natural image) of the same size. Furthermore, when comparing its performance with that of
the AdvPatch employed in CNNs, as demonstrated in (Brown et al., 2017), the G-Patch achieves a
comparable attack success rate on vision transformers of equivalent size.

                              Table 4: Black box attack success rates

                         Patch                         Patch size
                                               80x80    96x96 112x112
                         G-Patch               50.4%    76.4%      83.2%
                         Control patch          2.7%     3.9%       6.8%
                         AdvPatch (CNNs)        58%      81%        86%


4.5   P HYSICAL - WORLD ATTACK

The physical-world deployability is a key feature that makes adversarial patches more popular than
many other attacking methods. However, due to the alignment problem, none of the adversarial
patches designed for vision transformers has been deployed in the physical world before. Although
our G-Patches show the perfect position irrelative based on previous experiments, a valid concern
remains regarding their robustness in physical-world scenarios. In order to address this concern, we
design several physical-world deploy instances to show that the proposed attack patch can still work
robustly in the physical world.
We have chosen a variety of scenarios encompassing different lighting conditions and image captures
from varying distances and angles. For our experiments, we use the ViT-B/16 model as the victim
network, and we present some illustrative figures and predictions in Figure 5.
The top row shows the G-Patch’s remarkable effectiveness in addressing distortions resulting from
variations in camera angles, shadows, and even the bending of the printed patch. The bottom row
highlights the G-Patch’s ability to deceive the network with a relatively small size compared to the


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Figure 5: Prediction results in the physical world


original target. These results demonstrate the robustness of G-Patch in launching attacks in the
complex physical world, addressing practical challenges encountered when designing adversarial
patches for vision transformers.

5   C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces the G-Patch, a novel universal adversarial patch designed for vision trans-
formers that can deceive them without alignment constraints. Our experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the G-Patch, allowing it to launch attacks from various positions within the field
of view with a relatively small size. Additionally, we highlight its robustness against brightness
restrictions, color transfer, and random noise, making it resilient in real-world scenarios. Black
box and physical-world attack experiments validate its effectiveness under challenging conditions.
The G-Patch represents a significant advancement, bridging the practicality gap between the digital
and physical domains for adversarial patches on vision transformers, opening avenues for further
research.

R EFERENCES
Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario Lučić, and Cordelia Schmid.
  Vivit: A video vision transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 6836–6846, October 2021.

Anish Athalye, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Kevin Kwok. Synthesizing robust adversarial
  examples. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 284–293. PMLR, 2018.

Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ayan Chakrabarti, Daniel Glasner, Daliang Li, Thomas Unterthiner, and An-
  dreas Veit. Understanding robustness of transformers for image classification. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10231–10241, 2021.

Tom B Brown, Dandelion Mané, Aurko Roy, Martı́n Abadi, and Justin Gilmer. Adversarial patch.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09665, 2017.

Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Quanfu Fan, and Rameswar Panda. Crossvit: Cross-attention multi-scale
  vision transformer for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-
  ference on computer vision, pp. 357–366, 2021a.

Zhengsu Chen, Lingxi Xie, Jianwei Niu, Xuefeng Liu, Longhui Wei, and Qi Tian. Visformer:
  The vision-friendly transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 589–598, 2021b.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaoyi Dong, Jianmin Bao, Dongdong Chen, Weiming Zhang, Nenghai Yu, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen,
  and Baining Guo. Cswin transformer: A general vision transformer backbone with cross-shaped
  windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), pp. 12124–12134, June 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Ivan Evtimov, Kevin Eykholt, Earlence Fernandes, Tadayoshi Kohno, Bo Li, Atul Prakash, Amir
  Rahmati, and Dawn Song. Robust physical-world attacks on machine learning models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1707.08945, 2(3):4, 2017.
Yonggan Fu, Shunyao Zhang, Shang Wu, Cheng Wan, and Yingyan Lin. Patch-fool: Are vision
  transformers always robust against adversarial perturbations? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08392,
  2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Benjamin Graham, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hugo Touvron, Pierre Stock, Armand Joulin, Hervé Jégou,
  and Matthijs Douze. Levit: a vision transformer in convnet’s clothing for faster inference. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 12259–12269,
  2021.
Jindong Gu, Volker Tresp, and Yao Qin. Are vision transformers robust to patch perturbations? In
   Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022,
   Proceedings, Part XII, pp. 404–421. Springer, 2022.
Kai Han, An Xiao, Enhua Wu, Jianyuan Guo, Chunjing Xu, and Yunhe Wang. Transformer in
  transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:15908–15919, 2021.
Qian Huang, Isay Katsman, Horace He, Zeqi Gu, Serge Belongie, and Ser-Nam Lim. Enhanc-
  ing adversarial example transferability with an intermediate level attack. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 4733–4742, 2019.
Danny Karmon, Daniel Zoran, and Yoav Goldberg. Lavan: Localized and visible adversarial noise.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2507–2515. PMLR, 2018.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Ze Liu, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Video swin trans-
  former. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 3202–3211, June 2022.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksander Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. To-
  wards deep learning models resistant to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal
  adversarial perturbations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 1765–1773, 2017.
Muhammad Muzammal Naseer, Kanchana Ranasinghe, Salman H Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad
 Shahbaz Khan, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Intriguing properties of vision transformers. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 23296–23308. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2021.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sayak Paul and Pin-Yu Chen. Vision transformers are robust learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 2071–2081, 2022.

Yao Qin, Chiyuan Zhang, Ting Chen, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alex Beutel, and Xuezhi Wang.
  Understanding and improving robustness of vision transformers through patch-based negative
  augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16276–16289, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision transformers for dense prediction. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 12179–
  12188, October 2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Hadi Salman, Saachi Jain, Eric Wong, and Aleksander Madry. Certified patch robustness via
  smoothed vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
  sion and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15137–15147, 2022.

Rulin Shao, Zhouxing Shi, Jinfeng Yi, Pin-Yu Chen, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. On the adversarial robust-
  ness of vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15670, 2021.

Yucheng Shi, Yahong Han, Yu-an Tan, and Xiaohui Kuang. Decision-based black-box attack against
  vision transformers via patch-wise adversarial removal. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 35:12921–12933, 2022.

Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.

Simen Thys, Wiebe Van Ranst, and Toon Goedeme. Fooling automated surveillance cameras: Ad-
  versarial patches to attack person detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, June 2019.

Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.

Zhengzhong Tu, Hossein Talebi, Han Zhang, Feng Yang, Peyman Milanfar, Alan Bovik, and Yinxiao
  Li. Maxvit: Multi-axis vision transformer. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 459–
  479. Springer, 2022.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                  https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.

Dongxian Wu, Yisen Wang, Shu-Tao Xia, James Bailey, and Xingjun Ma. Skip connections
  matter: On the transferability of adversarial examples generated with resnets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.05990, 2020a.

Zuxuan Wu, Ser-Nam Lim, Larry S Davis, and Tom Goldstein. Making an invisibility cloak: Real
  world adversarial attacks on object detectors. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
  Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 1–17. Springer,
  2020b.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tete Xiao, Mannat Singh, Eric Mintun, Trevor Darrell, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Early
  convolutions help transformers see better. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:30392–30400, 2021.
Ting Yao, Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Yu Wang, Xiao-Ping Zhang, and Tao Mei. Dual vision trans-
  former. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2023.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transform-
  ers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 12104–12113, June 2022.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiyang Dai, Jianwei Yang, Bin Xiao, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, and Jianfeng Gao.
  Multi-scale vision longformer: A new vision transformer for high-resolution image encoding. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2998–
  3008, October 2021.
Yang Zhang, Hassan Foroosh, Philip David, and Boqing Gong. Camou: Learning physical vehicle
  camouflages to adversarially attack detectors in the wild. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.


                                                12
