Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C URRICULUM R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING VIA
M ORPHOLOGY-E NVIRONMENT C O -E VOLUTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Throughout long history, natural species have learned to survive by evolving their
         physical structures adaptive to the changes of environments. In contrast, current
         reinforcement learning (RL) mainly focuses on training an agent with a fixed mor-
         phology (e.g., skeletal structure and joint attributes) in a fixed environment, which
         can hardly be generalized to dynamic environments or new tasks. In this paper,
         we optimize an RL agent and its morphology through “morphology-environment
         co-evolution (MECE)”, in which the morphology keeps being updated to adapt
         to the changing environment, while the environment is modified progressively
         to bring new challenges and stimulate the improvement of the morphology. This
         leads to a curriculum to train generalizable RL, whose morphology and policy
         are optimized for different environments. Instead of hand-crafting the curriculum,
         we train two policies to automatically change the morphology and the environment.
         To this end, (1) we develop two novel and effective rewards for the two policies,
         which are solely based on the learning dynamics of the RL agent; (2) we design
         a scheduler to automatically determine when to change the environment and the
         morphology. In experiments on two classes of tasks, the morphology and RL
         policies trained via MECE exhibit significantly better generalization capability
         in unseen test environments than SOTA morphology optimization methods. Our
         ablation studies on the two MECE policies further show that the co-evolution
         between the morphology and environment is the key to success.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved unprecedented success in some challenging tasks (Lil-
licrap et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015). Although current RL can excel on a specified task in a fixed
environment through massing training, it usually struggles to generalize to unseen tasks and/or adapt
to new environments. A promising strategy to overcome this problem is to train the agent on multiple
tasks in different environments (Wang et al., 2019a; Portelas et al., 2019; Gur et al., 2021; Jaderberg
et al., 2017) via multi-task learning or meta-learning (Salimans et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017). How-
ever, it increases the training cost and the space for possible environments/tasks can be too large to be
fully explored by RL. So how to select the most informative and representative environments/tasks to
train an RL agent to evolve generalizable skills becomes an critical open challenge.
Unlike RL agents that do not actively seek new environments to improve their learning capability,
natural species have full motivations to do so to survive in the competitive world, and one underlying
mechanism to drive them is evolution. Evolution is a race with the changing environment for every
species, and a primary goal is to accelerate its adaptation to new environments. Besides merely
optimizing its control policy, evolution more notably changes the morphology of species, i.e., the
skeletal structure and the attributes for each part, in order to make them adapt to the environment. In
fact, the improvement on morphology can be more critical because there could exist a variety of actions
or skills an agent cannot do (no matter how the control policy is optimized) without certain structures,
e.g., more than one leg, a long-enough limb, or a 360-degree rotation joint. For RL, we claim
that A good morphology should improve the agent’s adaptiveness and versatility, i.e., learning
faster and making more progress in different environments. From prehistoric person to modern
Homo sapiens, there is a definite association between the rise of civilization and the Homo sapiens’
optimization of their physical form for improved tool use. Unfortunately, the morphology in many RL
researches are pre-defined and fixed so it could be sub-optimal for the targeted environments/tasks


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Fixed Environment                                                                                        Fixed Environment
           Each agent                                Each agent                                                                                 Environment                                       Environment
                                    Environment                               Environment                                Exploration                                     Exploration
           takes actions to                          takes actions to                                                                           rewards                                           rewards
                                    rewards                                   rewards
           explore                                   explore

                   Agents set                              Agents set                                      πT2A                          + π            πT2A Sequence
                                                                                                                                                             actions
                                                                                                                                                                      of
                                                                                                                                                                                           +   π       πT2A
                              + π                                       + π
                                                                                            πT2A -Transform2Act policy
                                                                                                                                       (b) Main structure of Transform2Act
                                             Elimination
                              +   π                                     + π
                                             & random
                                             mutation                                       πe -Environment policy

                                                                                            πm -Morphology policy        Environment Et                   πe                   Environment Et+1                 πe
                                                                                            π -Control policy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reward Re
                                                                                                                                                                                               Environment


                                                                                                                                                            reward Re
                                                                                                                                         Environment
                                  + π                                   + π                                     Exploration                                             Exploration
                                                                                                                                         rewards                                               rewards

                                                                                                                                            reward Rm                                               reward Rm
                                  + π                                   + π                           πm                         + π                     πm Sequence
                                                                                                                                                            actions
                                                                                                                                                                     of
                                                                                                                                                                                       +   π                    πm

                  (a) Main structure of ES-based methods                                                                                       (c) Co-evolution in MECE


Figure 1: MECE vs. previous methods. (a) Evolution strategy (ES)-based method for morphology optimiza-
tion. It starts from agents with different morphology, eliminates those with poor performance, and then applies
random mutation to the survivors. (b) Transform2Act, which trains an RL policy to modify the morphology of
an agent in a fixed environment. (c) MECE (ours). We train two policies to optimize the morphology and change
the environment to form a curriculum over the course of training a control policy.

and may restrain the potential of RL. Although morphology can be optimized using RL (Sims, 1994;
Wang et al., 2019b; Kurin et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022) to improve the final performance for a
specific task or environment, it was not optimized for the adaptiveness to varying environments.
Moreover, instead of re-initializing the control/RL policy after every morphology modification or
environment change, the millions of years of evolution demonstrate the effectiveness of continual and
progressive learning of the control policy over generations of morphology evolution along with a
sequence of varying environments. How to optimize the morphology and control policy of an RL
agent for the above goal is still an underexplored problem.
Given that the agent has the freedom to improve its morphology and control policy for faster
adaptation to different environments/tasks, the remaining question is: what environment can improve
this learning process and incentivize the agent to keep finding better morphology (rather than staying
with the same one)? The learning environment plays an essential role in RL since it determines the
data and feedback the agent can collect for its training. In this paper, we adopt a simple criterion: A
good environment should accelerate the evolution of the agent and help it find better morphology
sooner, which will enhance the agent’s adaptiveness and versatility over new environments/tasks.
The interplay between morphology and environment has lasted for billions of years. In the endless
game, species which find the appropriate environments to evolve its morphology and policy may
survive and keep being improved via adaptation to new environments/tasks. Inspired by this, we
propose an morphology-environment co-evolution (MECE) scheme that automatically generates a
curriculum of varying environments to optimize the agent’s morphology and its RL policy so they can
be generalized to unseen environments and adapted to new morphology, respectively. In MECE, we
train two RL policies to modify the morphology and change the environment, which create a sequence
of learning scenarios to train the control policy continuously. This differs from previous work that
select the morphology or the environment from a pre-defined set of candidates. Specifically, unlike
zeroth-order optimization approaches (Wang et al., 2019b; Hejna et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2018), a
morphology policy network can generate modifications based on all the morphology evaluated in
diverse environments from history. On the other hand, an environment policy can produce a sequence
of progressively modified environments instead of randomly selected or sampled ones (Portelas et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2019a). In Fig. 1, we illustrate the co-evolution process of MECE and compare
it with evolution-strategy (ES) based method (Wang et al., 2019b) and Transform2Act (Yuan et al.,
2022), which uses RL to optimize the morphology in a fixed environment.
Inspired by the former discussion of “good morphology” and “good environment”, we optimize the
morphology policy to improve the agent’s adaptiveness+versatility and optimize the environment
policy to improve the morphology’s evolution. To this end, we design two rewards for the two policies
based on the learning progress of the control policy, which is estimated by comparing its concurrent
performance on a validation set and its historical trajectories. Therefore, the three policies are
complementary and mutually benefit each other: (1) the morphology and environment policies create
a curriculum to improve generalizability of the control policy; (2) the environment policy creates a
curriculum to optimize the morphology policy; (3) the control policy provides rewards to train the


                                                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


other two policies. In MECE, we train the control policy and automatically determine when to apply
the other two policies to modify the morphology or change the environment: they are triggered by
the slow progress on the current morphology and environment, respectively. In experiments over
different tasks, the morphology and control policy learned through MECE significantly outperforms
the existing method in new environments. Moreover, MECE exhibits much faster-learning speed than
baselines. We further provide an extensive ablation study to isolate each main component of MECE’s
contribution and compare it with other options.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Continuous Design Optimization. A line of research in the community has studied optimizing an
agent’s continuous design parameters without modifying its skeletal structure, and they commonly
optimize on a specific kind of robots. Baykal & Alterovitz (2017) studies an annealing-based
framework for cylindrical robot optimization. Ha et al. (2017); Desai et al. (2017) optimize the
design of legged robots by trajectory optimization and implicit function. Applying deep RL to design
optimization has become more popular recently. Chen et al. (2020) uses computational graphs to
model robot hardware as part of the policy. Luck et al. (2019) optimizes robot design via a learned
value function. Ha et al. (2017) proposes a population-based policy gradient method. Another line
of work (Yu et al., 2019; Exarchos et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021) searches for the optimal robot
parameters to fit an incoming domain by RL. Different from the prior works, our approach learns
to find the most general skeleton of an agent while maintaining its continuous design parameters
optimization to diverse environments or tasks.
Combinatorial morphology Optimization. One closely related line of work is the design of modular
robot morphology spaces and developing algorithms for co-optimizing morphology and control (Sims,
1994; Liao et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., 2022) within a design space to find task-
optimized combinations of controller and robot morphology. When the control complexity is low,
evolutionary strategies have been successfully applied to find diverse morphologies in expressive soft
robot design space (Cheney et al., 2013; 2018). For more expressive design spaces, GNNs have been
leveraged to share controller parameters (Wang et al., 2019b) across generations or develop novel
heuristic search methods for efficient exploration of the design space (Zhao et al., 2020). In contrast
to task-specific morphology optimization, Hejna et al. (2021) propose evolving morphologies without
any task or reward specification. Hejna et al. (2021) employ an information-theoretic objective to
evolve task-agnostic agent designs.
Generalization to environments. Several recent works (Wang et al., 2019a; Portelas et al., 2019;
Gur et al., 2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2022) show that the efficiency and generalization of RL
can be improved by training the policy in different environments. By sampling the parameters
of environmental features, they Portelas et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2019a) teach the RL agent
using a curriculum of various environments. Estimating the distribution of environments, however,
requires evaluating the RL policy on numerous sampled environments, which might be expensive
and inaccurate for intricate ones. The modified environments may also be unfeasible or too difficult
for RL exploration. In MECE, we train an environment policy to change the environments adaptive
to the evolved agent’s learning progress, and it is possible to regulate the level of difficulty of the
modified environments.

3    F ORMULATIONS OF THE T HREE P OLICIES IN MECE
In MECE, we have three RL policies, a control policy π that learns to control the agents of evolved
morphology, a morphology policy πm that learns to modify the agent’s morphology for better robust-
ness in diverse environments, and an environment policy πe that learns to change the environment
to boost the morphology evolution. During the training phase, πm and πe are alternately applied to
evolve the agent’s morphology and the training environment, respectively. Taking into account that π
might require various environment steps for training in distinct morphologies or environments, we
propose a dynamic time-scaling for πm and πe that is adaptive to π’s learning process.
Agent control. The problem of controlling an agent can be modeled as a Markov decision process
(MDP), denoted by the tuple {S, A, p, r, γ}, where S and A represent the set of state space and
action space respectively, p means the transition model between states, and r is the reward function.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


An agent of morphology mi ∈ M in state st ∈ S at time t takes action at ∈ A and the environment
returns the agent’s new state st+1 according to the unknown transition function p(st+1 |st , at , mi ),
along with associated reward rt = r(st , at ). The goal is to learn the control policy π ∗ : S → A
mapping states to actions that maximizeshthe expectedi return E[Rt ], which takes into account reward
                                          PH t
at future time-steps J(π) = E[Rt ] = E      t=0 γ rt with a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1], where H is
the variable time horizon.
We use a graph neural network (GNN) for the control policy because (1) it can be generalized to
different morphologies and learn fundamental control skills; (2) it captures the skeleton structure and
encodes physical constraints. Specifically, we represent the agent’s skeleton by a graph G = (V, A, E)
where each node u ∈ V represents a joint and each edge e ∈ E represents a bone connecting two
joints. Each joint u is associated with a representation vector zu storing attributes in A, e.g., bone
length, motor strength, size. The GNN takes zu as inputs and propagate messages across nodes on
the graph to produce a hidden state for each node.
Morphology evolution. We model the morphology evolution as an MDP problem, denoted by the
tuple {Sm , B, pm , rm , ρ}. Sm represents the set of state space, and a state sm
                                                                                αt ∈ Sm at time-step
αt is defined as smαt = Gαt , where Gαt is the skeleton structure of agent. The action bαt sampled
from the set of action space B can modify the topology of the agent, which has three choices
in {AddJoint, DelJoint, N oChange}. The transition dynamics pm (sm                m
                                                                           αt+1 |sαt , bαt ) reflects the
changes in state and action. We define the reward function for πm as the average improvement of
training π with the current evolved morphology in different environments. The reward rm at time-step
αt is denoted as
                           1 X
                                    R(H, θE , Gαt ) − R(H, θE , Gαt−1 ) − λ∥bm         2

               rm,αt =                                                            αt ∥2 ,             (1)
                          |E| E
                             θ ∈E

note that the first term in Eq. 1 indicates the average performance of the current morphology in
diverse environments, and the second term is a cost for each action taken by πm that modifies the
morphology of the agent. E is the set of environments used for evaluation.
Environment evolution. We model environment evolution as an MDP problem, denoted by the
tuple {SE , C, pE , rE , ρ}. The state sE             E
                                        βt = (Gβt , θβt ) in the set of state space Se includes the agent’s
topology Gβt = (Vβt , Eβt ) and the parameter of environment θE ∈ ΘE . The transition dynamics
pE (sE      E
     βt+1 |sβt , cβt ) reflects the changes in the state by taking an action at time-step βt. The action
cβt will directly change the environment parameters (more detailed in Appendix A). We define the
reward for πe as the learning progress of multiple morphologies in N most recent environments.
Thus, training πe will encourage πm to optimize the morphology of better generalization sooner. The
reward re at time-step βt is denoted as
                                             N
                                         1 X
                               rE,βt =         (Pβt − Pθt−i )
                                         N i=1
                                           E                  E
                        where, Pβt = R(H, θβt , Gβt ) − R(H, θβt−1 , Gβt ).                            (2)
                                                                                          E
in Eq. 2, Pk is the learning progress of the RL agent in an environment defined on R(H, θβt , Gβt ),
which denotes the expected return of the RL agent Gβt of H time-steps evaluated in environment θkE .
Short evaluation window. Since rm and rE are respectively based on the training process of π on
different morphologies or environments, it is costly but necessary to rollout π periodically to collect
data. However, Hejna et al. (2021) demonstrates that evaluating with a short horizon is enough to
provide informative feedback to reflect the training process of the current policy. In light of this, we
run a short evaluation window for π after every period of environment steps taken by the agent. In
each evaluation window, we rollout multiple morphologies of the best performance by π in several
most recent environments, and then we can calculate rm and re based on the evaluation results. For
more details refer to Appendix C.
In this paper, we use a standard policy gradient method, PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), to optimize
these three policies. Note that the time scale of the main policy, morphology policy πm and
environment policy πe are different, indicated by the subscript α and β, which we will explain
more details in the following section.

                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    A LGORITHM OF MECE


In MECE, we jointly train three policies:
                                              Algorithm 1 MECE
control policy π learns to complete tasks,
morphology policy πm learns to evolve the 1: Initialize: control policy π, morphology policy πm , envi-
agent’s morphology to be more adaptive            ronment policy πe , dataset D ← ∅, initial agent morphol-
to diverse environments, and environment          ogy m0 , initial environment parameter θ0E ;
                                               2: while Not reaching max iterations do
policy πe learns to modify the training envi- 3:     for t = 0, 1, · · · , τmax do               ▷ RL exploration
ronments more challenging. At first glance, 4:           Sample control action at ∼ π;
training multiple RL policies may appear 5:              st+1 ← T (st+1 |st , at );
more difficult than training a single RL pol- 6:         rt ← environment reward;
                                                                            E
icy, as it needs the collection of additional 7:         mt+1 ← mt , θt+1         ← θtE ;
data via interaction. However, MECE en- 8:               Store (st , rt , at , st+1 , mt , θtE ) into D;
ables three policies to help in each other’s 9:      end for
training through the co-evolving mecha- 10:          Update π with PPO using samples in D;
                                                                E
nism, where each policy is trained on a 11:          (mt+1 , θt+1   ) = CO-EVO(mt , π, θtE );
curriculum of easy-to-hard tasks utilizing 12: end while
dense feedback from the training experience of other policies. By iterating this co-evolution process,
MECE considerably improves the training efficiency of each policy, resulting in an RL agent of
morphology that is more generalizable across environments.
In each episode, the control policy π starts from training on an initial agent in a randomly sampled
environment (refer to Line.3-9 in Alg. 1). This initial agent’s skeleton structure is relatively simple
and is easy to learn according to its naive morphology. Even though the naive agent is not generalized
due to its constrained morphology, it can initially provide dense feedback for training πm and πe .
On the other hand, beginning from an agent with a random morphology is theoretically feasible but
inefficient when initializing a complicated morphology that is difficult to learn to control and yields
uninformative feedback for training the other policies.
We assume that the control policy is now          Algorithm 2 CO-EVO
mature on the current morphology after
                                                   1: Input: Current morphology mαt , control policy π, cur-
training. Then MECE proceeds to a se-                 rent environment θβtE
                                                                            , environment set Env of N most
ries of co-evolution phases, where a phase            recent environments, dataset D.
is associated with achieving robustness            2: Procedure CO-EVO(mαt , π, θβt   E
                                                                                        ):
across the evolved morphologies and en-            3: Evaluate π with morphology mαt in the current environ-
                                                              E
vironments (refer to Line.11 in Alg. 1). In           ment θβt   and environments set Env ;
each phase, as shown in Line.3-4 of Alg. 2,        4: Calculate reward rm and rE following Eq. 1 and
we first evaluate the control policy to col-          Eq. 2,store rm and rE into D;
lect rewards for training πm and πe . Note         5: if rm ≤ δm then         ▷ Modify the agent’s morphology
that this step is not cost, as the RL agent ex-    6:     Apply πm to modify mαt to mαt+1 ;
ecutes environment steps with a short hori-        7:     Update πm with PPO using samples in D;
                                                   8: else
zon. After that, we alternately apply πm           9:     if re ≤ δe then ▷ Modify the training environment
and πe to co-evolve the agent’s morphol-          10:                               E
                                                               Apply πe to modify θβt      E
                                                                                      to θβt+1 ;
ogy and the training environments based on        11:          Update πe with PPO using samples in D;
two criteria of rm and re (refer to Line.5        12:      end if
and 9 in Alg. 2).                                 13: end if
                                                                          E
                                                  14: Return (mαt+1 , θβt+1   )
Dynamic update window based on the
reward criteria. As mentioned in section 3, rm and re indicate the learning progress of the
current morphology in the training environment respectively. In particular, a nominal value of rm
corresponds to the adaptability of the current morphology to different environments and indicates that
training with the current morphology cannot significantly increase π’s performance. In this instance,
we should apply πm to optimize the morphology to increase its generalization to environments.
Similarly, a minor re indicates that modifying the agent’s morphology will have a negligible effect
on its performance in the current environment, and the environment should be modified to be more
challenging to boost the morphology evolution. As a result, we employ two independent criteria
for rm and re to formulate a dynamic update window, which allows MECE to adapt to the learning
progress of morphology and environment and apply πm or πe to produce corresponding evolution
and alterations.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We now have an agent of newly evolved morphology or a modified training environment, and then
forward to the next iteration of training the control policy π on them. Using rm and re , MECE has
achieved the alternating evolution of morphology and environment. MECE not only improves the
robustness of the morphology to various environment, but also improves the learning efficiency of the
policies through the use of dense feedback.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We design our experiments to answer the following questions: (1) Given dynamic environments, does
our method outperform previous methods in terms of convergence speed and accumulated reward?
(2) Does our method create agents more adaptive and generalizable to diverse new environments?

5.1   E NVIRONMENTAL S ETUP

Diverse environments have varying features that require the agent to evolve out different morphologies,
e.g., a bipedal agent has too short legs to go across a high obstacle, or an agent of four legs navigates
on a rough road more smoothly than one of one or two legs. In our experiments, we conduct
three environments that require various morphologies to complete the tasks. We use a tuple θE of
environment parameters to denote the possible physical features of environments.
In experiments, we have three types of environments: (1) 2d locomotion: In the 2D locomotion
environment, agents are limited to movement in the X-Z plane. The state sT is given by the final
(x, z) positions of the morphology joints. We evaluate morphologies on three tasks: running forwards,
running backwards, and jumping. Environment policy πe takes actions to change the roughness of
terrains, that is controlled by θE . (2) 3d locomotion: where a 3D agent’s goal is to move as fast
as possible along x-axis and is rewarded by its forward speed along x-axis. Environments have a
fixed number of obstacles and terrains of different roughness which are controlled by θE . πe can not
only change the roughness of terrains in the environments, also learns to modify the average distance
between obstacles. (3) Gap crosser: Gap Crosser, where a 2D agent living in an xz−plane needs to
cross periodic gaps and is rewarded by its forward speed. The width of the gap is controlled by πe . In
order to avoid unlearnable environments, the upper and lower limits of the gap width are limited. For
more details refer to Appendix A.
Baselines. We compare our method with the following baselines that also optimize both the skeletal
structure and joint attributes of an agent. (1)Neural Graph Evolution (NGE) (Wang et al., 2019b),
which is an ES-based method that uses GNNs to enable weight sharing between an agent and its
offspring. (2) Transform2Act (Yuan et al., 2022), that optimizes an RL policy to control the evolution
of agents. Note that both baselines do not have diverse environments in the original code. For a
fair comparison, we apply an environment set randomly sampled from a uniform distribution in the
training phase for them. (3) enhanced POET (Wang et al., 2020), that pertains to the modification of
the training environments that are paired with agents possessing distinct yet unchanging morphologies.
Given the absence of morphology optimization/evolution in enhanced POET, we conducted a random
sampling of six sets of agents, each comprising five agents with distinct morphologies, resulting in a
total of 30 agents. Subsequently, we selected the top-performing agent from each set for the test.

5.2   M AIN RESULTS

In Fig. 2(a)-(c), we report the average performance of MECE and all baseline methods in test
environments for three settings. The accumulated rewards are averaged over 12 UNSEEN and
randomly sampled environments and 6 different random seeds. In terms of learning efficiency and
final performance, MECE outperforms baseline methods in all environments. The results show that
while Transform2Act’s final performance can be improved by periodically changing the training
environments, MECE’s learning efficiency is still notably higher than that of Transform2Act. The
best morphologies found by each approach are listed in Fig. 2(d)-(f) for easier comparison. For
2d-locomotion, MECE develops a morphology that resembles a crawling animal that can move fast
over terrain. In 3D locomotion, MECE has developed a spider-like framework. MECE evolves
a more streamlined structure in comparison to Transform2Act so that it can more possibly avoid
obstacles. Finally, the Hopper-like agents developed by Transform2Act and MECE are comparable
in the Gap crosser that can jump across gaps. Overall, MECE-optimized morphologies have superior
structural symmetry and are more consistent with the characteristics of biological evolution in various
environments.

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      (a) 2d-locomotion                       (b) 3d-locomotion                 (c) Gap-crosser


                    (d) Evolved Morphology (2d)           (e) Evolved Morphology (3d)   (f) Evolved Morphology (Gap)


Figure 2: Baselines comparison and optimized morphology. In Fig.(a)-(c), we report the evaluation results
of MECE and baseline methods in three environments, and we plot the accumulated rewards (mean± std
averaged over 6 random seeds) against the number of simulation steps for all methods. For a fair comparison,
we add periodically changing environments that are randomly sampled from a fixed distribution in the training
of baseline methods (“Transform2Act”, “NGE”). “Transform2Act-original” and “NGE-original” are trained
in accordance with the original papers. MECE has better learning efficiency and final performance than all
baseline methods. In Fig.(d)-(f), we list the optimal morphology that evolved by each method. Intuitively, the
structural symmetry and environmental adaptability of the MECE-optimized morphology are better. Especially
in 3d-locomotion, the agent developed by MECE is better at navigating terrain and avoiding obstacles.

5.3    A BLATION S TUDY AND A NALYSIS
We conducted a series of ablation studies to evaluate the effectiveness of each part in MECE. We
list the introduction information of each ablation study in Tab. 1, and report the results in Fig. 3. Note
that in each ablation study, we only change one part of MECE and maintain the other parts the same
as the original MECE, and all results are the test performance evaluated on the same environment
set in Fig. 2 (b).

          Ablation Study                     Definition of Legends
                                             original: Periodic environments generated by πe .
   Ablation study-I for πe .                 periodic envs-random: Periodic environments of randomly sampled.
   Fig. 3(a)                                 fixed envs-initial: Initial and easy environment.
                                             fixed envs-final: Fixed environment generated by πe .
                                             original: Dynamic morphology evolved by πm .
   Ablation study-II for πm .                random morph: Randomly mutate the morphology.
   Fig. 3(b)                                 fixed morph-initial: Fixed agent of the initial morphology.
                                             fixed morph-final: Fixed agent of the final morphology evolved by πm .
   Ablation study-III for                    Original: Dynamic evaluation window.
   dynamic update window.                    fixed update window: Update πe and πm at a fixed frequency.
   Fig. 3(c)
                                             original: Follow the reward setting of πm (πe ) in Eq. 1 (Eq. 2).
   Ablation study-IV for rm                  reward-i: Remove the reward for πm .
   and re . Fig. 3(d)                        reward-ii: change rm to Eq. 1.
                                             reward-iii: change re to Eq. 2.

Table 1: List of ablation studies. This list includes definitions for each set of controls as well as the objectives
of ablation study I-IV. Since we only validated one design of MECE in each ablation study, only one design
from each control group was different from MECE (original).


                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ablation Study I. In this ablation study, we focus on the effectiveness of πe for the training and
report the results in Fig. 2(a). Note that the initial environment is relatively simple, while the final
environment that evolved by πm is more challenging. The results show that the evolved morphology
and control policy trained in diverse environments are more general than those trained in the fixed
environment, no matter whether the environment is simple or not. On the other hand, comparing the
performance of MECE with MECE (periodic envs), we can find that πe helps the training in terms
of efficiency and the final performance. This is because training in the environment modified by πe ,
compared to the randomly generated one, avoids the learning gap between two extremely different
environments, and is smoother for π and πm to learn. On the other hand, πe learns to generate
environments to accelerate the learning progress of π and πm , which is shown clearly in the learning
curves of 10 - 20 million simulation steps in Fig. 3(a).


               (a) Ablation - envs       (b) Ablation - morphs       (c) Ablation - exploration windows   (d) Ablation - reward


Figure 3: Ablation study. We design four ablation studies to illustrate the advantages of each part in MECE.
The results of ablation study I and II show the effectiveness of πe and πm on the learning efficiency and
generalization. Ablation study III proves that applying πe and πm adaptive to the training process of the control
policy can improve its robustness. In ablation study IV, we try different settings of the reward function of πe and
πm , and the results prove that the original reward setting is optimal. More details of each ablation study can be
found in Tab. 1.
Ablation Study II. The purpose of this ablation study is to demonstrate how πm can produce
morphology that is more adaptable to diverse environments and increase learning effectiveness. The
results are shown in Fig. 3(b). When comparing the learning curves for MECE (random morph)
and MECE (original), the former has a far higher early learning efficiency than the latter. This
is due to πe remaining constant and the environment not changing significantly, which prevents
the morphology from being adequately adapted to a variety of habitats, even some comparable
environments. Theoretically, the "fixed morph-final" morphology should be able to be more adaptive
to environments and, with training, reach competitive performance. Although it performs better
than "random morph" and "fixed morph-initial," "MECE(original)" is still far behind. The findings
indicate that training an agent with a complex morphology (i.e., MECE(fixed morph-final)) in diverse
environments is difficult and ineffective. Therefore, it is imperative to implement an automated
curriculum that encompasses diverse environments and morphologies in MECE to effectively train
an adaptable agent.
Ablation Study III. Through a co-evolutionary process of adaptive criterion on rm and re , πm
and πe learn to evolve the morphology and environment. To determine whether this design is
effective, we performed an ablation study. The results are reported in Fig 3(c). For “MECE (fixed
evaluation window)”, every fixed number of environment steps, πm and πe take actions to change the
agent’s morphology and environment. The results indicate that by removing the dynamic window,
MECE’s learning effectiveness has drastically decreased. It is challenging to coordinate the training
developments of the three policies, particularly the control policy, without a dynamic evaluation
window. Only a somewhat steady control policy, as was already mentioned, can give the other two
reliable feedback for training. Moreover, the performance of Transform2Act is taken into account for
easy comparison. Even though "MECE(fixed evaluation window)" is less effective, a competitive
final performance to Transform2Act is still feasible.
Ablation Study IV. We designed this ablation investigation to verify the reward of πm and πe in
MECE, and the findings are displayed in Fig. 3(d). Note that just one incentive is altered in each
scenario in this experiment; all other rewards remain unchanged. We explore two scenarios for πm :
the first involves removing the reward (“MECE (reward-i)”), same to the setting of transform2Act),
and the second involves substituting the formal of re (“MECE (reward-ii)”), i.e., accelerating learning
progress. We take into account employing learning progress (in the form of rm , “MECE (reward-iii)”)
for πe . The results show that the original design has obvious advantages in both learning efficiency
and final performance. For the issues addressed by MECE, πm can be thought of as the meta learner
of π, whereas πe is the meta learner of the former. In order to help π perform better on various tasks,
πm learns to modify the agent’s morphology during training, and πe speeds up both of their learning
processes. Therefore, in both theoretical and practical tests, the original design is the most logical.

                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.4   C ASE STUDY: C O - EVOLUTION BETWEEN MORPHOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
To further comprehend the co-evolution of morphology and environment in MECE, we perform a
case study in 2d locomotion and present results in Fig. 4. The y-axis of the point plot indicates the
training environment’s roughness. Fig. 4(a)-(f) are schematic descriptions of the current morphology
and the training environment corresponding to it.

                                                                                     (e)
                             (a)                                                                 (b)
                                                                (c)



                                                                      (d)                  (f)
                             (c)                                                                 (d)
                                         (a)
                                               (b)


                             (e)                                                                 (f)

                                                 Average training environments roughness


Figure 4: Case study results. This figure more vividly illustrates a schematic diagram of the co-evolution of
morphology and environment during training. The ordinate in the illustration shows the average environments’
roughness changing as the training processes (6 random seeds). Although the training environments generated
by πe are similar to the randomly sampled at the beginning, it can be observed from the scatter plot that πe can
guarantee more challenging and stable training environments. Fig.(a)-(f) compare the effectiveness of πe that
correspond to changes in the training environments (blue indicates original MECE, and orange indicates random
environments). Contrarily, it is evident that no πe is likely to result in exceptionally difficult environments
(Fig.(d)), while the environment produced by πe is challenging but learnable (Fig.(c)).
Generally, an effective training environment should meet two conditions simultaneously. The first is
learnable, and the RL agent can collect training data via exploration. The second factor is the level of
difficulty; environments that are either too easy or too challenging may reduce the learning efficiency
of the RL agent. Therefore, in 2D locomotion, a reasonable environment is one in which the environ-
ment’s roughness is quite large (challenging), but not so large as to render the agent unconquerable
(learnable) during exploration. Using the results of the pointplot, the environment policy can ensure
that the ratio of environmental unevenness during the training process to the height of the current
agent is approximately 1, which satisfies the training environment criteria. At contrast, despite the fact
that the randomly generated environment can ensure the ideal in some phases, it is extremely unstable
(the standard deviation is visibly high), which would undoubtedly lower the learning effectiveness.
Specifically, comparing Fig. 4(a) and (c), the environment generated by πe in the early stage of
training is unlearnable for the current agent, whereas in the middle stage of training, the training
environment is relatively flat, but challenging, especially in terms of the number of occurrences of a
particular feature. The roughness of the environment on the right fluctuates frequently. Note again
compared to Fig. 4(d) that the right side of the randomly produced environment is unlearnable for
the current agent in the middle of training. This phenomena does not occur in MECE because πe
modifies the environment to be morphology-adaptive. Comparing Figs. 4(e) and (f), the environment
formed by πe ’s slope exhibits noticeable but relatively subtle alterations. This is due to the fact that
the existing morphology has a high degree of adaptation to varied contexts, and environments with
more extreme alterations have less effect on the morphology’s optimization. To better train the control
policy, an environment of moderate difficulty should be adopted.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we offer a framework for morphology-environment co-evolution that evolves the
agent’s morphology and the training environment in alternation. Compared to previous morphology
optimization approaches, ours is more sample-efficient and learns to develop morphologies that are
more robust across diverse environments. Experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms
baseline methods in terms of convergence speed and overall performance. In the future, we are
interested in using curriculum RL approaches to further improve the learning efficiency of our
approach so that it can adapt to more challenging environments and tasks.


                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S OCIETAL I MPACT

Our research conducted centers on the co-evolution of an RL agent’s morphology and the training
environments. This study aims to synchronize the instruction of a control policy, morphology policy,
and environment policy. The regulation of the morphological development of RL agents has the
potential to drive progress in multiple domains, resulting in notable advantages for society. In the
domain of robotics, our investigations have the potential to facilitate the advancement of adaptable
and multifaceted robotic frameworks that can proficiently traverse volatile surroundings, execute
intricate operations, and provide aid in perilous undertakings. The technological progressions possess
the capability to augment industrial procedures, ameliorate efficacy, and mitigate hazards to human
laborers across diverse domains.
Although the management of morphological evolution presents encouraging progress, it is imperative
to acknowledge potential hazards and apprehensions. A fundamental issue of utmost importance
pertains to the ethical and responsible utilization of advanced RL agents. It is imperative to ensure that
the behavior of these agents aligns with ethical standards and legal regulations as their morphology
evolves through autonomous learning processes. It is imperative to develop all-encompassing
frameworks and protocols that regulate the deployment of RL agents featuring dynamic morphologies,
thereby averting any potential instances of misapplication or detrimental outcomes.

R EFERENCES
Cenk Baykal and Ron Alterovitz. Asymptotically optimal design of piecewise cylindrical robots
  using motion planning. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2017.

Tianjian Chen, Zhanpeng He, and Matei T. Ciocarlie. Hardware as policy: Mechanical and computa-
  tional co-optimization using deep reinforcement learning. In CoRL, 2020.

Nick Cheney, Robert MacCurdy, Jeff Clune, and Hod Lipson. Unshackling evolution: evolving soft
  robots with multiple materials and a powerful generative encoding. In GECCO ’13, 2013.

Nick Cheney, Josh C. Bongard, Vytas SunSpiral, and Hod Lipson. Scalable co-optimization of
  morphology and control in embodied machines. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 15, 2018.

Ruta Desai, Ye Yuan, and Stelian Coros. Computational abstractions for interactive design of robotic
  devices. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1196–1203,
  2017.

Ioannis Exarchos, Yifeng Jiang, Wenhao Yu, and C. Karen Liu. Policy transfer via kinematic domain
  randomization and adaptation. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 45–51, 2021.

Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with pytorch geometric. ArXiv,
 abs/1903.02428, 2019.

Chelsea Finn, P. Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. ArXiv, abs/1703.03400, 2017.

Agrim Gupta, Linxi (Jim) Fan, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. Metamorph: Learning universal
  controllers with transformers. ArXiv, abs/2203.11931, 2022.

Izzeddin Gur, Natasha Jaques, Kevin Malta, Manoj Tiwari, Honglak Lee, and Aleksandra Faust.
  Adversarial environment generation for learning to navigate the web. ArXiv, abs/2103.01991,
  2021.

Sehoon Ha, Stelian Coros, Alexander Alspach, Joohyung Kim, and Katsu Yamane. Joint optimization
  of robot design and motion parameters using the implicit function theorem. Robotics: Science and
  Systems XIII, 2017.

Donald J. Hejna, P. Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Task-agnostic morphology evolution. ArXiv,
  abs/2102.13100, 2021.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando, and
 Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based training of neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1711.09846, 2017.
Yifeng Jiang, Tingnan Zhang, Daniel Ho, Yunfei Bai, C. Karen Liu, Sergey Levine, and Jie Tan.
  Simgan: Hybrid simulator identification for domain adaptation via adversarial reinforcement
  learning. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2884–
  2890, 2021.
Vitaly Kurin, Maximilian Igl, Tim Rocktäschel, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. My body
  is a cage: the role of morphology in graph-based incompatible control. ArXiv, abs/2010.01856,
  2021.
Thomas Liao, Grant Wang, Brian Yang, R. P. Lee, Kristofer S. J. Pister, Sergey Levine, and Roberto
  Calandra. Data-efficient learning of morphology and controller for a microrobot. 2019 International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2488–2494, 2019.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Tom Erez,
  Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1509.02971, 2016.
Kevin Sebastian Luck, Heni Ben Amor, and Roberto Calandra. Data-efficient co-adaptation of
  morphology and behaviour with deep reinforcement learning. In CoRL, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charlie Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518:529–533, 2015.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  ArXiv, abs/1810.02244, 2019.
Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster,
  Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktaschel. Evolving curricula with regret-based environment
  design. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward
 Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
  Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
  library. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep rl in continuously parameterized environments. In CoRL, 2019.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative
  to reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1703.03864, 2017.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. CoRR, abs/1506.02438, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Karl Sims. Evolving 3d morphology and behavior by competition. Artificial Life, 1:353–372, 1994.
Brandon Trabucco, Mariano Phielipp, and Glen Berseth. Anymorph: Learning transferable polices
  by inferring agent morphology. ArXiv, abs/2206.12279, 2022.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet):
  Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
  ArXiv, abs/1901.01753, 2019a.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Aditya Rawal, Jiale Zhi, Yulun Li, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley.
  Enhanced poet: Open-ended reinforcement learning through unbounded invention of learning
  challenges and their solutions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Tingwu Wang, Renjie Liao, Jimmy Ba, and Sanja Fidler. Nervenet: Learning structured policy with
  graph neural networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Tingwu Wang, Yuhao Zhou, Sanja Fidler, and Jimmy Ba. Neural graph evolution: Towards efficient
  automatic robot design. ArXiv, abs/1906.05370, 2019b.
Wenhao Yu, C. Karen Liu, and Greg Turk. Policy transfer with strategy optimization. ArXiv,
 abs/1810.05751, 2019.
Ye Yuan, Yuda Song, Zhengyi Luo, Wen Sun, and Kris M. Kitani. Transform2act: Learning a
  transform-and-control policy for efficient agent design. ArXiv, abs/2110.03659, 2022.
Allan Zhao, Jie Xu, Mina Konakovic-Lukovic, Josie Hughes, Andrew Spielberg, Daniela Rus, and
  Wojciech Matusik. Robogrammar: graph grammar for terrain-optimized robot design. ACM Trans.
  Graph., 39:188:1–188:16, 2020.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1    C ONTROL P OLICY AND M ORPHOLOGY P OLICY

we represent the agent’s skeleton by a graph G = (V, A, E), where each node u ∈ V represents a
joint and each edge e ∈ E represents a bone connecting two joints. Each joint u is associated with a
representation vector zu storing attributes in A, e.g., bone length, motor strength, size. The GNN
takes zu as inputs and propagate messages across nodes on the graph to produce a hidden state for
each node. Both the control policy π and the morphology policy πm take each node’s hidden state as
their inputs and output their actions.

Implementation of morphology poicy πm MuJoCo agents are specified using XML strings, during
the morphology modify phase, we represent each agent’s skeleton structure as an XML string and
modify its content based on the morphology actions. The action of πm {DelJoint, AddJoint} is
applied to each node. Once the action is taken and the skeleton is changed, the graph architecture
changes and thus the nodes’ hidden states changes. More specifically, An agent is initialized with
only one head joint and several (or zero) Lv1 body joints directly connected to the head joint. In
each iteration, the morphology policy will traverse each joint (using GNN) to decide whether to add
an Lv1 body joint connected to the head joint, or an Lv2 body joint connected to a Lv1 body joint
(i.e., adding a new bone). Then, the morphology policy will further traverse each joint to modify its
attributes (bone length, motor strength, size) on the morphology.
Modelling the morphology evolution as an MDP. In MECE, we aim to train an agent πm that
can design the morphology and modify it when adapting to new environments. And training πm
requires interactions with the MDP to get reward of each modification. This is more efficient than
conventional morphology evolution methods that randomly search for a better morphology because
the policy learns to explore the space more efficiently through (1) interactions with MDP using
different morphologies; and (2) structural constraint and correlation captured by the GNN.

A.2    E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

In this part, we share further information about the three experiment environments. A simple skeleton
structure is used to initialize the agent. Each joint of the agent is connected to its parent joint via a
hinge. The environment state of each joint contains its joint angle and velocity. In addition to the
height, phase, and global velocity, we also include additional information for the root joint, such as
the phase and height. Zero padding is employed to ensure that the length of each joint state is same.
The attribute characteristic of each joint includes the bone vector, bone size, and motor gear value.
Using a loosely-defined attribute range, each attribute is normalized within the interval [−1, 1].

2d locomotion The agent in this environment lives inside an xz-plane with a terrain ground. Each
joint of the agent is allowed to have a maximum of three child joints. For the root joint, we add its
height and 2D world velocity to the environment state. The enviornment reward function is defined
as:
                                      rt = |pxt+1 − pxt |/δt + 1,                                (3)
where pxt denotes the x-position of the agent and δt = 0.008 is the time step. An alive bonus of 1 is
also used inside the reward. The episode is terminated when the root height is below 1.4.

3d locomotion The agent in this environment lives freely in a 3D world with an uneven ground.
There are a fixed number of obstacles randomly scattered on the surface. Each joint of the agent is
allowed to have a maximum of three child joints except for the root. For the root joint, we add its
height and 3D world velocity to the environment state. The reward function is defined as:
                                                        1 X
                           rt = |pxt+1 − pxt |/δt − ω ·       ∥au,t ∥2 ,                       (4)
                                                        J
                                                            u∈Vt

where ω = 0.0001 is a weighting factor for the control penalty term. u denotes the each node of the
skeleton structure Vt of the agent at time-step t. J is the total number of agent’s joints, and the time
step δt = 0.04.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gap crosser The agent in this environment lives inside an xz-plane. The terrain of this environment
includes a periodic gap. The height of the initial terrain is at 0.2. The agent must cross these gaps to
move forward. Each joint of the agent is allowed to have a maximum of three child joints. For the
root joint, we add its height, 2D world velocity, and a phase variable encoding the periodic x-position
of the agent to the environment state. The reward function is defined as:

                                         rt = |pxt+1 − pxt |/δt + 0.1,                                        (5)

where the time step δt = 0.08. An alive bonus of 0.1 is used inside the reward. The episode is
terminated with the root height is below 1.5.

How does environment policy πe control the roughness of training environment? In 2d and 3d
locomotion, we use step heights to define the roughness of training environments. πe can control
three parameters that define the generation of the environment, i.e., the height of the first step h0 ,
average step height variance σh and step height difference δh . We sequentially generate step hi one
by one (or line by line) in 2d (3d) locomotion tasks based on the equation as follows:

                               hi = hi−1 + f lag ∗ (δh + N (0, σh )), i ≥ 1,                                  (6)

                     −1
where, f lag =            is randomly chosen for each step hi . We examine each step’s height to
                     1
ensure it will not exceed the maximal height, which is limited to 2.4 in 2d locomotion and 2.7 in 3d
locomotion. We also limit σh to not exceed 0.55(0.4) for 2d (3d) locomotion, and δh to not exceed
0.25(0.2) for 2d (3d) locomotion. Thus, πe can control the environment’s roughness through these
three environment parameters.
For Gap crosser tasks, πe can control the width between two steps through an environment parameter,
and the task fails once the agent falls down or is detected as stuck.
For randomly sampled environments as baselines used in our experiments, we randomly sample each
step hi from a Gaussian distribution N (0, 2.4) (N (0, 2.7)) for 2d (3d) locomotion environment.


B     F REQUENTLY A SKED Q UESTIONS AND A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

B.1    H OW DO ENVIRONMENTS AND MORPHOLOGIES CHANGE IN THE TRAINING PHASE ?

In this section, we report the changing environments and agent’s morphology during the training
in Fig. 5. The results show that when the evolved morphology is relatively complex, the training
environment focuses on more complex cases than the randomly sampled environments. On the other
hand, the prevalence of easy environments significantly decreases as morphology evolves (indicating
a higher ability to move in different environments).


            (a) 2d-locomo�on                     (b) 3d-locomo�on                      (c) Gap-crosser


Figure 5: This figure shows the changing of the agent’s morphology and environments in the training phase.
The results illustrate that with the environment generator (πe ), the training environment focuses more on complex
cases (higher roughness). The presence of agents with more complex morphologies is more noticeable among
them. Thus, the environment generator creates the training environment based on how the morphology changes
during training.



                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2    H OW DOES THE ENVIRONMENT ROUGHNESS CHANGE IN TRAINING ?

We report the mean and std of the environment roughness over training stages and during tests in
Tab. 2. As shown in the table: (1) the roughness (mean) increases over time, automatically forming an
easy-to-hard curriculum, which leads to better generalization performance in the uniformly sampled
test environments, which have relatively high average roughness and also high variance; (2) the
variance of roughness is very small at the beginning of training, increases in the middle, and reduces
a little later. Thereby, the learning focuses on easier environments at first, encourages exploration for
better generalization in the middle, and keeps improving the agent in the most challenging ones at
last; (3) in addition to the automatic mean and std scheduling, the increasing speed of roughness is
also automatically adjusted to be adaptive to training stages, e.g., it has a short warming-up stage at
the very beginning when the roughness keeps small and does not change too much, followed by a
critical learning period of quick growing (e.g., 15 - 35 million steps of Gap Crosser), and the growing
gradually slows down in the later stage when close to saturation (e.g., 30 - 50 million steps of 3d
locomotion).

         Environment Steps (million)       2d locomotion      3d locomotion       Gap Crosser
                   0−5                     2.493 ± 0.123      2.765 ± 0.170      0.541 ± 0.210
                  5 − 10                   2.585 ± 0.256      2.907 ± 0.243      0.978 ± 0.362
                 10 − 15                   3.232 ± 0.551      3.325 ± 0.406      1.128 ± 0.375
                 15 − 20                   3.870 ± 0.951      3.587 ± 0.439      1.306 ± 0.403
                 20 − 25                   4.522 ± 1.768      3.604 ± 0.647      1.775 ± 0.595
                 25 − 30                   5.019 ± 2.027      3.831 ± 0.822      2.393 ± 0.948
                 30 − 35                   5.864 ± 1.116      4.312 ± 1.125      3.028 ± 1.346
                 35 − 40                   6.288 ± 1.447      4.775 ± 1.512      3.242 ± 0.822
                 40 − 45                   6.420 ± 0.857      4.879 ± 0.931      3.445 ± 0.619
                 45 − 50                   6.725 ± 0.699      4.921 ± 0.774      3.612 ± 0.618
                 Test Env                  5.425 ± 1.603      4.368 ± 1.020      2.813 ± 1.389

      Table 2: Mean and std of the environment roughness over training stages and during test.


B.3    H OW DOES MECE PERFORM IN THE INITIAL ENVIRONMENT ?

In this section, we report the performance of MECE tested in the initial environment to address the
concern about the possible risk of forgetting problems. We report the evaluation of the 3D-locomotion
agent at different learning stages in the initial environment (Tab. 3 and in 30 randomly chosen
environments used in training (Tab. 4).

             Methods          20 million steps       30 million steps      50 million steps
              MECE           2490.05 ± 412.90       3232.10 ± 481.32      4195.88 ± 431.16
           Tranform2Act      2192.56 ± 486.31       2572.28 ± 535.95      3581.80 ± 417.55

                        Table 3: Evaluation result in the initial environment.

             Methods          20 million steps       30 million steps      50 million steps
              MECE           2533.14 ± 463.02       3318.25 ± 471.14      5352.26 ± 393.45
           Tranform2Act      2354.65 ± 557.16       2809.64 ± 521.83      3647.26 ± 518.77
               NGE           1139.69 ± 774.25       1452.20 ± 828.49      1487.65 ± 816.51

                       Table 4: Evaluation results in 30 training environments.

From the results, we do not observe any risk of forgetting and MECE outperforms Transform2Act
in all cases. We would like to discuss more on why we do not need to worry about forgetting the
curriculum produced by MECE.

       • Due to the specific design of rewards in MECE, the environment policy and morphology
         policy will challenge each other, resulting in more complex environments and more versatile
         morphology during training. Such a curriculum leads to agent skills that are evolving


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         and improving over time and faster adaptation to more challenging and variable
         environments. Therefore, the agent can keep excelling in simpler environments in the
         earlier training stages.
       • The curriculum of morphology and environment is distinct from the random training
         sequence in continual RL. Forgetting usually happens in continual learning on a random
         sequence of tasks that one cannot control. In contrast, the sequence (curriculum) in MECE is
         optimized for better and faster adaptation (generalization) of the agent to new environments,
         which naturally avoids forgetting.

C    S HORT EVALUATION WINDOW (SEW) IN MECE
In Alg. 2, we modify the agent’s morphology and the training environment based on the control
policy’s learning progress. In light of the previous method (Hejna et al., 2021), we construct a short
evaluation window (SEW) on π to collect data for computing rm and re . In accordance with Sec. 3,
we should evaluate the present morphology in many settings for rm in Eq. 1 and several morphologies
in the current training environment for re in Eq. 2. In this short evaluation phase, we therefore
maintain some of the most recent morphologies and training environments. We attempted to save
several combinations of morphology and the number of contexts for this purpose. All experimental
and control data are provided under the assumption that the optimal combination exists. We list all
tried combinations in Tab. 5.

D    H YPERPARAMETERS AND T RAINING P ROCEDURES
In this section, we present the hyperparameters searched and used for MECE in Tab. 5 and the
hyperparameters for baseline in Tab. 6 and Tab. 7. All models are implemented by PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019). For control policy and morphology policy, we use the PyTorch Geometric package (Fey
& Lenssen, 2019) and GraphConv (Morris et al., 2019) as the GNN layer. When training the policy
with PPO, we adopt generalized advantage estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016). For the
baselines, we employ the released code of NGE and Transform2Act to build our version.
For a fair comparison, we employ the same GNN architecture for MECE and baselines. In addition,
we ensure that the number of simulation steps used for optimization is the same for both the baseline
methods and ours. MECE and Transform2Act optimize the policy with a batch size of 50000 for
1000 epochs, totaling 50 million simulation steps. NGE employs a population of 20 agents, and each
agent is trained with a batch size of 20,000 for 125 generations, totaling 50 million simulation steps.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Hyperparameter                                     Values Searched & Selected
 Policy GNN Layer Type                                       GraphConv
 Number of morphologies in SEW                                   2, 3, 4
 Number of environments in SEW                                 2, 3, 4, 5
 GNN Size (πm )                     (32, 32, 32), (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
 GNN Size (π)                       (32, 32, 32), (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
 Hidden layers for πe network                                    2, 3, 4
 Hidden units for πe network                                200, 300, 400
 Policy Learning Rate (π)                               5e − 5, 1e − 4, 3e − 4
 Policy Learning Rate (πm )                             5e − 5, 1e − 4, 3e − 4
 Policy Learning Rate (πe )                             3e − 4, 5e − 4, 1e − 4
 Value GNN Layer Type                                       GraphConv
 Value Activation Function                                       Tanh
 Value GNN Size                            (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
 Value MLP Size                               (256, 256), (512, 256), (256, 256, 256)
 Value Learning Rate                                        1e − 4, 3e − 4
 PPO clip ϵ Pize                                                  0.2
 PPO Batch Size                                         10000, 20000, 50000
 PPO Minibatch Size                                           512, 2048
 Num. of PPO Iterations Per Batch                               1, 5, 10
 Num. of Training Epochs                                         1000
 Discount factor γ                                               0.95
 GAE λ                                                0.99, 0.995, 0.997, 0.999

Table 5: Hyperparameters searched and used by MECE. The bold numbers among multiple values
are the final selected ones.


    Hyperparameter                                  Values Searched & Selected
    Num. of Skeleton Transforms Ns                            3, 5, 10
    Num. of Attribute Transforms Nz                            1, 3, 5
    Policy GNN Layer Type                                   GraphConv
    JSMLP Activation Function                                   Tanh
    GNN Size (Skeleton Transform)         (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
    JSMLP Size (Skeleton Transform)          (256, 256), (512, 256), (256, 256, 256)
    GNN Size (Attribute Transform)        (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
    JSMLP Size (Attribute Transform)         (256, 256), (512, 256), (256, 256, 256)
    GNN Size (Execution)                  (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
    JSMLP Size (Execution)              (128, 128), (256, 256), (512, 256), (256, 256, 256)
    Diagonal Values of Σz                                 1.0, 0.04, 0.01
    Diagonal Values of Σe                                 1.0, 0.04, 0.01
    Policy Learning Rate                                      5e − 5
    Value GNN Layer Type                                  GraphConv
    Value Activation Function                                   Tanh
    Value GNN Size                        (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128), (256, 256, 256)
    Value MLP Size                           (256, 256), (512, 256), (256, 256, 256)
    Value Learning Rate                                   1e − 4, 3e − 4
    PPO clip ϵ Pize                                              0.2
    PPO Batch Size                                            50000
    PPO Minibatch Size                                         2048
    Num. of PPO Iterations Per Batch                          1, 5, 10
    Num. of Training Epochs                                    1000
    Discount factor γ                                          0.95
    GAE λ                                                      0.995

Table 6: Hyperparameters searched and used by Transform2Act in our version. The bold numbers
among multiple values are the final selected ones.



                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Hyperparameter                            Values Searched & Selected
         Num. of Generations                                    125
         Agent Population Size                             10, 20, 50, 100
         Elimination Rate                                0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4
         GNN Layer Type                                     GraphConv
         MLP Activation                                         Tanh
         Policy GNN Size                    (32, 32, 32), (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128)
         Policy MLP Size                       (128, 128), (256, 256), (512, 256)
         Policy Log Standard Deviation                       0.0, −1.6
         Policy Learning Rate                                  5e − 5
         Value GNN Size                     (32, 32, 32), (64, 64, 64), (128, 128, 128)
         Value MLP Size                        (128, 128), (256, 256), (512, 256)
         Value Learning Rate                                   3e − 4
         PPO clip ϵ                                              0.2
         PPO Batch Size                                    20000, 50000
         PPO Minibatch Size                                     2048
         Num. of PPO Iterations Per Batch                        10
         Discount factor γ                                  0.99, 0.995
         GAE λ                                                  0.95

Table 7: Hyperparameters searched and used by NGE in our version. The bold numbers among
multiple values are the final selected ones.


                                             18
